Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Title 2 ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL
Title 3 REVENUE AND FINANCE
Title 4 WATER SYSTEM
Title 5 BUSINESS TAXES, LICENSES AND REGULATIONS
Title 6 ANIMALS
Title 7 SANITATION AND HEALTH
Title 8 HEALTH AND SAFETY
Title 9 PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE
Title 10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Title 11 (RESERVED)
Title 12 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES
Title 13 PUBLIC SERVICES
Title 14 (RESERVED)
Title 15 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
Title 16 SUBDIVISIONS
Title 17 ZONING

Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 1.01 CODE ADOPTION (Reserved)
Chapter 1.04 COUNTY CODE PROVISIONS
Chapter 1.08 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 1.12 GENERAL PENALTY
Chapter 1.14 ENFORCEMENT
Chapter 1.16 IMPRISONMENT
Chapter 1.17 ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS
Chapter 1.18 ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES
Chapter 1.20 ELECTIONS
Chapter 1.30 CLAIMS PROCEDURE
Chapter 1.40 APPEALS

Chapter 1.01 CODE ADOPTION (Reserved)

Chapter 1.04 COUNTY CODE PROVISIONS
1.04.010 Adoption by reference.
        The following portions of the Ordinance Code of Stanislaus County, California, are adopted by reference under the authority of Section 50020 to 50022.9 of the Government Code of the state of California:

        A.    The following portions of Title 10: All of Chapter 10.12, Gambling; all of Chapter 10.16, Pool and Billiard Parlors; all of Chapter 10.24, Fortune Telling; and, all of Chapter 10.28, Curfew;

        B.     The following portions of Title 11: All of Chapter 11.20, Interference With Emergency Vehicles;

        C.     The following portions of Title 6: All of Chapter 6.48, Regulation of Restaurants and Permits; all of Chapter 6.44, Public Dance and Dance Hall Permits; all of Chapter 6.16, Circus and Carnival Permits; and, all of Chapter 6.52, Second Hand Dealers;

        D.    The following portions of Title 6: All of Chapter 2, Interference With Emergency Vehicles;

        E.     The following portions of Title 7: All of Chapter 2, Regulation of Restaurants and Permits; all of Chapter 3, and 7-51 thereof; all of Chapter 4, Circus and Carnival Permits, except Section 7-67 thereof; all of Chapter 6, Secondhand Dealers;

        F.     The following portions of Title 8: All of Chapter 1, Building Code; all of Chapter 2, Plumbing Code; all of Chapter 3, Electrical Code; and all of Chapter 6, Street Improvements Required;

        G.    The following portions of Title 9: All of Chapter 2, Subdividing; all of Chapter 3, Zoning Ordinance. (Ord. 93-08 §1, 1993; Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1, 1970).

Chapter 1.08 GENERAL PROVISIONS
1.08.010 Definitions.
        The following words and phrases, whenever used in the ordinances of the city of Waterford, California, shall be construed as defined in this section unless from the context a different meaning is intended or unless a different meaning is specifically defined and more particularly directed to the use of such words or phrases:

        A.    “City” and “town” each mean the city of Waterford, California, or the area within the territorial limits of the city of Waterford, California, and such territory outside of the city over which the city has jurisdiction or control by virtue of any constitutional or statutory provision.

        B.     “Council” means the city council of the city of Waterford. “All its members” or “all councilmen” means the total number of councilmen holding office.

        C.     “County” means the county of Stanislaus.

        D.    “Law” denotes applicable federal law, the Constitution and statutes of the state of California, the ordinances of the city of Waterford, and, when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations which may be promulgated thereunder.

        E.     “May” is permissive.

        F.     “Month” means a calendar month.

        G.    “Must” and “shall” are each mandatory.

        H.    “Oath” includes an affirmation or declaration in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words “swear” and “sworn” shall be equivalent to the words “affirm” and “affirmed.”

        I.      “Owner,” applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant, tenant by the entirety, of the whole or part of such building or land.

        J.      “Person” includes a natural person, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business, trust, organization, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them.

        K.    “Personal property” includes money, goods, chattels, things in action and evidences of debt.

        L.     “Preceding” and “following” mean next before and next after, respectively.

        M.    “Property” includes real and personal property.

        N.    “Real property” includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.

        O.    “Sidewalk” means that portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians.

        P.     “State” means the state of California.

        Q.    “Street” includes all streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts, places, squares, curbs, or other public ways in this city which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property so designated in any law of this state.

        R.     “Tenant” and “occupant,” applied to a building or land, include any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.

        S.     “Written” includes printed, typewritten, mimeographed, multigraphed, or otherwise reproduced in permanent visible form.

        T.     “Year” means a calendar year. (Ord. 79-11 Art. I §1, 1979).

 

1.08.020 Title of office.
        Use of the title of any officer, employee, department, board or commission means that officer, employee, department, board or commission of the city of Waterford. (Ord.79-11 Art. I, §2, 1979).

 

1.08.030 Interpretation of language.
        All words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, out technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning. (Ord. 79-11 Art. I §3, 1979).

 

1.08.040 Grammatical interpretation.
        The following grammatical rules shall apply in the ordinances of the city of Waterford, unless it is apparent from the context that a different construction is intended:

        A.    Gender. Each gender includes the masculine, feminine and neuter genders.

        B.     Singular and Plural. The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the singular.

        C.     Tenses. Words used in the present tense include the past and the future tenses and vice versa, unless manifestly inapplicable. (Ord. 79-11 Art. I §4, 1979).

 

1.08.050 Acts by agents.
        When an act is required by an ordinance, the same being such that it may be done as well by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be construed to include all such acts performed by an authorized agent. (Ord. 79-11 Art. I §5, 1979).

 

1.08.060 Prohibited acts include causing and permitting.
        Whenever in the ordinances of the city of Waterford any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall include causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering or concealing the fact of such act or omission. (Ord. 79-11 Art. I, §6, 1979).

 

1.08.070 Computation of time.
        Except when otherwise provided, the time within which an act is required to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day, unless the last day is Sunday or a holiday, in which case it shall also be excluded. (Ord. 79-11 Art. I §7, 1979).

 

1.08.080 Construction.
        The provisions of the ordinances of the city of Waterford and all proceedings under them are to be construed with a view to effect their objects and to promote justice. (Ord. 79-11 Art. I §8, 1979).

 

1.08.090 Repeal shall not revive any ordinances.
        The repeal of an ordinance shall not repeal the repealing clause of an ordinance or revive any ordinance which has been repealed thereby. (Ord. 79-11 Art. I §9, 1979).

 

1.08.100 No duty of care imposed upon city.
        The provisions of this code are not intended to and shall not be construed or given effect in a manner that imposes upon the city or any officer or employee thereof a mandatory duty of care towards persons and property within or without the city so as to provide a basis of civil liability for damages, except as otherwise imposed by law. (Ord. 86-1 §1, 1986).

 

1.08.110 Time provisions directory, except as otherwise required by state law or this code.
        Any provisions in this code governing the time within which an official is to act shall in all instances, except for notice requirements and as otherwise required by state law, be deemed directory rather than mandatory, unless otherwise specifically stated. (Ord. 86-1 §2, 1986).

Chapter 1.12 GENERAL PENALTY
1.12.010 Violation a misdemeanor or infraction.
        It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision of or fail to comply with any requirement of this code or any requirements or conditions validly imposed upon such person under the authority of this code, including an administrative order, and any person so doing is guilty of a misdemeanor unless such violation is specifically designated as an infraction. Each such person is guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any such provision or any requirement or condition validly imposed upon such person under authority of this code is committed, continued, or permitted by such person and shall be punishable accordingly. (Ord. 2012-05 §2).

 

1.12.020 Designation of administrative violations.
        A.    The following may be designated as administrative violations and shall be subject to enforcement pursuant to the provisions of Chapters 1.17 (Administrative Citations) and 1.18 (Administrative Penalties).

        1.     All violations of the Waterford Municipal Code, unless otherwise excepted by ordinance;

        2.     All violations of the California and International Model Codes and appendices and any successor model codes adopted by the city of Waterford;

        3.     All violations of design standards adopted by the city council and/or the planning commission and on file with the city clerk;

        4.     All violations of conditions imposed on any entitlement, permit, contract, or environmental document issued or approved by the city of Waterford;

        5.     All violations of state laws enforced by the city of Waterford that have been designated for enforcement through this chapter or by ordinance.

        B.     A violation designated as an administrative violation may only be adjudicated pursuant to the administrative enforcement procedures established by Chapters 1.17 (Administrative Citations) and 1.18 (Administrative Penalties). Each responsible person shall have the right to request an administrative hearing and subsequent judicial review as set forth in this code. (Ord. 2012-05 §2).

 

1.12.030 General penalties.
        A.    Misdemeanors. Unless otherwise provided, any person convicted of a misdemeanor under the provisions of this code shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars or by imprisonment in the County Jail of Stanislaus County for a period not exceeding one year, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

        B.     Infraction. Unless otherwise provided, any person convicted of an infraction under the provisions of this code shall be punishable for a first conviction by a fine of not more than one hundred fifty dollars, for a second conviction within a period of one year by a fine of not more than three hundred dollars, and for a third or any subsequent conviction within a period of one year, by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars.

        C.     Infraction a Misdemeanor. Any offense which would otherwise be an infraction is a misdemeanor if a defendant has been convicted of three or more of the same violations of this code within a one-year period immediately preceding the commission of the offense and such prior convictions are alleged in the accusatory pleading. For this purpose, a bail forfeiture shall be deemed to be a conviction of the offense charged. (Ord. 2012-05 §2).

 

1.12.040 Prosecutorial authority.
        The city attorney shall have the authority to criminally prosecute violations of this code. Any violation of this code constituting a misdemeanor may, in the discretion of the city attorney, be charged as, prosecuted as, or reduced to an infraction. The Stanislaus County district attorney shall not have the authority to reduce or dismiss criminal charges brought by the city attorney for violations of this code without the written consent of the city attorney or designee. (Ord. 2012-05 §2).

 

1.12.050 Notice—Generally.
        If any person is arrested for a violation of this code, and such person does not demand to be taken before a magistrate, the citation procedures pursuant to Penal Code Section 853.6 et seq., and its successors, shall apply. (Ord. 2012-05 §2).

 

1.12.060 Failure to appear a misdemeanor.
        Any person willfully violating their written promise to appear in court is guilty of a misdemeanor regardless of the disposition of the charge upon which they were originally arrested. (Ord. 2012-05 §2).

 

1.12.070 Causing, permitting, suffering prohibited.
        Whenever any act or omission is made unlawful pursuant to this code or any other applicable law, rule or regulation, it is unlawful for any person to cause, permit, suffer, aid, or abet such act or omission or to conceal the fact of such act or omission. (Ord. 2012-05 §2).

 

1.12.080 Place of confinement.
        Every person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this code and sentenced to imprisonment shall be imprisoned in the County Jail of Stanislaus County. (Ord. 2012-05 §2).

 

1.12.090 Violation a public nuisance.
        In addition to the penalties provided in the preceding sections, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this code or any requirements or conditions validly imposed under authority of this code is a public nuisance and may be, by this city, summarily abated, and each day such condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense. (Ord. 2012-05 §2).

 

1.12.100 Nuisances—Recovery of abatement expenses.
        Whenever any person creating, causing, committing, or maintaining a public nuisance, as referred to in Section 1.12.090 of this chapter, or other public nuisance, as defined under state law or other ordinances or regulations, has been given notice by an enforcement officer or by any other city officer, employee, or policing agent authorized to give such notice to abate such nuisance or cease and desist from continuing such nuisance or violation of law, and such person fails, refuses, or neglects to comply with the notice within the time specified therein, or if such a time is not specified, then within a time reasonably sufficient to enable such compliance, such noncomplying person shall be liable to the city for any and all costs and expenses to the city involved in thereafter abating the nuisance and in obtaining compliance with or enforcing the law as referred to or encompassed within said notice. Costs and expenses may be recovered in accordance with Chapter 8.12 (Nuisances) of the Waterford Municipal Code. (Ord. 2012-05 §2).

 

1.12.110 Judicial abatement.
        Pursuant to Government Code Section 38773 et seq., the city has the authority to judicially abate public nuisances by filing criminal or civil nuisance actions. The expense of abatement may be recovered as set forth in Chapter 8.12 (Nuisances) of the Waterford Municipal Code. (Ord. 2012-05 §2).

 

1.12.120 Treble damages for subsequent abatement judgments.
        Pursuant to Government Code Section 38773.7, upon the entry of a second or subsequent civil or criminal judgment within a two-year period that finds an owner of property responsible for a condition that may be abated in accordance with Government Code Section 38773.5, a court may order the owner to pay treble costs of the abatement. These costs shall not include conditions abated pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 17980. (Ord. 2012-05 §2).

 

1.12.130 Civil violations—Injunctions and civil penalties.
        A.    In addition to any other remedy provided by this code, the city attorney may institute an action in any court of competent jurisdiction to restrain, enjoin, or abate any violation or condition found to be in violation of the provisions of this code.

        B.     As part of a civil action filed to enforce provisions of this code, a court may assess a maximum civil penalty of two thousand five hundred dollars per violation of the code for each day during which any person commits, continues, allows, or maintains a violation of any provision of this code. (Ord. 2012-05 §2).

 

1.12.140 Code enforcement performance bond.
        As part of any enforcement action taken by the city, the city has the authority to require a responsible person to post a performance bond or other security acceptable to the city to ensure compliance with this code, applicable state codes or any judicial action. (Ord. 2012-05 §2).

Chapter 1.14 ENFORCEMENT
1.14.010 Declaration of purpose.
        A.    The city council finds that the enforcement of the municipal code and applicable state codes throughout the city is an important public service. Code enforcement is vital to the protection of the public health, safety, and quality of life. The city council further finds that a comprehensive code enforcement system that uses a combination of judicial and administrative remedies is critical to gain code compliance. Nothing in this code is intended to limit the duties and responsibilities of sworn peace officers.

        B.     In accordance with the provisions of Government Code Section 53069.4, and its successor statutes, the city of Waterford adopts Chapter 1.17, Administrative Citations, and Chapter 1.18, Administrative Penalties, in order to achieve the following goals:

        1.     To protect the public health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city of Waterford;

        2.     To gain compliance with the municipal code and state codes, ordinances, and regulations in a timely and efficient manner;

        3.     To provide for an administrative process to appeal the imposition of administrative citations and fines;

        4.     To provide a method to hold parties responsible when they fail or refuse to comply with the provisions of the municipal code, other ordinances adopted by the city, and conditions on entitlements; and

        5.     To provide responsible parties a strong financial incentive to cure their violations through the use of administrative penalties. (Ord. 2012-04 §2).

 

1.14.020 Definitions.
        For purposes of carrying out the provisions of this chapter, the following words and/or phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them as provided in this section:

        “Ordinance” means any and all ordinances or resolutions passed or adopted by the city council of the city of Waterford. (Ord. 2012-04 §2).

 

1.14.030 Code enforcement.
        It is unlawful for a person to violate a provision, or to fail to comply with a requirement of this code, or any code adopted by reference by this code, an ordinance of the city not included within this code, or any conditions on entitlements. The city may enforce any such violation of the provisions of this code by any one or more of the following methods, at the city’s discretion:

        A.    Criminal penalties pursuant to Chapter 1.12 of this title;

        B.     Denial, forfeiture, or revocation of any permit granted by the city;

        C.     Administrative citations and penalties, to the extent authorized by this code; and

        D.    Any other remedy available to the city, including, but not limited to, civil penalties, injunctive relief, and abatement of public nuisance. (Ord. 2012-04 §2).

 

1.14.040 References to this code.
        All references to this code are deemed to include this code, any code adopted by reference by this code, an ordinance of the city not included within this code, or any conditions on entitlements. (Ord. 2012-04 §2).

 

1.14.050 General enforcement authority.
        The city manager, or any designated enforcement officer shall have the authority and powers necessary to gain compliance with the provisions of this code for which they have a duty to enforce. These powers include, but are not limited to, the power to issue correction notices, administrative citations, inspect public and private property and use judicial and administrative remedies available under this code, or applicable state codes. The designation of enforcement officers shall be made by a duly adopted resolution of the Waterford city council. (Ord. 2012-04 §2).

 

1.14.060 Authority to issue notice to appear and release citations.
        Pursuant to California Penal Code Section 836.5, designated enforcement officers are authorized to issue criminal citations, as misdemeanors or infractions, for violations of the provisions of this code, for which they have a duty to enforce. Such authority is not extended to include all of the duties and responsibilities of a peace officer, but is limited as provided herein. (Ord. 2012-04 §2).

 

1.14.070 Notice of violation.
        Chapters 1.17 and 1.18, of this title, provide the procedure for issuance and recordation of notices of violation where other sections of this code do not provide an alternative procedure. (Ord. 2012-04 §2).

 

1.14.080 Power to arrest.
        Enforcement officers are authorized to arrest any person without a warrant whenever the enforcement officer has probable cause to believe that the person has committed a violation of this code in his or her presence, for which the enforcement officer had the duty to enforce. Pursuant to Penal Code Section 836.5, the enforcement officer may only arrest a person by issuing a misdemeanor field citation or by effecting a citizen’s arrest with the assistance of a peace officer.

        An enforcement officer shall release the person to be issued a citation on his or her written promise to appear in court. An enforcement officer shall not, under any circumstance, take the person into custody. In the event that the person refuses to provide his or her written promise to appear in court, or demands to be taken before a magistrate, an enforcement officer shall summon a city of Waterford police officer and request that such police officer take the person into custody pursuant to a citizen’s arrest. This section shall in no way limit the authority of any sworn peace officer to effect an arrest. (Ord. 2012-04 §2).

Chapter 1.16 IMPRISONMENT
1.16.010 Location designated.
        Under Section 36903 of the Government Code, imprisonment in the County Jail is prescribed as the place for imprisonment for each violation of the city code. (Ord. 70-2 §1, 1970).

Chapter 1.17 ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS
1.17.010 Applicability.
        This chapter provides for administrative citations for enforcement of violations of this code, as defined in Section 1.09.080. The use of administrative citations shall be in addition to all other legal remedies, civil or criminal, which may be pursued to address violations of this code, including any other administrative remedies that are provided for in this code. Use of this chapter shall be at the sole discretion of the city and the enforcement officers. (Ord. 2011-03 §1).

 

1.17.020 Definitions.
        “Administrative citation” means a formal notice that is issued by an enforcement officer or other authorized agent to a person who has been determined to have committed a violation of this municipal code and/or other regulations and ordinances enforceable by the city of Waterford.

        “Board” means the appeals hearing board of the city of Waterford as set by resolution of the city council.

        “Correction notice” means an informal notice informing a responsible party about the existence of a certain condition or activity which constitutes a violation of this code or a violation of any applicable statute, rule, regulation or other ordinance enforceable by the city of Waterford.

        “Enforcement officer” means an individual holding the position title designated by resolution of the city council in accordance with Section 1.09.040 of this title and who is authorized to enforce certain prescribed provisions of this municipal code and all applicable statutes, rules, regulations and other ordinances enforceable by the city of Waterford.

        “Responsible party” means any person or persons in charge of the premises or location, or the person or persons responsible for the event or incident, and shall include any of the following:

        1.     The person or persons owning the property where the violation exists.

        2.     The person or persons in charge of the premises where the violation exists.

        3.     The person or persons using the premises where the violation exists.

        4.     If any of those persons are minors, the parent or guardian of such minor(s) shall be the responsible party.

        5.     If the person or persons is a business entity, the manager or on-site supervisor where the violation exists shall be a responsible party. (Ord. 2014-11 §1; Ord. 2011-03 §1).

 

1.17.030 Correction notice and administrative citation issuance procedures.
        A.    A correction notice may be issued to the responsible party as a warning the first time a violation of this code occurs. If the violation is not corrected by the compliance date, an administrative citation shall be issued for the violation(s).

        B.     Before issuing an administrative citation for any violation of a building, plumbing, electrical, or similar regulation set forth in this code or in any code adopted by reference, the enforcement officer must first issue a written correction notice to the responsible party for the violation. For violations that do not constitute an immediate danger to health or safety, a reasonable time, not less than ten days, shall be provided to remedy or correct the violation prior to the issuance of an administration citation and imposition of fines or penalties. In determining what is a reasonable time, the enforcement officer may consider the estimate of local professionals, including licensed contractors.

        C.     When a correction notice or administrative citation is issued, service will be effected as follows:

        1.     The enforcement officer shall attempt to locate and personally serve the responsible party and obtain the signature of the responsible party on the correction notice or administrative citation.

        2.     If the responsible party served refuses or fails to sign the correction notice or administrative citation, the failure or refusal to sign shall not affect the validity of the correction notice or administrative citation or of subsequent proceedings.

        3.     If the enforcement officer is unable to locate the responsible party, the correction notice or administrative citation shall be mailed to the responsible party by regular mail and by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, to the address shown on the last equalized assessment roll available or as known to the enforcement officer.

        4.     If the enforcement officer does not succeed in serving the responsible party personally, or if certified mail and/or regular mail are unsuccessful, the enforcement officer shall post the correction notice or administrative citation on any real property within the city where the city has knowledge that the responsible party has a legal interest, and such posting shall be deemed effective service.

        D.    Service of a correction notice or an administrative citation which is personally served shall be deemed complete at the time of such personal service. Service of a correction notice or an administrative citation which is served by regular mail shall be deemed complete on the date the correction notice or administrative citation is deposited in the mail. (Ord. 2011-03 §1).

 

1.17.040 Contents of notices.
        A.    Each correction notice shall contain the following information:

        1.     Date, approximate time, and address or definite description of the location where the violation(s) was observed;

        2.     The code section(s) or condition(s) violated and a description of the violation(s);

        3.     An order to the responsible party to correct the violation(s) within the time specified (compliance date), and an explanation of the consequences of failure to correct the violation(s) including the fine for the violation(s); and

        4.     The name and signature of the enforcement officer.

        B.     Each administrative citation shall contain the following information:

        1.     Date, approximate time, and address or definite description of the location where the violation(s) was observed;

        2.     The code section(s) or condition(s) violated and a description of the violation(s);

        3.     An order to the responsible party to correct the violation(s) within the time specified (compliance date), and an explanation of the consequences of failure to correct the violation(s) including the fine for the violation(s);

        4.     The amount of the administrative fine for the violation(s);

        5.     An explanation of how the fine shall be paid, the time period by which it shall be paid, and the consequences for failure to pay the fine;

        6.     An order prohibiting the continuation or repeated occurrence of the violation(s) described in the administrative citation;

        7.     A description of appeal rights including the time within which the citation may be contested and the place to obtain a request for appeal hearing form to contest the administrative citation; and

        8.     The name and signature of the enforcement officer. (Ord. 2011-03 §1).

 

1.17.050 Amount of fines.
        A.    The amounts of the fines for code violations imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be set forth in the schedule of fines established by resolution of the city council.

        B.     The schedule of fines shall specify any increased fines for repeat violations of the same code provision by the same person within twelve months from the date of an administrative citation.

        C.     The schedule of fines shall specify the amount of any penalties and interest imposed for the payment of a fine after its due date. (Ord. 2011-03 §1).

 

1.17.060 Compliance.
        A.    Upon receipt of a correction notice, the responsible party must do the following: Remedy the violation(s). If the violation(s) is corrected on or before the compliance date provided, no administrative citation shall be issued.

        B.     Upon receipt of an administrative citation, the responsible party must do the following:

        1.     Pay the fine to the city within thirty days from the date the administrative citation was issued. All fines assessed shall be payable to the city of Waterford and payment shall be made to the city of Waterford finance department. Payment of a fine shall not excuse or discharge the failure to correct the violation(s) nor shall it bar further enforcement action by the city; and

        2.     Remedy the violation(s). If the responsible party fails to correct the violation(s) within the time specified, subsequent administrative citations may be issued for the same violation(s). The amount of the fine for failure to correct the violation shall increase at a rate specified in the schedule of fines established by resolution of the city council.

        C.     The responsible party may appeal the administrative citation as set forth in Section 1.17.080 et seq. (Ord. 2011-03 §1).

 

1.17.070 Issuance of permits.
        In the event an administrative citation is issued because the responsible party lacks a required permit and the fine is delinquent, the city shall not issue a permit until the fine and all applicable penalties and interest are paid. (Ord. 2011-03 §1).

 

1.17.080 Appeal hearing process.
        A.    Any recipient of an administrative citation (appellant) may contest that there was a violation of the code or that he or she is the responsible party by completing a request for appeal hearing form and returning it to the city clerk within thirty days from the date of the administrative citation, together with an advance deposit of the fine or notice that a request for an advance deposit hardship waiver has been filed pursuant to Section 1.17.090.

        B.     A request for appeal hearing form may be obtained from the department specified on the administrative citation.

        C.     All appeals from any administrative citation shall be in writing on the request for appeal hearing form and shall contain the following information:

        1.     Name of each appellant;

        2.     A brief statement in ordinary and concise language of the specific items protested, together with any material facts claimed to support the contentions of the appellant(s);

        3.     A brief statement in ordinary and concise language of the relief sought and the reasons why the administrative citation should be rescinded, modified or otherwise set aside; and

        4.     The signatures of all parties named as appellants and their mailing addresses. Any appeal filed that fails to provide all of the information required by this section shall be deemed incomplete.

        D.    Not later than five business days from the date the request for appeal hearing is filed, the enforcement officer or his or her designee shall determine whether the appeal is complete. If the appeal is determined to be incomplete, the enforcement officer or his or her designee shall immediately mail to the appellant a notice of incomplete filing, which shall provide a written explanation of each reason why the appeal has been determined to be incomplete. If the thirty-day appeal period runs during the time the request for appeal hearing form is under review or during the time a notice of incomplete filing is to be sent to the appellant, the notice of incomplete filing shall specify an additional time period, not to exceed five city business days, by which the request for appeal hearing form must be resubmitted and received by the city.

        E.     Appellant shall be notified of the time and place set for the hearing at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. (Ord. 2011-03 §1).

 

1.17.090 Advance deposit hardship waiver.
        A.    Any person who intends to request an appeal hearing and who is financially unable to make the advance deposit of the fine as required in Section 1.17.080 may file a request for an advance deposit hardship waiver.

        B.     The request shall be filed with the department specified on the administrative citation on an advance deposit hardship waiver application form available from the department specified on the administrative citation, within ten days of the date of the administrative citation.

        C.     The requirement of depositing the full amount of the fine shall be stayed unless or until the designee of the department specified on the administrative citation makes a determination not to issue the advance deposit hardship waiver.

        D.    The finance officer, or designee of the department specified on the administrative citation, may issue the advance deposit hardship waiver only if the appellant submits a sworn affidavit, together with any supporting documents or materials, demonstrating to the satisfaction of the department designee the person’s actual financial inability to deposit with the city the full amount of the fine in advance of the appeal hearing.

        E.     If the determination is made not to issue an advance deposit hardship waiver, the appellant shall remit the deposit to the city within ten days of the date of that decision or thirty days from the date of the administrative citation, whichever is later.

        F.     The department designee shall issue a written determination listing the reasons for his or her determination to not issue the advance deposit hardship waiver. The written determination of the department designee shall be final.

        G.    The written determination shall be served upon the appellant by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, to the address listed on the advance deposit hardship waiver application form. (Ord. 2011-03 §1).

 

1.17.100 Hearing procedure.
        A.    No hearing to contest an administrative citation before a hearing board shall be held unless and until the following has been completed:

        1.     A request for appeal hearing form has been completed and submitted to the city; and

        2.     The fine has been deposited in advance in accordance with Section 1.17.080; or

        3.     An advance deposit hardship waiver has been issued in accordance with Section 1.17.090.

        B.     A hearing before the board shall be set for a date that is not less than fifteen days and not more than sixty days from the date that the request for appeal hearing form is filed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The hearing date may be continued upon mutual agreement of the city and the appellant.

        C.     At the hearing, the appellant shall be given the opportunity to testify and to present evidence concerning the administrative citation.

        D.    The failure of the appellant to appear at the appeal hearing without a showing of good cause shall constitute a forfeiture of the fine and a failure to exhaust his or her administrative remedies.

        E.     The administrative citation and any additional evidence submitted by the enforcement officer shall constitute prima facie evidence of the respective facts contained in those documents. If the enforcement officer submits an additional written report concerning the administrative citation to the hearing officer for consideration at the hearing, then a copy of that report shall be served by mail on the appellant at least five working days prior to the date of the hearing.

        F.     The board may continue the hearing and request additional information from the enforcement officer or the appellant prior to issuing a written decision.

        G.    Failure to timely and properly file an appeal from an administrative citation shall constitute a waiver of all rights to an administrative appeal hearing and adjudication of the administrative citation or any portion thereof. The determination that the violation occurred and that the responsible party was responsible for the violation shall be deemed final on the date that service of the administrative citation is deemed completed pursuant to Section 1.17.030. (Ord. 2014-11 §1; Ord. 2011-03 §1).

 

1.17.110 Appeals hearing board decision.
        A.    After considering all of the testimony and evidence submitted at the hearing, the board may decide to uphold the administrative citation, establish a modified schedule for compliance, overturn some or all of the findings of the enforcement officer and/or rescind the citation in part or in its entirety, and/or reduce the amount or waive payment of the administrative fine. The board shall issue a written decision.

        B.     The decision shall state whether the administrative citation has been either upheld, in full or in part, or rescinded, in full or in part. In addition, the decision shall contain a brief summary of the evidence considered, findings of fact, a determination of the issues presented, the effective date of the decision, and a compliance order, if applicable, which shall specifically describe the actions which shall be required to be taken to remedy the code violation(s) indicated in the decision and shall require the actions to be completed within a specified time period and by a specified deadline.

        C.     If the board determines that the administrative citation should be upheld, then the fine amount on deposit with the city shall be retained by the city.

        D.    If the board determines that the administrative citation should be upheld and the fine has not been deposited pursuant to an advance deposit hardship waiver, the board shall set forth in the decision a requirement to pay the applicable administrative fine(s) by a specified date or a payment schedule for the fine(s).

        E.     If the board determines that the administrative citation should be cancelled and the fine was deposited with the city, then the city shall promptly refund the amount of the deposited fine.

        F.     The board shall serve a copy of the decision on the appellant either by delivering a copy of the decision personally or by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, and addressed to appellant at the address shown on the appeal form. The decision shall be issued and served within twenty days from the date the hearing is deemed closed. A copy of the decision shall also be provided to the enforcement officer. (Ord. 2014-11 §1; Ord. 2011-03 §1).

 

1.17.120 Right to judicial review.
        Any person aggrieved by the decision of the board on an administrative citation may obtain review of that decision by filing a petition for review with the Superior Court of Stanislaus County in accordance with the timelines and provisions set forth in California Government Code Section 53069.4. (Ord. 2014-11 §1; Ord. 2011-03 §1).

 

1.17.130 Recovery of administrative citation fines and costs.
        A.    The failure of the responsible party to pay the administrative fines assessed by an administrative citation within the time specified on the citation or after an administrative appeal hearing will result in the collection of the fine by the city.

 

The city may pursue any available legal remedy to collect civil fines. The city may also recover its collections costs according to proof.

        B.     Collection costs shall be in addition to any penalties, interest and/or late charges imposed on the delinquent obligation. Collection costs imposed under this section shall be added to and become a part of the underlying obligation.

        C.     In addition to any administrative fines and costs assessed, the responsible party shall also be liable for all costs, expenses, or disbursements paid or incurred by the city or any of its contractors in connection with the abatement of the violation(s). (Ord. 2011-03 §1).

 

1.17.140 Lien procedure.
        When a violation involves real property and the administrative fines and related costs are not paid within the prescribed time, and/or have not been successfully challenged by a timely appeal as specified in Section 1.17.120, this obligation may be recorded as a lien upon and against the real property, and/or be collected as a special assessment. The lien and/or special assessment shall be imposed pursuant to the procedure set forth in Chapter 8.12, Nuisances, of the Waterford Municipal Code. (Ord. 2011-03 §1).

 

1.17.150 Administrative fee—Satisfaction of lien.
        A.    Each responsible party against whose property an assessment is levied pursuant to this chapter shall also be assessed an administrative fee based on the costs incurred in levying the assessment. The administrative fee shall be included in the lien amount and recorded against the responsible party’s property.

        B.     Once the city receives full payment for outstanding principal, penalties, and costs, the finance officer, or his or her designee, will provide the responsible party or financial institution with a notice of satisfaction for recordation by the county recorder of the county of Stanislaus. This notice of satisfaction will cancel the city’s lien. (Ord. 2011-03 §1).

Chapter 1.18 ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES
1.18.010 Applicability.
        This chapter provides for administrative penalties. The use of administrative penalties are in addition to all other legal remedies, criminal or civil, which may be pursued by the city to address any violation of this code, including any other administrative remedies that are provided for in this code. Use of this chapter shall be at the sole discretion of the city. (Ord. 2011-04 §1).

 

1.18.020 Definitions.
        A.    “Administrative costs” include any and all costs incurred by the city in connection with the matter before the board including, but not limited to, costs of investigation, staffing costs incurred in preparation for the hearing and the hearing itself, and costs for all inspections necessary to enforce a compliance order.

        B.     “Administrative order” means an order issued after hearing by the board requiring correction of certain violations and imposing administrative penalties and administrative costs.

        C.     “Administrative penalty” means a monetary penalty imposed by the city after failing to comply with a compliance order issued by an enforcement officer.

        D.    “Board” means the appeals hearing board of the city of Waterford as set by resolution of the city council.

        E.     “Compliance order” means an order issued by an enforcement officer to a responsible party to correct certain violations as set forth in the order by a date certain, prior to the imposition of administrative penalties.

        F.     “Enforcement officer” shall have the same meaning as defined in Section 1.17.020 of this code.

        G.    “Responsible party” shall have the same meaning as in Section 1.17.020 of this code. (Ord. 2011-04 §1).

 

1.18.030 Compliance order.
        A.    Whenever the enforcement officer determines that a violation of any provision of this code within the enforcement officer’s responsibility is occurring or exists, the enforcement officer may issue a written compliance order to any responsible party.

        B.     A compliance order shall contain the following information:

        1.     The date and address or definite description of the location of the violation(s);

        2.     The code section(s) or condition(s) violated and a description of the violation(s);

        3.     An order to the responsible party to correct the violation(s) within the time specified, and an explanation of the consequences of failure to correct the violation(s);

        4.     The time period after which administrative penalties will begin to accrue if compliance with the order has not been achieved;

        5.     Either a copy of this chapter or an explanation of the consequences of noncompliance with this chapter and a description of the hearing procedure and appeals process; and

        6.     The name and signature of the enforcement officer.

        C.     The responsible party shall be given a reasonable period in which to comply with the compliance order. However, should a violation constitute an imminent threat to life or property, immediate compliance may be ordered. (Ord. 2011-04 §1).

 

1.18.040 Service of notices—Failure to receive notice.
        All written notices required to be given under the provisions of this chapter may be served in the following manner:

        A.    If real property is involved, by posting notice on the property; and

        B.     By personal service; or

        C.     To the property owner, by mailing a copy of the notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, postage prepaid, to his or her address shown on the last equalized assessment roll available on the date the notice is prepared, by first class mail to the same address, and to other responsible parties at their addresses as known to the enforcement officer or at the property address. Service by regular mail under this subsection shall be deemed complete after deposit in the United States mail.

        D.    If the compliance order involves the correction of conditions to real property, which if left uncorrected could result in the demolition of the property, then notice shall be provided to all other persons with a legal interest in the property, by mailing a copy of the notice by regular mail, postage prepaid. Service under this subsection shall be deemed complete after deposit in the United States mail. (Ord. 2011-04 §1).

 

1.18.050 Hearing.
        A.    If the enforcement officer determines that all violations have been corrected within the time specified in the compliance order, no further action shall be taken.

        B.     If compliance is not achieved within the time specified in the compliance order, the enforcement officer shall advise the secretary to the board to set a hearing before the board.

        C.     The secretary to the board shall cause written notice to be served on the responsible party and, where real property is involved, a notice of the hearing shall be served on the property owner at the address as it appears on the last equalized county assessment roll available on the date the notice is prepared. (Ord. 2011-04 §1).

 

1.18.060 Notice of hearing.
        A.    Every notice of hearing on a compliance order shall contain the date, time and place at which the hearing shall be conducted by the board.

        B.     Every hearing shall be set for a date not less than fifteen days or more than sixty days from the date of the notice of hearing unless the enforcement officer determines the matter is urgent or good cause exists for an extension of time.

        C.     The hearing serves to provide a full opportunity for a person subject to a compliance order to object to the determination that he or she is a responsible party, that a violation has occurred and/or that the violation continues to exist. The failure of a person subject to a compliance order to appear at a hearing shall constitute a failure to exhaust administrative remedies. (Ord. 2011-04 §1).

 

1.18.070 Hearing procedure—Findings and order.
        A.    At the time and place set forth in the notice of hearing, the board shall conduct a hearing on the compliance order.

        B.     The board shall consider any written or oral evidence consistent with its rules of procedure regarding the violation and compliance by the responsible party.

        C.     Subject to subsection G, within fifteen days following the conclusion of the hearing, the board shall make findings, and issue its determination regarding:

        1.     The existence of the violation.

        2.     The failure of the responsible party and/or property owner to take required corrective action within the time period stated in the compliance order.

        D.    The board shall issue written findings on each violation. The findings shall be supported by evidence received at the hearing.

        E.     If the board finds, by majority vote, that the preponderance of evidence demonstrates a violation has occurred and that the violation was not corrected within the time period specified in the compliance order, the board shall issue an administrative order.

        F.     If the board finds that no violation has occurred or that the violation was corrected within the time period specified in the compliance order, the board shall issue a finding of those facts.

        G.    The findings of fact and, if applicable, the administrative order, shall be served upon the responsible party and/or property owner. Service shall be made in a manner provided for giving notice by this chapter. (Ord. 2011-04 §1).

 

1.18.080 Administrative order—Contents.
        If the board determines that a violation occurred which was not corrected within the time period specified in the compliance order, the board shall issue an administrative order described in Section 1.18.070 which imposes any or all of the following:

        A.    An order to correct, including a schedule for correction where appropriate;

        B.     Administrative penalties as provided in Section 1.18.090;

        C.     Administrative costs as provided in Section 1.18.100. (Ord. 2011-04 §1).

 

1.18.090 Administrative penalties.
        A.    The board may impose administrative penalties for the violation of any provision of this code in an amount not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars per day for each ongoing violation. The total administrative penalty shall not exceed one hundred thousand dollars exclusive of administrative costs, interest and restitution for compliance inspections.

        B.     In determining the amount of the administrative penalties, the board may take any or all of the following factors into consideration:

        1.     The duration of the violation;

        2.     The frequency, recurrence, and number of violations;

        3.     The seriousness of the violation;

        4.     The good faith efforts of the responsible party and/or property owner to come into compliance;

        5.     The economic impact of the penalty on the responsible party and/or property owner;

        6.     The impact of the violation on the community;

        7.     Such other factors as justice may require.

        C.     Administrative penalties imposed by the board shall accrue from the date specified in the compliance order and shall cease to accrue on the date the violation is corrected as determined by the enforcement officer or the board.

        D.    The board, in its discretion, may suspend the imposition of administrative penalties for any period of time during which:

        1.     The responsible party and/or property owner has applied for necessary permits; and

        2.     Such permits are necessary to achieve compliance; and

        3.     Such permit applications are actively pending before the city, state, or other appropriate governmental agency.

        E.     Administrative penalties assessed by the board shall be due by the date specified in the administrative order.

        F.     If the violation is not corrected as specified in the administrative order and no suspension is in effect, administrative penalties shall continue to accrue on a daily basis until the violation is corrected, subject to the maximum amount set forth in subsection A of this section.

        G.    If the responsible party and/or property owner gives written notice to the enforcement officer that the violation has been corrected and if the enforcement officer finds that compliance has been achieved, the enforcement officer shall deem the date the written notice was postmarked or personally delivered to the enforcement officer or the date of the final inspection, whichever first occurred, to be the date the violation was corrected. If no written notice is provided to the enforcement officer, the violation will be deemed corrected on the date of the final inspection. (Ord. 2011-04 §1).

 

1.18.100 Administrative costs.
        The board shall assess administrative costs against the responsible party and/or property owner when it finds that a violation has occurred and that compliance has not been achieved within the time specified in the compliance order. (Ord. 2011-04 §1).

 

1.18.110 Failure to comply with administrative order.
        Failure to pay the assessed administrative penalties and administrative costs specified in the administrative order of the board may be enforced as:

        A.    A personal obligation of the responsible party; and/or

        B.     If the violation is in connection with real property, a special assessment or lien against the real property as provided for in Section 1.18.160. The special assessment or lien shall remain in effect until paid in full. (Ord. 2011-04 §1).

 

1.18.120 Recovery of administrative penalties.
        The city may collect the assessed administrative penalties and administrative costs by use of all available legal means, including recordation of a special assessment or lien. Collection costs shall be in addition to any penalties, interest and/or late charges imposed on the delinquent obligation. Collection costs imposed under this section shall be added to and become a part of the underlying obligation. (Ord. 2011-04 §1).

 

1.18.130 Report of compliance after administrative order.
        If the enforcement officer determines that compliance with the administrative order has been achieved, he or she shall file a compliance report with the board and serve the responsible party and/or property owner with the compliance report by personal delivery or by first class mail. (Ord. 2011-04 §1).

 

1.18.140 Compliance dispute.
        A.    If the enforcement officer does not file a report pursuant to Section 1.18.130, a responsible party and/or property owner who believes that compliance with the administrative order has been achieved may request a compliance hearing before the board by filing a request for a hearing with the board.

        B.     The hearing shall be noticed and conducted in the same manner as a hearing on a compliance order as provided in Sections 1.18.060 and 1.18.070.

        C.     The board shall determine the dispute as follows:

        1.     If compliance has been achieved, when it was achieved, and what relief, if any, the responsible party and/or property owner may be entitled.

        2.     If compliance has not been achieved, to what extent has it not. Further, for good cause shown, the board may amend or modify its original order. (Ord. 2011-04 §1).

 

1.18.150 Right to judicial review.
        Any person affected by the decision of the board may appeal the decision to the Superior Court of Stanislaus County within twenty days of the decision or service of the administrative order. The appeal shall be governed by the provisions of Government Code Section 53069.4. (Ord. 2011-04 §1).

 

1.18.160 Lien/special assessment.
        When a violation involves real property and the amount of any administrative penalties and/or administrative costs imposed by the board pursuant to this chapter in connection with real property has not been satisfied in full within sixty days or such other time limit set forth in the administrative order, and/or has not been successfully challenged by a timely appeal as provided in Section 1.18.150, this obligation may be recorded as a lien upon and against the real property on which the violation occurred, and/or collected as a special assessment. The lien and/or special assessment shall be imposed pursuant to the procedure set forth in Chapter 8.12, Nuisances, of the Waterford Municipal Code. (Ord. 2011-04 §1).

 

1.18.170 Administrative fee/satisfaction of lien.
        A.    Each responsible party against whose property an assessment is levied pursuant to this chapter shall also be assessed an administrative fee based on the costs incurred in levying the assessment. The administrative fee shall be included in the lien amount and recorded against the responsible party’s property.

        B.     Once payment in full is received by the city for outstanding penalties and costs, the city clerk or the finance officer shall provide the responsible party or financial institution with a notice of satisfaction so that they may record this notice with the office of the county recorder of the county of Stanislaus. Such notice of satisfaction shall cancel the city’s lien. (Ord. 2011-04 §1).

 

1.18.180 Foreclosure of real property lien.
        The lien may be foreclosed and the real property sold by the filing of a complaint for foreclosure in a court of competent jurisdiction and the issuance of a judgment to foreclose. There shall be no right to trial by jury. The city shall be entitled to its attorney fees and costs. (Ord. 2011-04 §1).

 

1.18.190 Redemption of lien.
        The lien may be redeemed by the payment in full of all amounts secured by the lien within six months after the lien is recorded and notice of the right to redeem is given to the property owner. (Ord. 2011-04 §1).

 

1.18.200 Penalties as a personal obligation.
        If it is determined by the city council that the administrative penalties and costs set forth in the board’s administrative order should become a personal obligation of the violator, it may direct that a petition be filed with a court of competent jurisdiction to enter said order as a judgment of that court. The city shall be entitled to its attorney fees and costs. (Ord. 2011-04 §1).

 

1.18.210 Interest.
        Interest shall accrue on all amounts declared due by the appeals hearing board, and unpaid, from the date of the administrative order to the date paid pursuant to the laws applicable to civil money judgments. (Ord. 2011-04 §1).

 

1.18.220 Rules and regulations.
        The city council may, by resolution, adopt such rules and regulations for the administration and interpretation of this chapter as it may consider proper. (Ord. 2011-04 §1).

Chapter 1.20 ELECTIONS
1.20.010 General municipal election.
        In accordance with the provisions of California Government Code Section 35504.5, the general municipal election of the city now required to be held on the second Tuesday in April of each even-numbered year, shall be held on the same day as the statewide general election in each even-numbered year commencing with the statewide general election to be held on Tuesday following the first Monday of November, 1986. (Ord. 84-4 §1, 1984).

Chapter 1.30 CLAIMS PROCEDURE
1.30.010 Claims procedure.
        Pursuant to the authority contained in Section 935 of the Government Code of the state of California, the following claims procedures are established for those claims against the city of Waterford for money or damages not now governed by state or local laws. (Ord. 97-09 §1, 1994).

 

1.30.010A Claims for damages or money.
        Notwithstanding the exemptions set forth in Section 905 of the Government Code of the state of California, all claims against the city of Waterford for damages or money, when a procedure for processing such claims is not otherwise provided by state or local laws, shall be presented within the time limitations and in the manner prescribed by Sections 910 through 915.2 of the Government Code of the state. Such claims shall further be subject to the provisions of Section 945 through 946 of the Government Code of the state relating to the prohibition of suits in the absence of the presentation of claims and action thereon by the council.

 

1.30.010B Claims regarding tax, assessments and fees.
        Claims regarding tax assessments and fees against the city of Waterford for money or damages which are excepted by Section 905 from the Government Code (commencing with Section 900) in Chapter 2 (commencing with Section 910) which are not governed by any other statutes or regulations relating thereto, shall be governed by the procedures set forth in Chapter 1.30.

 

1.30.020 When a claim shall be presented.
        A claim shall be presented and acted upon by the city of Waterford, as a prerequisite to filing of a suit thereon. The claim shall be subject to the provisions of Government Code Section 945.6 and Section 946.

 

1.30.030 Limitation on time for filing a claim.
        Claims for a refund of tax, assessment, or fees, must be presented within six months after the date the fee, tax or assessment was paid. In the event, the fee, tax or assessment is not paid or paid late, the time period shall run six months from the date upon which the fee, tax or assessment was due to be paid to the city.

 

1.30.040 Claim provision.
        Government Code Section 911.4, Section 911.6 to Section 912.2 inclusive, and Section 946.4 and Section 946 are applicable to all claims set forth in the ordinance codified in this chapter.

 

1.30.050 Shorter limitation period provided.
        In the event a shorter time period is otherwise provided for the time in which a claim or litigation shall commence, the shorter time period shall prevail. (Ord. 01-05 §1, 2001).

Chapter 1.40 APPEALS
1.40.010 Right to appeal.
        A.    Planning Appeals. Other than any planning appeal covered by Waterford Municipal Code Chapter 17.75 et seq. (i.e., Zoning), any action or decision of the planner or engineer may be appealed to the planning commission. Any action or decision of the planning commission may be appealed to the city council.

        B.     Permit Appeals. Any grant, condition, denial, suspension, or revocation of a permit by any official of the city under the provisions of this code (except those falling within the scope of subsection A of this section) may be appealed to the city council.

        C.     Administrative Citation Appeals. Anyone who is cited with an administration violation of the Waterford Municipal Code including, but not limited to, prohibition against underage drinking and social host liability, may be appealed to the city manager who will submit his or her decision within ten days of said appeal. The city manager’s decision may be appealed to the city council if done so in writing within ten days of the city manager’s decision. (Ord. 07-07 §1, 2007).

 

1.40.020 Time for appeal.
        Any person may initiate an appeal to the planning commission by filing a written notice of appeal together with the required fee with the secretary to the planning commission within ten days of the rendering of the action or decision. Any person may initiate an appeal to the city council by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk together with the required fee within ten days of the rendering of the action or decision. (Ord. 07-07 §1, 2007).

 

1.40.030 Hearing—Notices.
        The city clerk or secretary of the planning commission shall forthwith set such matter for a hearing and shall cause written notice thereof to be given to the applicant and appellant (if different) not less than ten days prior to such hearing. (Ord. 07-07 §1, 2007).

 

1.40.040 Form and content.
        The notice of appeal shall be made on the prescribed form and shall state specifically the reasons and basis for the appeal. All information to be considered must be submitted with the appeal. However, the appealing party may request, at the time of filing the appeal, a thirty-day period within which additional information or arguments in support of the appeal may be filed. (Ord. 07-07 §1, 2007).

 

1.40.050 Effect of appeal.
        The filing of an appeal shall cause the rights of the parties to remain as they were prior to the action or decision except where the city manager finds that public health, welfare, or safety require the action or decision be made effective during the appeal process. In the event of such a finding, the city manager shall notify the affected parties within five days of the filing of the appeal. (Ord. 07-07 §1, 2007).

 

1.40.060 Scope of review.
        In ruling on the appeal, the planning commission or city council may change, modify, alter, amend, affirm, or reverse the action or decision being appealed. Further, the hearing on appeal shall be conducted de novo and all relevant information and arguments may be submitted. If information, evidence or argument not previously submitted is offered at the hearing, the hearing may be continued in the interest of fairness. (Ord. 07-07 §1, 2007).

 

1.40.070 Effective date of decision.
        Any decision or action of the planning commission in regard to an appeal shall be final and effective as of the date rendered if no appeal is timely filed. Any decision or action of the city council in regard to any appeal shall be final and effective on the date rendered. (Ord. 07-07 §1, 2007).

 

1.40.080 Action by majority vote.
        Unless state law requires action by ordinance or resolution, the decision on an appeal may be adopted by a majority of those voting and shall be evidenced by minute order. (Ord. 07-07 §1, 2007).

Title 2 ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL
Chapter 2.04 COUNCIL MEETINGS
Chapter 2.06 CITY COUNCIL MEMBERS
Chapter 2.12 CITY MANAGER
Chapter 2.16 DIRECTOR OF FINANCE
Chapter 2.18 CITY CLERK
Chapter 2.20 PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT
Chapter 2.24 PLANNING COMMISSION
Chapter 2.28 PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION
Chapter 2.32 TRAINING OF LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS
Chapter 2.36 PUBLIC EMPLOYEES’ RETIREMENT SYSTEM
Chapter 2.40 PERSONNEL SYSTEM
Chapter 2.44 UNCLAIMED PROPERTY
Chapter 2.48 EMERGENCY ORGANIZATION

Chapter 2.04 COUNCIL MEETINGS
2.04.010 Date and time.
        The city council shall meet regularly twice a month on the first and third Thursday, at the hour of six-thirty p.m., or at such other time as the city council may from time to time hereafter fix by resolution. (Ord. 2000-02 §1; Ord. 96-06 §1; Ord. 74-1 §1, 1974).

 

2.04.020 Location.
        Meetings of the city council shall be held in the Council Chambers, located inside Waterford City Hall, 101 E Street, Waterford, CA 95386, or such other location in the city of Waterford, duly noticed. (Ord. 2015-01 §1; Ord. 2000-02 §1; Ord. 82-6 §1; Ord. 74-1 §1, 1974).

Chapter 2.06 CITY COUNCIL MEMBERS
2.06.010 Compensation—Reimbursement.
        The members of the city council of the city of Waterford shall receive compensation for their services in the amount of three hundred dollars per month for the performance of civic endeavors. (Ord. 2017-08 §1; Ord. 2012-01 §1; Ord. 92-11, 1992).

Chapter 2.12 CITY MANAGER
2.12.010 Position created.
        The position of the city manager is created and established. The city manager shall be appointed by the city council wholly on the basis of his or her administrative and executive ability and qualifications, and shall hold office for and during the pleasure of the city council as provided in this chapter. Whenever a reference is made to “city manager” in this code, or in any other city ordinance, resolution or action, that reference shall be deemed to mean “city manager.” (Ord. 2011-13 §1; Ord. 86-3 §2, 1986).

 

2.12.020 Appointment and removal.
        A.    Appointment and Removal by Council.

        1.     The city council shall appoint the city manager for any period of time negotiated between the two parties, and remove him or her by a three-member vote. After the expiration of the six-month probationary period of employment, such removal shall be accomplished in the following manner: at least thirty days before such removal becomes effective, the city council shall, by a three-member vote of its members, adopt a preliminary resolution stating the reason for his or her removal. By the preliminary resolution the council may suspend the city manager from duty, but shall in any case cause to be paid him or her forthwith any unpaid balance of his or her salary and accruals through the thirty-day period, and any severance compensation if agreed upon in the employment agreement. The city council, in removing the city manager, shall use its controlled discretion, and its action shall be final.

        2.     The city manager may resign from his or her position by giving at least thirty days’ written notice of the effective date of his or her resignation; provided, further, that the city council may waive all or part of said thirty days’ notice period.

        B.     Limitation on Removal. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this section, the city manager shall not be removed from office, other than for misconduct in office, during or within a period of ninety days next succeeding any general or special municipal election held in the city, at which election a member of the city council is elected or when a new member of the city council is appointed or elected. The purpose of this provision is to allow any newly-elected or appointed member of the city council or reorganized city council to observe the actions and ability of the city manager in the performance of the powers and duties of his or her office. After the expiration of said ninety-day period, the provisions of subsection A of this section as to removal of the city manager shall apply and be effective. (Ord. 2011-13 §1; Ord. 86-3 §2, 1986).

 

2.12.030 Eligibility.
        No member of the city council shall be eligible for appointment as city manager until two years have elapsed after such councilmember has ceased to be a member of the city council. (Ord. 2011-13 §1; Ord. 86-3 §2, 1986).

 

2.12.040 Acting city manager.
        The city manager shall appoint, subject to the approval of the city council, one of the department heads of the city to serve as acting city manager during any temporary absence or disability of the city manager. (Ord. 2011-13 §1; Ord. 86-3 §2, 1986).

 

2.12.050 Bond.
        The city manager shall furnish a corporate surety bond to be approved by the city council, in such sum as may be determined by the city council, and conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties imposed upon the city manager as prescribed in this chapter. Any premium for such bond shall be a proper charge against the city. (Ord. 2011-13 §1; Ord. 86-3 §2, 1986).

 

2.12.060 Compensation.
        The city manager shall receive such compensation as the city council shall from time to time determine. (Ord. 2011-13 §1; Ord. 86-3 §2, 1986).

 

2.12.070 Powers and duties.
        The city manager shall be the administrative head of the government of the city under the direction and control of the city council, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. He or she shall be responsible for the efficient administration of all the affairs of the city which are under his or her control. In addition to his or her general powers as administrative head, and not as a limitation thereon, it shall be his or her duty and he or she shall have the powers set forth in the following subsections:

        A.    Law Enforcement. It shall be the duty of the city manager to enforce all laws and ordinances of the city and to see that all franchises, contracts, permits and privileges granted by the city council are faithfully observed.

        B.     Authority Over Employees. It shall be the duty of the city manager, and he or she shall have the authority, to control, order and give directions to all heads of departments and to subordinate officers and employees of the city under his or her jurisdiction.

        C.     Power of Appointment and Removal. Subject to the employee merit system rules and regulations of the city, it shall be the duty of the city manager to appoint, remove, promote and demote any and all officers and employees of the city, except the city attorney, and all elected officials. The city manager will inform the city council about any plans related to the appointment, removal, promotion or demotion of any and all officers and employees of the city.

        D.    Administrative Reorganization of Officers. It shall be the duty and responsibility of the city manager to conduct studies and to recommend to the city council such administrative reorganization of offices, positions or units of the city as may be indicated in the interest of efficient, effective and economical conduct of the city’s business.

        E.     Ordinances. It shall be the duty of the city manager and he or she shall recommend to the city council for adoption such measures, resolutions and ordinances as he or she deems necessary.

        F.     Attendance at Council Meetings. It shall be the duty of the city manager to attend all meetings of the city council unless he or she is excused therefrom by the mayor individually or the city council.

        G.    Financial Reports. It shall be the duty of the city manager to keep the city council at all times fully advised as to the financial condition and needs of the city and to present a monthly report to the city council on the finances and administrative activities of the city.

        H.    Budget. It shall be the duty of the city manager to prepare and submit the proposed annual budget and the proposed annual salary plan to the city council for its approval.

        I.      Expenditure Control and Purchasing. It shall be the duty of the city manager to see that no expenditures shall be submitted or recommended to the city council except on approval of the city manager or authorized representative. The city manager or his or her authorized representative shall be responsible for the purchase of all supplies for all the departments or divisions of the city; further, it shall be the duty of the city manager to establish a centralized purchasing system for all city offices, departments and agencies.

        J.      Investigations and Complaints. It shall be the duty of the city manager to make investigations into the affairs of the city and any department or division thereof, and any contract or the proper performance of any obligations of the city; further, it shall be the duty of the city manager to investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of the city government and in regard to the service maintained by public utilities in the city.

        K.    Public Buildings. It shall be the duty of the city manager and he or she shall exercise general supervision over all public buildings, public parks and all other public property which is under the control and jurisdiction of the city council.

        L.     Additional Duties. It shall be the duty of the city manager to perform such other duties and exercise such other powers as may be delegated to him or her from time to time by ordinance or resolution or other official action of the city council. (Ord. 2011-13 §1; Ord. 86-3 §2, 1986).

 

2.12.080 Internal relations.
        The city council and its members shall deal with the administrative services of the city only through the city manager, except for the purpose of inquiry, and neither the city council nor any member thereof shall give orders or instructions to any subordinates of the city manager. The city manager shall take his or her orders and instructions from the city council only when sitting in a duly convened meeting of the city council, and no individual councilperson shall give any orders or instructions to the city manager. (Ord. 2011-13 §1; Ord. 86-3 §2, 1986).

 

2.12.090 Additional provisions.
        Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as a limitation on the power or authority of the city council to enter into any supplemental agreement with the city manager delineating additional terms and conditions of employment not inconsistent with any provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2011-13 §1; Ord. 86-3 §2, 1986).

Chapter 2.16 DIRECTOR OF FINANCE
2.16.010 Office established.
        The office of director of finance of the city is established. (Ord. 74-2 §1, 1974).

 

2.16.020 Appointment—Compensation.
        The director of finance shall be appointed by the city council, and shall serve at the pleasure of the city council, at a compensation to be fixed by the city council from time to time by resolution. (Ord. 74-2 §2, 1974).

 

2.16.030 Powers and duties designated.
        The powers and duties of such office shall include the following:

        A.    Maintain records readily reflecting the financial condition of the city;

        B.     Prepare and submit to the city council periodic statements, at such, times as the city council may direct, but in no event less often than semiannually, indicating the financial condition of the city and a complete financial statement and report at the end of each fiscal year;

        C.     Maintain a general accounting system for the city government, supervising and controlling disbursements and expenditures, including payroll, through a system of budget control to assure that moneys are available and appropriated;

        D.    Cause a summary of the city’s financial report required by Government Code Section 53891, in a form prescribed by the State Controller, to be published or posted in the manner prescribed by Government Code Section 40804 and within the time prescribed by Section 40805 of said Code;

        E.     Prepare and submit to the city council a proposed preliminary budget prior to the beginning of the next succeeding fiscal year;

        F.     Audit all demands and submit the same to the city council for approval or rejection, not less frequently than once a month, together with his or her affidavit certifying as to the accuracy of the demands and the availability of the funds for payment thereof. As to an order or demand not approved for want of funds, he or she shall have the duties prescribed for the city clerk in Government Code Sections 37204 and 37205;

        G.    Countersign all municipal warrants and checks;

        H.    Certify and approve payrolls or attendance records of municipal officers and employees other than those within departments whose department heads have the responsibility for certification or approval of departmental payrolls or attendance records for employees in their department;

        I.      Procure materials, supplies and general services for the city and prepare and maintain a current inventory of all materials and supplies and an inventory of general assets belonging to the city;

        J.      Provide general office services to other departments of the city as may be determined appropriate;

        K.    Estimate, plan and program the city’s financial activities, and advise the city council and other city officers;

        L.     Perform such other duties as the city council may from time to time direct. (Ord. 74-2 §2, 1974).

 

2.16.040 Bond required.
        Before entering upon the duties of his or her office, the director of finance shall execute a bond to the city, the penal sum of which shall be in a reasonable amount recommended by the city attorney and fixed by the city council, from time to time, by resolution. (Ord. 74-2 §4, 1974).

Chapter 2.18 CITY CLERK
2.18.010 Authority and appointment of office.
        The office of the city clerk is established pursuant to Section 36501 of the California Government Code. The city clerk shall be appointed by the city manager, with the consent of the city council, but will serve at the pleasure of the city manager. The city manager may appoint an “interim city clerk” to serve as the city clerk at any time the office is vacant or the city clerk is unable to serve. Such interim city clerk shall have all the powers and duties prescribed by this chapter and by direction of the city council. (Ord. 2011-12 §1).

 

2.18.020 Compensation.
        If the city manager appoints a separate person to the office of city clerk, the city clerk shall receive such compensation and expense allowance as the city council shall from time to time determine, and such compensation shall be a proper charge against such funds of the city as the city council shall designate. (Ord. 2011-12 §1).

 

2.18.030 Functions.
        A.    The city clerk shall have all of the powers, duties and responsibilities granted to and imposed upon the office of the city clerk by the provisions of California Government Code Section 40801 and following, other general laws of the state, the provisions of this code, and the ordinances and resolutions of the city council.

        B.     The principal functions of the city clerk shall be to:

        1.     Attend all meetings of the city council and prepare the minutes of such proceedings;

        2.     Have custody of and be responsible for the city seal and all books, official files, papers, correspondence and archives belonging to the city committed to the clerk’s custody;

        3.     Prepare and maintain an index of all records in the clerk’s custody;

        4.     Administer and supervise the city’s records management program;

        5.     Administer and supervise all municipal elections;

        6.     Administer all oaths and take affidavits in matters relating to city business;

        7.     Administer and supervise the publication of legal notices and ordinances and, if appropriate, prepare fair and adequate summaries of such ordinances for publication, which shall be reviewed by the city attorney and city manager before being published;

        8.     Attest the signatures of city officers and documents that have been executed as authorized by resolution, ordinance or statute;

        9.     Perform such other duties relating to the office as shall be required of him or her by law, ordinance or the city council/agency;

        10.   Provide administrative supportive services to city officers and employees for required conflict of interest filings;

        11.   Provide information from the Secretary of State and/or Fair Political Practices Commission to candidates in municipal elections and administer candidate filings;

        12.   Keep a register of claims and indexing system for litigation involving the city as directed by the city manager;

        13.   Accept and process subpoenas and summons and other legal process unless an administrative regulation designates acceptance and process by another department or officer of the city.

        C.     With the approval of the city manager, the city clerk may deputize subordinates who shall perform such duties required by law to be per formed by the city clerk as the city clerk may delegate and direct. (Ord. 2011-12 §1).

 

2.18.040 Bond required.
        The city clerk shall execute a bond in the amount set by the city council by resolution, upon recommendation of the city attorney in accordance with Government Code Section 36518. Any premium for such bond shall be a proper charge against the city. (Ord. 2011-12 §1).

Chapter 2.20 PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT
2.20.010 Creation—Functions.
        A.    A public works department is established.

        B.     The functions of the public works department shall include:

        1.     Construct, inspect, operate and maintain the city’s public works facilities and city installations such as are not assigned to another department;

        2.     Enforce through the appropriate officials and divisions the laws and regulations relating to work done in public streets and ways, the construction, alteration, occupation and demolition of buildings, and land use;

        3.     Maintain in efficient operable condition automotive and other equipment of the city not otherwise assigned to another department for maintenance or for which the maintenance has not been contracted out;

        4.     Perform or direct all phases of engineering work required in connection with the functions of the city not otherwise assigned to another department;

        5.     Perform such other duties as may be assigned by the city manager and city council. (Ord. 2011-09 §1; Ord. 70-9 §1, 1970).

 

2.20.020 Director—Appointment and responsibilities.
        There shall be a director of public works appointed by the city manager with the consent of the city council. The director of public works, shall be responsible for the direction and control of all functions assigned to the department.

        The director of public works shall have the following powers and duties:

        A.    Have charge of the department of public works of the city under the supervision of the city manager;

        B.     Have control and supervision over all the public works of the city, including, but not limited to, streets and street improvements, water system, sanitary and storm drain sewer systems and sewer plans, sanitary landfill sites and operations, maintenance and service yards and buildings, public buildings and facilities, and the maintenance of parks, grounds and appurtenant facilities;

        C.     Coordinate with and assist the employees responsible for planning and development, engineering, and in the planning and development of city facilities, parks, and public works;

        D.    Submit an annual budget to the city manager for his or her approval, rejection or amendment;

        E.     Such other functions and duties as the city manager may, from time to time, specify. (Ord. 2011-09 §1; Ord. 70-9 §2, 1970).

 

2.20.030 Director—Duties performed by other officer.
        The duties of the director of public works may be performed by the holder of any other paid office in the city at the discretion of the mayor and the council, and, in such event, such official shall, by virtue of the assignment of these duties, become ex officio director of public works. (Ord. 70-9 §3, 1970).

Chapter 2.24 PLANNING COMMISSION
2.24.010 Membership.
        The planning commission shall have five voting members. The majority of the members shall be citizens of the city. Noncitizen members may be appointed as set forth herein, provided they live within five miles of the city’s limits, or either own real property or own a business whose principle place of operation is in the city. The members shall be appointed by a majority vote of the city council and shall serve without compensation. An alternate member may be appointed by a majority vote of the city council. An alternate commissioner shall serve as a voting member in the absence of a regular member. Members of the commission shall receive reimbursement for necessary traveling and other expenses incurred on official duty when such expenditures have received authorization by the city council. Members of the planning commission shall not hold any other appointed or elected office of the city of Waterford nor be an employee of same. (Ord. 2020-04 §1; Ord. 2014-02 §1; Ord. 93-20 §1, 1993; Ord. 80-1 §2, 1980).

 

2.24.020 Term of office, removal and vacancy filling.
        A.    The term of office of planning commission members shall be two years. A member of the commission may be removed from office by a majority vote of the city council.

        B.     A member who fails, without permission, to attend three successive meetings of the commission, is subject to removal.

        C.     Vacancies shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired term. (Ord. 80-1 §3, 1980).

 

2.24.030 Meetings.
        A.    The planning commission shall meet at least once a month so long as there are items for deliberation and at such time and place as it may fix by resolution.

        B.     The commission shall select a chairperson from among its members and shall select a chairperson annually. The same person may serve as chairperson in successive terms.

        C.     Special meetings may be called at any time by the chairperson or by any three members by written notices served upon the members twenty-four hours before the proposed time of such meetings. (Ord. 07-01 §1; Ord. 82-7, 1982; Ord. 80-1 §4, 1980).

 

2.24.040 Rules of transaction and recordkeeping.
        The planning commission shall adopt rules for the transaction of business and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations, which record shall be on file in the city clerk’s office and shall be a public record. The office of the city manager shall furnish stenographic services as are needed to make possible the necessary recording and filing of these records. (Ord. 80-1 §5, 1980).

 

2.24.050 Powers and duties.
        The planning commission shall have the power and it shall be its duty:

        A.    To prepare and recommend for adoption a comprehensive long term general plan for the physical development of the city and of any land outside its boundaries, as provided for by the conservation and planning laws of the state. Such plan shall be known as the master plan and may comprise any, all or any combination of the plans specified in Article 5, Chapter 3, Title 7 of the Government Code of the state;

        B.     To prepare plans based on the master plans and drafts of such regulations, programs and legislation as may in its judgment be required for the systematic execution of the master plan, and to recommend such plans and measures to the council for adoption;

        C.     To act as the advisory agency for the city in connection with the administration of the Subdivision and Map Act of the state and the city subdivision regulations;

        D.    To investigate and recommend to the council plans for the improvement and beautification of the city, such as the opening, straightening, widening, closing of public streets or parking thereon; the location and improvement of public buildings and public works;

        E.     To perform the duties of a planning commission under Articles 7, 8, 9 and 10 of Chapter 3, Title 7 and Article 3, Chapter 4, Title 7 of the Government Code of the state;

        F.     To perform such other duties as may be imposed upon it by the city council by ordinance or resolution. (Ord. 80-1 §6, 1980).

Chapter 2.28 PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION
2.28.010 Membership.
        The parks and recreation commission shall consist of five voting members appointed by the mayor with the approval of the city council. An alternate member may be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the city council. An alternate commissioner shall serve as a voting member in the absence of a regular member. The members shall serve without compensation except for reimbursement of reasonable expenses incurred in performing the duties of the commission when approved by the city council. The members of the parks and recreation commission shall not be elected, appointed officials, nor employees of the city. (Ord. 2014-03 §1; Ord. 96-02 §1, 1996; Ord. 92-14, 1992).

 

2.28.020 Terms of office, removal and filling of vacancies.
        A.    A term of office of parks and recreation commission members shall be two-year terms beginning on July 1st of the year of their appointment, and ending on the second June 30th thereafter, except that such members shall hold office at the pleasure of the city council and may be removed from office at any time with or without cause by a majority vote of the city council.

        B.     A commission member who is absent from three consecutive meetings without being excused by a majority of the commission shall be deemed to have vacated his or her position on the commission and such position shall be automatically deemed vacant.

        C.     Vacancies shall be filled by appointment by the mayor with the approval of the city council for any unexpired term. (Ord. 96-02 §1, 1996; Ord. 85-6 §3, 1985; Ord. 83-3, 1983; Ord. 80-13 §3, 1980; Ord. 72-5, 1972; Ord. 71-9 §2, 1971).

 

2.28.030 Meetings.
        A.    The parks and recreation commission shall meet at least once a month so long as there are items for deliberation and at such time and place as it may fix by resolution.

        B.     A majority of the commission shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of transacting business of the commission.

        C.     The commission shall select a chairperson from among its members and shall select a new chairperson annually. The same person may serve as chairperson in successive terms.

        D.    Special meetings may be called at any time by the chairperson or by any three commission members by written notices served upon all members at least twenty-four hours before the proposed time of such meetings. (Ord. 07-01 §2; Ord. 85-6 §4, 1985; Ord. 71-9 §3, 1971).

 

2.28.040 Rules of transaction and recordkeeping.
        The parks and recreation commission shall adopt rules for the transaction of business and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations. A copy of those minutes shall be prepared and submitted to the commission for their approval at the next monthly meeting of the commission. Within seven days from the date of the commission’s approval of minutes from a prior meeting, a copy of the approved minutes shall be submitted to the city council, and a copy to the city clerk’s office where that copy will be on file and shall be a public record. The office of the city manager shall furnish stenographic services as are needed to make possible the necessary recording and filing of these records. (Ord. 85-6 §5, 1985; Ord. 83-3, 1983; Ord. 80-13 §4, 1980; Ord. 71-9 §5, 1971).

 

2.28.050 Powers and duties.
        A.    The parks and recreation commission shall have the power and it shall be the duty of the commission to make recommendations to and advise the city council in matters pertaining to the creation, operation, maintenance, management and control of community recreation programs, and use of the city’s parks.

        B.     The parks and recreation commission shall have the power and it shall be the duty of said commission to make recommendations to the city council and to advise said council in matters pertaining to the creation, operation, maintenance, management and control of the city community center.

        C.     Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as restricting or curtailing any of the powers of the city council, or as a delegation to the commission of any of the authority or powers, invested and imposed by law in the city council. The city council declares that the public interest, convenience, welfare and necessity require the appointment of a parks and recreation commission to act in a purely advisory capacity to the city council for the purposes hereinabove enumerated. (Ord. 98-01 §1, 1998; Ord. 85-6 §6, 1985; Ord. 71-9 §4, 1971).

 

2.28.060 Definitions.
        Unless otherwise expressly stated, whenever used in this chapter, the following words shall be defined as follows:

        “City council” means the legislative body of the city;

        “Director” means the director of parks and recreation of the city;

        “Park” means any areas set aside for recreational uses, areas conserved for their scenic interest, playgrounds, beaches, recreation centers, golf courses, model plane fields, and any other areas owned or operated by the city and which are intended for active or passive recreational purposes. The word “park” shall also include any buildings, equipment, plants or other facilities located in any park. (Ord. 94-12 §1, 1994; Ord. 80-13 §5, 1980).

Chapter 2.32 TRAINING OF LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS
2.32.010 Qualification for aid.
        The city council declares that it desires to qualify to receive aid from the state under the provisions of Chapter 1 of Title 4, Part 4 of the California Penal Code. (Ord. 71-5 §1, 1971).

 

2.32.020 Adherence to standards.
        Pursuant to Section 13522 of said Chapter 1, the city will adhere to the standards for recruitment and training established by the California Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training. (Ord. 71-5 §2, 1971).

Chapter 2.36 PUBLIC EMPLOYEES’ RETIREMENT SYSTEM
2.36.010 Contract—Authorized.
        A contract between the city council and the Board of Administration, California Public Employees’ Retirement System is authorized, a copy of said contract being kept on file in the city clerk’s office, and by such reference made a part hereof as though set forth in this chapter in full. (Ord. 71-1 §1, 1971).

 

2.36.020 Contract—Execution.
        The mayor of the city council is authorized, empowered and directed to execute said contract for and on behalf of said agency. (Ord. 71-1 §2, 1971).

 

2.36.030 Contract—Amendment.
        A.    An amendment to the contract between the city council and the Board of Administration, California Public Employees’ Retirement System is authorized, a copy of said amendment being attached to the ordinance codified in this section, marked “Exhibit A,” and by such reference made a part hereof as though herein set out in full.

        B.     The mayor is authorized, empowered, and directed to execute said amendment for and on behalf of said agency. (Ord. 83-8 §§1, 2, 1983).

Chapter 2.40 PERSONNEL SYSTEM
2.40.010 Classification.
        All positions of the municipal service shall be classified within a position system which shall be maintained and operated by the city manager. (Ord. 2011-08 §1; Ord. 75-8 §5, 1975).

 

2.40.020 Equal opportunity employer/ discrimination-free workplace.
        It is the policy of the city that all persons are entitled to equal employment opportunity. The city does not discriminate against its employees, contractors, consultants, citizens, or applicants regardless of race, color, national origin, age, sex, sexual preference, marital status, physical handicap, medical condition, veteran status, or religious affiliation in accordance with all applicable federal and state equal opportunity laws. It is the city’s policy to treat all employees, contractors, consultants, and applicants on the basis of merit, qualifications and competence, and to remove discriminatory employment barriers when and where they are found to exist so all individuals may compete for employment opportunities on an equal basis.

        Nondiscrimination/equal opportunity shall apply in all program areas, including, but not limited to, recruitment, hiring, promotions, compensation, benefits, transfers, work assignments, performance evaluations, disciplinary actions, demotions, terminations, layoffs, employee development, educational, social, and recreational programs, and the use of city facilities.

        All city human resource practices and procedures shall be administered in accordance with this equal opportunity/discrimination-free workplace provision. (Ord. 2011-08 §1; Ord. 75-8 §4, 1975).

 

2.40.030 Merit system—Rules and regulations.
        The city manager shall formulate and recommend to the city council for its approval and for adoption rules and regulations and amendments thereto pertaining to the operation of a merit system personnel management program. Such rules and regulations shall provide for and govern the selection, employment, classification, advancement, suspension, discharge and retirement of appointive officers and employees of the city, and all matters pertaining to the status of employees and conditions of their employment. Such rules and regulations and amendments thereto may be adopted by the city council from time to time by resolution. (Ord. 2011-08 §1; Ord. 75-8 §2, 1975).

 

2.40.040 Merit system—Application and exceptions.
        The provisions of the merit system established by this chapter and rules and regulations adopted pursuant hereto shall apply to all positions and employment in the municipal service except:

        A.    Elective officers;

        B.     The city attorney;

        C.     Members of appointee boards, commissions and committees; and

        D.    Persons engaged under contract to supply expert professional technical service. (Ord. 2011-08 §1; Ord. 75-8 §3, 1975).

Chapter 2.44 UNCLAIMED PROPERTY
2.44.010 Unclaimed property defined.
        Within the meaning hereof, “unclaimed property” means all personal property coming into the possession of the sheriff of the county which, in the opinion of the sheriff, need not be preserved as evidence to be used in connection with the investigation or prosecution of crime, the owners of which property are unknown or cannot be located after appropriate inquiry and to which no valid claim of ownership is made. (Ord. 2011-11 §2).

 

2.44.020 Time to be held.
        All unclaimed property, as defined in Section 2.44.010, shall be held by the sheriff for a period of at least four months, except unclaimed bicycles, which shall be held for a period of at least three months. If the rightful owner or owners appear to claim such property prior to its transfer under Section 2.44.030, the sheriff shall restore the property to the owner or owners upon satisfactory proof of ownership being presented to him or her. (Ord. 2011-11 §2).

 

2.44.030 Transferal authorized.
        Whenever any unclaimed property has remained unclaimed for the period of time set forth in Section 2.44.020, such property may be transferred by the sheriff pursuant to Section 2.44.050 or to the county purchasing agent. (Ord. 2011-11 §2).

 

2.44.040 Disposal of property.
        The unclaimed property transferred under Section 2.44.030 to the county purchasing agent shall be sold by him or her pursuant to Article 7, Chapter 5, Part 2, Division 2, Title 3 of the Government Code (Section 25500 et seq.); except such property as he or she determines is needed for a public use, which property may be retained by the county for such public use. Such of the property as the sheriff or purchasing agent determines is of no value may be destroyed or disposed of by him or her as refuse. (Ord. 2011-11 §2).

 

2.44.050 Bicycles or toys.
        Whenever any unclaimed bicycles or toys remain unclaimed in the possession of the sheriff for the period set forth in Section 2.44.020, the sheriff may transfer such property to the probation officer or to the welfare department for use in any program of activities designed to prevent juvenile delinquency. (Ord. 2011-11 §2).

 
Chapter 2.48 EMERGENCY ORGANIZATION
2.48.010 Purpose.
        The declared purposes of this chapter are to provide for the preparation and carrying out of plans for the protection of persons and property within the city in the event of an emergency; the direction of the emergency organization; and the coordination of the emergency functions of the city with all other public agencies, corporations, organizations, and affected private persons. (Ord. 2011-07 §2).

 

2.48.020 Explanation of regional structure.
        A.    Combined City/County Disaster Council. A combined city/county disaster council has been created by the county of Stanislaus with representatives from area communities, including the city of Waterford. The city/county disaster council consists of the following:

        1.     The director of emergency services, who is chair of the disaster council;

        2.     A member of the board of supervisors, who is vice chair;

        3.     The assistant director of Stanislaus County emergency services, who is the secretary; and

        4.     One elected official from each city in Stanislaus County. The county and each city may select an alternate to attend meetings and to act on its behalf in the event the elected official is unavailable. Said alternate need not be an elected official, so long as the alternate has been appointed by that entity’s governing body.

        B.     Combined City/County Disaster Council Powers. The disaster council has power to:

        1.     Oversee the preparedness activities of the various county departments and other jurisdictions in the Stanislaus County operational area. This includes preparation of emergency and disaster plans, policies, and procedures, and ensuring unity of purpose. The council is responsible for ensuring compliance with the National Management System, the Standardized Emergency Management System, and the Incident Command System.

        2.     Approve as to form all proposed emergency operations procedures, plans, and other documents related to emergency preparedness and planning.

        3.     Hear proposals from any agency, department, or interested party in emergency and disaster preparedness. Prior to any formal action, the proposal shall have the approval of the operational area council for operational and procedural conformity with the Stanislaus County emergency operations plan, policies, and procedures.

        4.     Be required to have a majority of the members present for approval and/or review of any plan, policies, or issues and a simple majority vote will carry the recommended action. Thereafter, the recommended action will be forwarded to the appropriate board, commission, or executive representative.

        5.     Sit as the disaster council for any jurisdiction that deems it appropriate by resolution and local ordinance.

        6.     Administer a disaster service worker volunteer program, pursuant to California Code of Regulations, Title 19, Section 2570 et seq.

        7.     The disaster council does not have operational duties or powers during emergencies, disasters or other events or incidents.

        C.     Operational Area Council. The Stanislaus County operational area council is created under the authority of Government Code Article 9, Section 8605, and consists of the assistant director of emergency services and members that represent each city within Stanislaus County in accordance with that certain joint powers agreement (JPA), executed in 1988 between Stanislaus County and the cities within Stanislaus County. Generally, the JPA member will be the emergency manager from his or her jurisdiction. The operational area council:

        1.     Coordinates, reviews, and recommends for approval all emergency or disaster response policies, procedures, plans, and other influencing factors or events that would affect the Stanislaus operational area.

        2.     Reviews all disaster plans by any agency or jurisdiction in Stanislaus County for approval to form and compliance with the National Incident Management System, the Standardized Emergency Management System, and the Incident Command System. After review of the proposed plans, policies, and procedures relating to emergency management, the operational area council makes its recommendation to the disaster council.

        3.     Is the lead agency for the multi-agency emergency operations center management team and the multi-agency incident management team(s).

        4.     Fosters an effective flow of disaster information and emergency responses on a day-to-day basis through training, exercises, uniformity in planning, and response plans and policies.

        5.     Standing task forces may be appointed to include:

        a.     Special needs population;

        b.     Public health emergency preparedness committee;

        c.     Faith-based representation.

        The operational area council does not have operational duties or powers during an event or emergency and is created to serve in the preparedness and planning phases only.

        D.    Meetings of Disaster Council and Operational Area Council.

        1.     The disaster council meets a minimum of twice annually and as often as may be deemed necessary. The disaster council operates under the Brown Act for open meetings and local legislative bodies.

        2.     The operational area council meets quarterly or upon call of the assistant director of emergency services.

        E.     State of War, State of Emergency or Local Emergency. During a “state of war emergency,” “state of emergency” or “local emergency,” the chair of the disaster council or the director of emergency services may call upon the disaster council to meet with the emergency operations center policy group to act as an advisory group on issues as determined by the director of emergency services or the disaster council chair.

        F.     Plan and Agreement Preparation. It is the duty of the Stanislaus County disaster council to review and recommend for adoption by the city council, emergency plans and agreements and such ordinances and resolutions and rules and regulations as are necessary to implement such plans and agreements. (Ord. 2015-02 §1; Ord. 2011-07 §2).

 

2.48.030 Definitions.
        The following definitions shall apply to this chapter.

        “Emergency” means the actual or threatened existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within the city caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot, drought, sudden and severe energy shortage, earthquake, or other conditions, including conditions resulting from war or imminent threat of war, but other than conditions resulting from a labor controversy, which conditions are or are likely to be beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment and facilities of the city, requiring the combined forces of other political subdivisions to combat; or with respect to regulated energy utilities, a sudden and severe energy shortage which requires extraordinary measures beyond the authority vested in the California Public Utilities Commission.

        “Local emergency” means the duly proclaimed existence of an emergency within the territorial limits of this city.

        “State of emergency” means the duly proclaimed existence of an emergency other than a local emergency.

        “State of war emergency” means a duly proclaimed state of war emergency by the Governor whenever California or the nation is attacked by an enemy of the United States, or upon receipt by California of a warning from the federal government indicating that such an enemy attack is probable or imminent. The powers of the Governor granted under a state of war emergency are commensurate with those granted under a state of emergency. (Ord. 2011-07 §2).

 

2.48.040 Emergency organization.
        All officers and employees of this city, together with those volunteer forces enrolled to aid them during an emergency, and all groups, organizations, and persons who may by agreement or operation of law, including persons impressed into service under the provisions of subsection (A)(6) of Section 2.48.090, be charged with duties incident to the protection of life and property in this county during such emergency, shall constitute the emergency organization of the city. (Ord. 2015-02 §1; Ord. 2011-07 §2).

 

2.48.050 Punishment of violations.
        It is a misdemeanor, for any person, during an emergency, to:

        A.    Willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him or her by virtue of this chapter.

        B.     Do any act forbidden by any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, if such act is of such a nature as to give or be likely to give assistance to the enemy or to imperil the lives or property of inhabitants of the city, or to prevent, hinder or delay the defense of protection thereof.

        C.     Wear, carry or display, without authority, any means of identification specified by the emergency agency of the state. (Ord. 2011-07 §2).

 

2.48.060 Expenditures.
        Any expenditure made in connection with emergency activities, including mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the city and county. (Ord. 2011-07 §2).

 

2.48.070 Appointment to disaster council.
        Annually, the city shall appoint an elected officer to serve on the city/county disaster council. (Ord. 2011-07 §2).

 

2.48.080 Director and assistant director of emergency services.
        A.    There is hereby created the office of director of emergency services. The city manager shall be the director of emergency services.

        B.     There is hereby created the office of assistant director of emergency services. The public works director shall be the assistant director of emergency services and designated as the city’s emergency manager. (Ord. 2011-07 §2).

 

2.48.090 Powers and duties of director and assistant director of emergency services.
        A.    The director is hereby empowered to:

        1.     Request the city council to proclaim the existence or threatened existence of a “local emergency” if the city council is in session, or to issue such proclamation if the city council is not in session. Whenever a local emergency is proclaimed by the director, the city council shall take action to ratify the proclamation within seven days thereafter, or the proclamation shall have no further force or effect.

        2.     Request the Governor to proclaim a “state of emergency” when, in the opinion of the director, the locally available resources are inadequate to cope with the emergency.

        3.     Control and direct the effort of the emergency organization of the city for the accomplishment of the purposes of this chapter.

        4.     Direct cooperation between and coordination of services and staff of the emergency organization of the city; and resolve questions of authority and responsibility that may arise between them.

        5.     Represent the city in all dealings with public or private agencies on matters pertaining to emergencies as defined herein.

        6.     In the event of the proclamation of a “local emergency” as herein provided, the proclamation of a “state of emergency” by the Governor or the Director of the State Office of Emergency Services, or the existence of a “state of war emergency,” the director is hereby empowered:

        a.     To make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by such emergency; provided, however, such rules and regulations must be confirmed at the earliest practicable time by the city council;

        b.     To obtain vital supplies, equipment and such other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of life and property and to bind the city for the fair value thereof and, if required immediately, to commandeer the same for public use;

        c.     To require emergency services of any city officer or employee and, in the event of the proclamation of a “state of emergency” in the county or the existence of a “state of war emergency,” to command the aid of as many citizens of the community as he or she deems necessary in the execution of his or her duties; such persons shall be entitled to all privileges, benefits, and immunities as are provided by state law for registered disaster service workers;

        d.     To requisition necessary personnel or material of any city department or agency; and

        e.     To execute all of his or her ordinary powers as city manager, all of the special powers conferred upon him or her by this chapter or by resolution or emergency plan pursuant hereto adopted by the city council, all powers conferred upon him or her by any statute, by any agreement approved by the city council, and by any other lawful authority.

        7.     The director of emergency services shall designate the order of succession to that office, to take effect in the event the director is unavailable to attend meetings and otherwise perform his or her duties during an emergency, succession shall be approved by the city council.

        8.     The assistant director shall, under the supervision of the director and with the assistance of emergency service chiefs, develop emergency plans and manage the emergency programs of the city; and shall have such other powers and duties as may be assigned by the director. (Ord. 2011-07 §2).

Title 3 REVENUE AND FINANCE
Chapter 3.04 PROPERTY ASSESSMENT
Chapter 3.08 PURCHASING
Chapter 3.12 SPECIAL GAS TAX STREET IMPROVEMENT FUND
Chapter 3.16 REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX
Chapter 3.20 SALES AND USE TAX
Chapter 3.28 POLICE DEPARTMENT SPECIAL PROJECT FUND
Chapter 3.32 FACILITIES AND EQUIPMENT FEES
Chapter 3.36 MAINTENANCE DISTRICTS
Chapter 3.40 POLICE SERVICE FEES
Chapter 3.44 UNIFORM TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX
Chapter 3.50 COLLECTIONS OF PUBLIC UTILITIES CHARGES
Chapter 3.60 PUBLIC FACILITIES FEES

Chapter 3.04 PROPERTY ASSESSMENT
3.04.010 Transfer of duties to county auditor.
        The council elects to proceed under Article 2, Chapter 1, Division 4 of Title 4 of the Government Code of the state, being Sections 43090 et seq., and requests the county auditor to assess and determine the value of the property within the city. (Ord. 69-5 §1, 1970).

 

3.04.020 Contract execution.
        The mayor and city clerk are appointed signatory officers to enter into such contract for the assessment of the city property by the county, as may be required by the county. (Ord. 69-5 §2, 1970).

 

3.04.030 Copies to be kept on file.
        Upon final passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter, and the posting of copies thereof, the city clerk shall file with the county auditor a certified copy of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 69-5 §3, 1970).

Chapter 3.08 PURCHASING
3.08.010 Adoption of purchasing system.
        In order to establish efficient procedures for the purchase of supplies and equipment, to secure for the city supplies and equipment at the lowest possible cost commensurate with quality needed, to exercise positive financial control over purchases, to clearly define authority for the purchasing function and to assure the quality of purchases, a purchasing system is adopted. (Ord. 70-7, 1970).

 

3.08.020 Purchasing officer—Appointment.
        There is created the position of purchasing officer. He or she shall be appointed by the council. The duties of the purchasing officer may be combined with those of any other office or position. (Ord. 70-7, 1970).

 

3.08.030 Purchasing officer—Authority.
        The purchasing officer shall have authority to:

        A.    Purchase or contract for supplies and equipment required by any using agency in accordance with purchasing procedures prescribed by this chapter, such administrative regulations as the purchasing officer shall adopt and such other rules and regulations as shall be prescribed by the council;

        B.     Negotiate and recommend execution of contracts for the purchase of supplies and equipment;

        C.     Act to procure for the city the needed quality in supplies and equipment at least expense to the city;

        D.    Discourage uniform bidding and endeavor to obtain as full and open competition as possible on all purchases;

        E.     Prepare and recommend to the council rules governing the purchase of supplies and equipment for the city;

        F.     Prepare and recommend to the council revisions and amendments to the purchasing rules;

        G.    Keep informed of current developments in the field of purchasing, prices, market conditions and new products;

        H.    Prescribe and maintain such forms as are reasonably necessary to the operation of this chapter and other rules and regulations;

        J.      Supervise the inspection of all supplies and equipment purchased to insure conformance with specifications;

        K.    Recommend the transfer of surplus or unused supplies and equipment between departments as needed and the sale of all supplies and equipment which cannot be used by any agency or which have become unsuitable for city use;

        L.     Maintain a bidders, list, vendors, catalog file and records needed for the efficient operation of the purchasing department. (Ord. 70-7, 1970).

 

3.08.040 Exemptions.
        The purchasing officer, with approval of the council, may authorize in writing any agency to purchase or contract for specified supplies and equipment independently of the purchasing department, but he or she shall require that such purchases or contracts shall be made in conformity with the procedures established by this chapter and shall further require periodic reports from the agency on the purchases and contracts made under such written authorization. (Ord. 70-7, 1970).

 

3.08.050 Requisitions.
        Using agencies shall submit requests for supplies and equipment to the purchasing officer by standard requisition forms. (Ord. 70-7, 1970).

 

3.08.060 Purchase order—Required.
        Purchases of supplies and equipment shall be made only by purchase order. (Ord. 70-7, 1970).

 

3.08.070 Purchase order—Issuance.
        Except in cases of emergency, the purchasing officer shall not issue any purchase order for supplies or equipment unless there exists an unencumbered appropriation in the fund account against which said purchase is to be charged. (Ord. 70-7, 1970).

 

3.08.080 Bidding—Generally.
        Purchases of supplies and equipment shall be by bid procedures pursuant to Sections 3.08.090 and 3.08.100. Bidding shall be dispensed with only when an emergency requires that an order be placed with the nearest available source of supply, when the amount involved is less than one hundred dollars, when the commodity can be obtained from only one vendor, or in the case or purchases from or through other governmental agencies. (Ord. 70-7, 1970).

 

3.08.090 Bidding—Formal contract procedure.
        Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, when the expenditure for supplies and equipment exceeds two thousand dollars, it shall be contracted for by a written contract with the lowest responsible bidder pursuant to the procedure prescribed in this section:

        A.    Notice Inviting Bids. Notice inviting bids shall include a general description of the articles to be purchased, shall state where bid blanks and specifications may be secured and the time and place for opening bids.

        1.     Published Notice. The notice inviting bids shall be published at least ten days before the date of opening of the bids. Notice shall be published at least twice, not less than five days apart, in a newspaper of general circulation, printed and published in the city or if there is none, it shall be posted in at least three public places in the city that have been designated as places for posting public notices.

        2.     Bidders’ List. The purchasing officer shall also solicit sealed bids from all responsible prospective suppliers whose names are on the bidders’ list or who have requested their names be added thereto.

        3.     Bulletin Board. The purchasing officer shall also advertise pending purchases by a notice posted on a public bulletin board in the City Hall.

        B.     Bidder’s Security. When deemed necessary by the purchasing officer, bidder’s security may be prescribed in the public notices inviting bids. Bidders shall be entitled to return of bid security; provided, that a successful bidder shall forfeit his or her bid security upon refusal or failure to execute the contract within ten days after the notice of award of contract has been mailed, unless the city is responsible for the delay. The council may, on refusal or failure of the successful bidder to execute the contract, award it to the next lowest responsible bidder. If the council awards the contract to the next lowest bidder, the amount of the lowest bidder’s security shall be applied by the city to the difference between the low bid and the second lowest bid, and the surplus, if any, shall be returned to the lowest bidder.

        C.     Bid Opening Procedure. Sealed bids shall be submitted to the purchasing officer and shall be identified as bids on the envelope. Bids shall be opened in public at the time and place stated in the public notices. A tabulation of all bids received shall be open for public inspection during regular business hours for a period of not less than thirty calendar days after the bid opening.

        D.    Rejection of Bids. In its discretion the council may reject any and all bids presented and readvertise for bids.

 

        E.     Award of Contracts. Contracts shall be awarded by the council to the lowest responsible bidder except as otherwise provided in this chapter.

        F.     Tie Bids. If two or more bids received are for the same total amount or unit price, quality and service being equal and if the public interest will not permit the delay of re-advertising for bids, the council may accept the one it chooses or accept the lowest bid made by negotiation with the tie bidders at the time of the bid opening. (Ord. 2018-02 §1; Ord. 79-6 Art. III §B, 1979; Ord. 70-7, 1970).

 

3.08.100 Bidding—Open market procedure.
        Purchases of supplies and equipment of an estimated value in the amount of two thousand dollars or less may be made by the purchasing officer in the open market without observing the procedure described in Section 3.08.090:

        A.    Minimum Number of Bids. Open market purchases shall, wherever possible, be based on at least three bids, and shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder.

        B.     Notice Inviting Bids. The purchasing officer shall solicit bids by written requests to prospective vendors, by telephone, and by public notice posted on a public bulletin board in the City Hall.

        C.     Written Bids. Sealed written bids shall be submitted to the purchasing officer who shall keep a record of all open market orders and bids for a period of one year after the submission of bids or the placing or orders. This record, while so kept, shall be open to public inspection. (Ord. 70-7, 1970).

 

3.08.110 Inspection—Testing.
        The purchasing officer shall inspect supplies and equipment delivered to determine their conformance with the specifications set forth in the order or contract. The purchasing officer shall have authority to require chemical and physical tests of samples submitted with bids and samples of deliveries which are necessary to determine their quality and conformance with specifications. (Ord. 70-7, 1970).

 

3.08.120 Public works projects.
        A.    Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, when the expenditure required for a public project, as defined in this section, exceeds five thousand dollars, it shall be contracted for by a written contract with the lowest responsible bidder pursuant to the procedure prescribed in this section.

        B.     Definitions. For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:

        1.     “Purchasing officer” shall mean the purchasing officer of the city as created by Section 3.08.020 of this title.

        2.     “Public project” shall mean any of the following:

        a.     Construction, reconstruction, erection, alteration, renovation, improvement, demolition, and repair work involving any publicly owned, leased, or operated facility; and

        b.     Painting or repainting any publicly owned, leased, or operated facility.

        3.     “Public project” shall not include maintenance work. Maintenance work shall include all of the following:

        a.     Routine, recurring, and usual work for the preservation or protection of any publicly owned and operated facility for its intended purposes;

        b.     Minor repainting;

        c.     Resurfacing of streets at less than one inch;

        d.     Landscape maintenance, including mowing, watering, trimming, pruning, planting, replacement of plants, and servicing of irrigation and sprinkler systems; and

        e.     Work performed to keep, operate, and maintain water, power, and waste disposal systems.

        4.     “Facility” shall mean any plant, building, structure, ground facility, utility system, real property, street, or other public work improvement.

 

        C.     Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Policies and Procedures. The uniform construction cost accounting policies and procedures developed and as may be amended by the state from time to time are hereby adopted and incorporated by reference. Such alternate bidding procedures shall require the use of the policies and procedures incorporated in this chapter, and the city engineer shall require such procedures and policies to be used on public projects where such alternate bidding procedures are used.

        D.    California Public Contract Code Section 22020 empowers the State Controller to make adjustments in the monetary limits set forth in Public Contract Code Sections 22032 and 22034 every five years. The minimum limits are as set forth in the following sections:

        1.     Public Projects less than Sixty Thousand Dollars. Public projects of sixty thousand dollars or less may be performed by the employees of the city agency by force account or by negotiated contract as follows:

        a.     Force Account Work by City Employees. The city engineer shall approve a work order for the public project following the guidelines outlined in uniform construction cost accounting policies and procedures, and all charges relative to the project, including all labor, equipment rentals, materials, overhead costs, and the like, shall be charged to the work order.

        b.     Negotiated Contracts. The city engineer shall negotiate with at least two  contractors whom he determines are capable of performing public projects of the type and size. Upon the completion of negotiations, the city engineer shall select the best contract proposal. A written contract will be prepared, approved as to form by the city attorney and awarded by council.

        2.     Public Projects Less Than Two Hundred Thousand Dollars. Public projects of two hundred thousand dollars or less may be let to contract by informal procedures as follows:

        a.     The city engineer shall maintain a list of qualified contractors according to the categories of work.

        b.     All contractors on the list for the category of work being bid and/or all construction trade journals serving the area shall be mailed a notice inviting informal bids, unless the project or service is proprietary.

        c.     The mailing of notices to contractors and construction trade journals shall be completed not less than ten calendar days before the bids are due.

        d.     The notice inviting informal bids shall describe the project in general terms; how to obtain more detailed information about the project; and state the time and place for the submission of bids.

        e.     When deemed necessary by the city engineer, a bid security may be required. The bid security shall be returned to all bidders; however, a successful bidder shall forfeit his security upon the refusal or failure to execute the contract within ten days after notification of the award of the contract.

        f.      The city engineer shall receive sealed bids at the time and place stated in the public notice and tabulate the bids after the bids are opened.

        g.     The council shall award the contract to the lowest responsible bidder. The criteria for determining the lowest responsible bidder shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

        i.      The ability, capacity, and skill to perform the contract;

        ii.     Whether the bidder has the facilities to perform the contract within the time specified;

        iii.    The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience, and efficiency of the bidder;

        iv.    The past performance of similar contracts; and

        v.     Compliance with laws, ordinances, and regulations relating to the contract.

        3.     Public Projects Greater Than Two Hundred Thousand Dollars. For public projects of two hundred thousand dollars or more, the final bidding procedures as prescribed in the Public Contract Code shall be followed.

        E.     Emergencies. In cases of great emergency, as determined by the council, including, but not limited to, states of emergency as defined in Section 8558 of the Government Code of the state,

when repairs or replacements are necessary to permit the continued conduct of the operation or services of a public agency or to avoid danger to life or property, the council, by a majority vote, may proceed at once to replace or repair any public facility without adopting plans, specifications, strain sheets, or working details or giving notice for bids to let contracts. The work may be done by day labor under the direction of the council, or by contract, or by a combination of the two. (Ord. 2018-07 §1; Ord. 2018-02 §2).

Chapter 3.12 SPECIAL GAS TAX STREET IMPROVEMENT FUND
3.12.010 Fund created.
        To comply with the provisions of Section 2113 of the Streets and Highways Code, as now or hereafter amended, there is created in the city treasury a special fund to be known as the “Special Gas Tax Street Improvement Fund.” (Ord. 79-6 Art. III §C (1), 1979; Ord. 69-4 §1, 1969).

 

3.12.020 Source of funds.
        All moneys received by the city from the state under the provisions of the Streets and Highways Code for the acquisition of real property or interest therein for, or for engineering, or for the construction, maintenance or improvement of streets or highways by the city shall be paid into said fund. (Ord. 69-4 §2, 1969).

 

3.12.030 Expenditures.
        All moneys in said fund shall be expended exclusively for the purposes authorized by, and subject to the provisions of Sections 2106 through 2116 of the Streets and Highways Code, as now or hereafter amended. (Ord. 79-6 Art. III §C (2), 1979; Ord. 69-4 §3, 1969).

Chapter 3.16 REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX
3.16.010 Imposed.
        There is imposed on each instrument or writing by which land, tenement or other realty sold within the city is transferred or conveyed to the purchaser or other grantee when the consideration or value of the interest conveyed (exclusive of the value of an encumbrance remaining at the time of sale) exceeds one hundred dollars, a tax at the rate of $0.275 for each five hundred dollars or fractional part of five hundred dollars. (Ord. 70-1 §1, 1970).

 

3.16.020 Applicability.
        The tax imposed under Section 3.16.010 shall be paid by the person who makes, signs or issues the instrument subject to the tax, or for whose use or benefit the instrument is made, signed or issued. (Ord. 70-1 §2, 1970).

 

3.16.030 Exceptions—Designated.
        The tax imposed does not apply to the following conveyances:

        A.    A conveyance to make effective a plan of reorganization or adjustment:

        1.     Confirmed under the federal Bankruptcy Act;

        2.     Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a railroad corporation, as defined in subdivision (m) of Section 205 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended; or

        3.     Whereby a mere change in identity, form or place or organization is effected. This subsection only applies if the filing of instrument of transfer or conveyance occurs within five years from the date of confirmation, approval or change.

        B.     The tax does not apply to the making of conveyances to make effective an order of the Securities and Exchange Commission, as defined in subdivision (a) of Section 1083 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 if:

        1.     The order of the Securities and Exchange Commission recites that the conveyance is necessary or appropriate to carry out Section 79K of Title 15 of the United States Code, relating to the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935; and

        2.     The order specifies the property which is ordered to be conveyed.

        C.     Any deed, instrument or writing to which the United States or any agency or instrumentality thereof, any state or territory, or political subdivision thereof, is a party shall be exempt from any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter when the exempt agency is acquiring title.

        D.    Partnership Interest.

        1.     In the case of realty held by a partnership, no levy is imposed by reason of transfer of an interest in a partnership if:

        a.     The partnership is a continuing partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, and

        b.     The continuing partnership continues to hold the realty concerned;

        2.     If there is a termination of a partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, for purposes of this chapter the partnership shall be treated as having executed an instrument whereby there was conveyed for fair market value (exclusive of the value of an encumbrance remaining) all realty held by the partnership at the time of termination;

        3.     Not more than one tax may be imposed by reason of a termination described in subdivision 2, any transfer pursuant to it, with respect to the realty held by the partnership at the time of termination.

        E.     Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply with respect to any deed, instrument, or writing to a beneficiary or mortgagee, which is taken from the mortgagor, or trustor, as a result of or in lieu of foreclosure; provided, that such tax shall apply to the extent that the consideration exceeds the unpaid debt, including accrued interest and cost of foreclosure. Consideration, unpaid debt amount, and identification of grantee as beneficiary or mortgagee shall be noted on said deed, instrument or writing or stated in an affidavit or declaration under penalty of perjury for tax purposes. (Ord. 79-6 Art. III §D, 1979; Ord. 70-1 §5, 1970).

 

3.16.040 Exceptions—Security agreement.
        The tax imposed does not apply to an instrument in writing given to secure a debt. (Ord. 70-1 §3, 1970).

 

3.16.050 Exceptions—Public agencies.
        The United States or its agency or instrumentality, a state or territory, or political subdivision, or the District of Columbia is not liable for the tax imposed with respect to the instrument or writing to which it is a party, but the tax may be collected from any other party liable for it. (Ord. 70-1 §4, 1970).

 

3.16.060 Refunds.
        A claim for refund of the tax imposed is governed by Chapter 5 of Part 9 of Division 1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state beginning with Section 5096. (Ord. 70-1 §7, 1970).

 

3.16.070 Administration.
        The county recorder shall administer this chapter in conformity with Part 6.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and a county ordinance adopted pursuant to it. (Ord. 70-1 §6, 1970).

 

3.16.080 Operative date.
        This chapter becomes operative upon the operative date of any ordinance adopted by the county under Part 6.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state beginning with Section 11901, or upon the effective date of this chapter whichever is later. (Ord. 70-1 §8, 1970).

 

3.16.090 Copies on file.
        Upon its adoption, the city clerk shall file two copies of the ordinance codified in this chapter with the county recorder. (Ord. 70-1 §9, 1970).

Chapter 3.20 SALES AND USE TAX
3.20.010 Title.
        The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the “Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Ordinance.” (Ord. 69-3 §1, 1969).

 

3.20.020 Exclusions and exemptions.
        A.    The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the state of California upon a retailer or consumer.

        B.     The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city, in this state shall be exempt from the tax due under this chapter.

        C.     There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government.

        D.    In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code the storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax. (Ord. 83-7 §1, 1983; Ord. 69-3 §4, 1969).

 

3.20.021 Exclusions and exemptions.
        A.    The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the state of California upon a retailer or consumer.

        B.     The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city in this state shall be exempt from the tax due under this chapter.

        C.     There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of waterborne vessels to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property in such vessels for commercial purposes.

        D.    The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of waterborne vessels and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property of such vessels for commercial purposes is exempted from the use tax.

        E.     There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government.

        F.     In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code the storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax. (Ord. 83-7 §2, 1983).

 

3.20.022 Operative dates of exclusions and exemptions.
        A.    Section 3.30.020 shall be operative January 1, 1984.

        B.     Section 3.20.021 shall be operative on the operative date of any act of the Legislature of the state of California which amends Section 7202 of the Revenue and Taxation Code or which repeals and reenacts Section 7202 of the Revenue and Taxation Code to provide an exemption from city sales and use taxes for operators of waterborne vessels in the same, or substantially the same, language as that existing in subdivisions (i)(7) and (i)(8) of Section 7202 as those subdivisions read on October 1, 1983. (Ord. 83-7 §3, 1983).

 

3.20.030 Operative date defined.
        “Operative date” means the first day of the first calendar quarter following the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 69-3 §3, 1969).

 

3.20.040 Statutory provisions—Adoption.
        Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 69-3 §9, 1969).

 

3.20.050 Statutory provisions—Limitations.
        In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, wherever the state is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of the city shall be substituted therefor. The substitution, however, shall not be made when the word “State” is used as part of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of Equalization, the State Treasury, or the Constitution of the state. The substitution shall not be made when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the city or any agency thereof, rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter. The substitution shall not be made in those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or to impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the said provisions of that Code. The substitution shall not be made in Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; and the substitution shall not be made for the word “state” in the phrase “retailer engaged in business in this state” in Section 6203 or in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. (Ord. 69-3 §10, 1969).

 

3.20.060 Sales tax imposed.
        For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail a tax is imposed upon all retailers in the city at the rate stated in Section 3.20.080 of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in the city on and after the operative date. (Ord. 69-3 §6, 1969).

 

3.20.070 Use tax imposed.
        An excise tax is imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date for storage, use or other consumption in the city at the rate stated in Section 3.20.080 of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. (Ord. 69-3 §8, 1969).

 

3.20.080 Rate of tax.
        The rate of sales and use tax imposed by this chapter shall be one percent; provided, however, that commencing for the fiscal year after which the city collects one million dollars or more in sales tax receipts, the rate shall be reduced to .0950 percent. (Ord. 80-4 §1, 1980; Ord. 69-3 §2, 1969).

 

3.20.090 Exclusions and exemptions.
        A.    The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales tax imposed by the state upon a retailer or consumer.

        B.     The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city in this state shall be exempt from the tax due under this chapter.

        C.     There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of waterborne vessels to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property in such vessels for commercial purposes.

        D.    The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of waterborne vessels and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property of such vessels for commercial purposes is exempted from the use tax.

        E.     There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government.

        F.     In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code the storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of the state, the United States, or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax. (Ord. 73-3 §2, 1973; Ord. 69-3 §12.5, 1969).

 

3.20.100 Additional permit not required.
        If a seller’s permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional seller’s permit shall not be required by this chapter. (Ord. 73-3 §1, 1973; Ord. 69-3 §11, 1969).

 

3.20.110 Place of sale.
        For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his or her agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization. (Ord. 69-3 §7, 1969).

 

3.20.120 Amendments.
        All subsequent amendments of the Revenue and Taxation Code which relate to the sales and use tax and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code shall automatically become a part of this chapter. (Ord. 69-3 §13, 1969).

 

3.20.130 Contract with state.
        Prior to the operative date the city shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of the sales and use tax ordinance; provided, that if the city has not contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract rather than the first day of the first calendar quarter following the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter; provided further, that said contract shall continue in effect so long as the county has an operative sales and use tax ordinance as required by Revenue and Taxation Code Section 7202 (i)(4). (Ord. 79-6 Art. III §E (1), 1979; Ord. 69-3 §5, 1969).

 

3.20.140 Enjoining collection prohibited.
        No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or the city, or against any officer of the state or the city, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter, or Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. (Ord. 69-3 §14, 1969).

 

3.20.150 Violation—Penalty.
        Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of an infraction. (Ord. 79-6 Art. III §E (2), 1979; Ord. 69-3 §15, 1969).

Chapter 3.28 POLICE DEPARTMENT SPECIAL PROJECT FUND
3.28.010 Establishment of fund.
        There is hereby established in the police department a budget line item entitled “Special project fund” in the amount of two thousand dollars. (Ord. 89-3 §1, 1989).

 

3.28.020 Police chief reports.
        The police chief shall file a report regarding expenditure of such funds at least quarterly to the city manager. Each time funds are expended from the fund, the amount shall be reported to the city manager. (Ord. 89-3 §2 and §3, 1989).

 

3.28.030 City manager reports.
        At least quarterly, and at such other times as deemed appropriate and proper by the city manager, the city council shall be informed of the fund balance. (Ord. 89-3 §4, 1989).

 

3.28.040 Written report required.
        At the conclusion of the investigation in which funds were utilized, a written report shall be provided to the city manager setting forth the amount expended, the purpose of the expenditure, and the amount of money recovered and deposited in the treasury of the city. The city manager shall provide a copy of the report to the city council. (Ord. 89-3 §5, 1989).

 

3.28.050 Confidentiality.
        The above requirements shall be provided by such methodology that does not result in danger to persons or violation of any provisions of law regarding the requirement of the maintenance of confidentiality of the reports. (Ord. 89-3 §6, 1989).

Chapter 3.32 FACILITIES AND EQUIPMENT FEES
3.32.010 Purposes.
                A.    In order to implement the goals and objectives of the facilities element of the city of Waterford’s general plan, and to mitigate the service delivery impacts caused by new development in the city, certain public facilities and equipment must be acquired. The city council has determined that a development impact fee is needed in order to finance these public improvements and to pay the development’s fair share of the construction costs of these improvements. In establishing the fee described in the following sections, the city council has found the fee to be consistent with its general plan and, pursuant to Government Code Section 65913.2, has considered the effects of the fee with respect to the city’s housing needs as established in the housing element of the general plan.

        B.     New development in the city of Waterford necessitates an expansion of facilities of the city center (where general administration appears in the study it refers to the city center), the police department and the public works department. Without such it would be impossible to continue to provide said services and therefore would cause unacceptable harm to the quality of life in the city and county, contrary to the goals, objectives, and policies of the city’s general plan.

        C.     The impact of future development on the city center, the police department and the public works department has been studied and presented to the city in a report by Richard Milbrodt dba Administrative-Budget Counseling, entitled “City of Waterford Facilities and Equipment Plan” which analyzes and demonstrates a reasonable relationship between new development and the demand for city center, police department and public works department facilities and equipment as well as estimates the cost of providing these facilities and equipment.

        D.    City staff has determined that sources of city revenue other than development fees, including tax revenue, which will be paid by new development, will be needed for many public purposes and therefore will not be sufficient to offset the burdens on the city center, the police department and the public works department created by new development. (Ord. 94-10 §1, 1994; Ord. 90-06 §1, 1990).

 

3.32.020 Public facilities improvement fees for road, drainage, recreation, administration and law enforcement.
        A.    A public facilities and equipment fee is hereby established on issuance of all building permits, for development within the city of Waterford to pay for designated facilities and equipment shown in the adopted general plan. The city council shall, in a council resolution, set forth the specific amount of the fee, describe the benefit and impact area on which the development fee is imposed, list the specific public improvements to be financed, describe the estimated cost of these facilities, describe the reasonable relationship between this fee and the various types of new developments and set forth time for payment.

        B.     As described in the fee resolution, this development fee shall be due and payable from each developer prior to issuance of a building permit. The city will defer payment of such fees if the developer agrees to the following: (1) Payment must be made at least twenty-four hours before the final inspection is requested or Building Inspection personnel will not make the final inspection, (2) there will be no occupancy (temporary or permanent) allowed in the building until the fees have been paid, and (3) gas and/or electric tags will not be given until payment is received.

        C.     On an annual basis, the city council shall review this fee to determine whether the fee amounts are reasonably related to the impacts of developments and whether the described public facilities are still needed. (Ord. 94-10 §1, 1994; Ord. 90-06 §1, 1990).

 

3.32.030 Limited use of fees.
        The revenues raised by payment of this fee shall be placed in a separate and special account and such revenues, along with any interest earned on that account, shall be used solely to:

        A.    Pay for the city’s future construction of facilities described in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 3.32.020 of this section, or to reimburse the city for these described or listed facilities constructed by the city with funds advanced by the city from other sources, or

        B.     Reimburse developers who have been required or permitted by Section 3.32.040 to install such listed facilities which are oversized with supplemental size, length or capacity. (Ord. 94-10 §1, 1994; Ord. 90-06 §1, 1990).

 

3.32.040 Developer construction of facilities.
        Whenever a developer is required, as a condition of approval of a development permit, to construct a public facility described in a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 3.32.020 which facility is determined by the city to have supplemental size, length or capacity over that needed for the impacts of that development, and when such construction is necessary to ensure efficient and timely construction of the facilities network, a reimbursement agreement with the developer and a credit against the fee, which would otherwise be charged pursuant to this ordinance on the development project, shall be offered. The reimbursement amount shall not include the portion of the improvement needed to provide services or mitigate the need for the facility or the burdens created by the development. (Ord. 94-10 §1, 1994; Ord. 90-06 §1, 1990).

 

3.32.050 Fee adjustments.
        A developer of any project subject to the fee described in Section 3.32.020 may apply to the city council for a reduction or adjustment to that fee, or a wavier of that fee, based upon the absence of any reasonable relationship or nexus between the facilities and equipment impacts of that development and either the amount of the fee charged or the type of facilities to be financed. The application shall be made in writing and filed with the city clerk not later than: (1) ten days prior to the public hearing on the development permit application for the project, or (2) if no development permit is required, at the time of the filing of the request for a building permit. The application shall state in detail the factual basis for the claim of waiver, reduction or adjustment. The city council shall consider the application at the public hearing on the permit application or at a separate hearing held within sixty days after the filing of the fee adjustment or waiver is granted, any change in use within the project shall invalidate the waiver, adjustment or reduction of the fee. (Ord. 94-10 §1, 1994; Ord. 90-06 §1, 1990).

 

3.32.060 Exemptions.
        The following developments shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter:

        A.    Senior citizen housing, as described in Section 51.3 of the California Civil Code;

        B.     Residential care facilities for the elderly as described in subdivisions (k) and (1) of Section 1569.2 of the California Health and Safety Code;

        C.     Multi-1evel facilities for the elderly as described in paragraph (9) of subdivision (d) of Section 15432 of the California Government Code;

        D.    Such other developments as set forth in the city of Waterford resolution providing for a facilities and equipment fee, as amended from time to time. (Ord. 94-10 §1, 1994; Ord. 90-06 §1, 1990).

 

3.32.070 Repeal Chapter 3.24.
        Chapter 3.24 of Title 3 of the Waterford Municipal Code, entitled “System Improvement Fee” is hereby repealed, effective February 7, 1991. (Ord. 94-10 §1, 1994; Ord. 90-06 §1, 1990).

Chapter 3.36 MAINTENANCE DISTRICTS
3.36.010 New maintenance districts.
        Whenever the city council determines that the costs and expenses of maintaining and operating any or all public improvements of a local nature have not been adequately financed and provided for, proceedings therefor may be undertaken pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 93-05, 1993).

 

3.36.020 Council powers.
        The city council may, in its resolution declaring its intention to order work done or improvements made or by separate resolution, declare its intention to order that the costs and expenses of maintaining and operating any or all public improvements of a local nature, including the cost, of necessary repairs, replacements, fuel, power, electrical current, care, supervision, and any and all other items necessary for the proper maintenance and operation thereof, shall be assessed, either partly or wholly, upon such district as the city council shall determine will be benefited by the maintenance and operation of the public improvements proposed to be maintained; the amounts so assessed to be collected in the same manner and by the same officers as taxes for city purposes are collected. (Ord. 93-05, 1993).

 

3.36.030 Applicable general law.
        When the city council has declared its intention pursuant to Section 3.36.020, the applicable provisions of Chapter 26 of Part 3 of Division 7 of the Streets and Highways Code of the state of California, excepting Sections 5850 to 5853, inclusive, shall apply. (Ord. 93-05, 1993).

 

Article I. Alternative Method for the Levy of Benefit Assessments
3.36.040 Purpose.
        The purpose of this section is to provide an alternative procedure by which the city council may provide for the payment of the whole or any part of the costs and expenses of maintaining and operating any public improvements which are local in nature, payable from annual benefit assessments apportioned among the several lots or parcels of property within the maintenance district established therefor, the nature and formula or formulae for which is to be determined in the proceedings in which jurisdiction is provided for the use of such alternative procedure. (Ord. 93-05, 1993).

 

3.36.050 Resolution of intention.
        The resolution of intention to order work done or improvements made or said separate resolution shall contain a statement of the formula or formulae upon and by which annual assessment levies for the payment of said costs and expenses will be apportioned according to benefits among the several lots or parcels of property within the maintenance district and the zones of benefit, if any, to be established therefor. Said formula or formulae may prescribe a maximum rate or amount of annual benefit assessment to be levied for such purposes. (Ord. 93-05, 1993).

 

3.36.060 Written protests and oral objections.
        In connection with the hearing provided for in the establishment of the maintenance district, and the zones of benefit, if any, or the annexation of territory to an existing maintenance district, or to the initial modification in said formula or formulae as hereinafter provided, owners may file written protests and make oral objections to said formula or formulae in the same manner, at the same time and with like legal effect as provided for other protests and oral objections in Chapter 26 of Part 3 of Division 7 of said Streets and Highways Code. (Ord. 93-05, 1993).

 

3.36.070 Initial modification.
        At said hearing, the city council, of its own volition or in response to any protest made, heard, or considered, may make modifications in the formula or formulae for the purpose of making the same more fair and equitable; provided, however, that before making a final determination in said matter of modification it shall set said matter for hearing at a subsequent meeting of the city council, which it shall call or to which it may adjourn; provided further, that it shall give notice of the time, place, and purpose of said meeting, by one publication in the newspaper in which the original resolution of intention or notice of improvement or notice of hearing on the formation of the maintenance district or notice of hearing on the proposed annexation was published, at least ten days prior to said hearing. If the formula or formulae modification consists solely of a decrease in such maximum rate or amount of annual benefit assessment, the city council may order such decrease by resolution and no hearing need be held thereon. (Ord. 93-05, 1993).

 

3.36.080 Majority protest.
        If the city council finds that protests are made by the owners of more than one-half of the area of the property in said maintenance district subject to benefit assessment to pay said costs of maintenance and operation, no further proceedings shall be taken for a period of six months from the date of decision of the city council on the hearing, unless the protests are overruled by an affirmative vote of four-fifths of the members of the city council. (Ord. 93-05, 1993).

 

3.36.090 Final determination.
        At the initial hearing or at subsequent hearing on the modification of said formula or formulae as provided in this chapter or at any meeting of the city council subsequent to the full hearing of said matter, with or without council, by resolution, shall finally adopt a formula or formulae for the apportionment of benefits in said annual assessment levies, which shall be that stated in the resolution of the intention, or said separate resolution, or as modified, and its decision and determination shall be to appeal to it as to all errors, informalities, or irregularities which the city council might have avoided or have remedied. (Ord. 93-05, 1993).

 

3.36.100 Subsequent modification.
        If, at any time following the final establishment of the formula or formulae for said annual assessment levies, the city council shall, by resolution, determine that, by reason of changed conditions or because of defects or insufficiencies therein disclosed by its application, the established formula or formulae is, in any particular, inequitable, and fair, the city council may, by resolution, so declare, stating the reasons therefor, and fix a time and place of hearing thereon. (Ord. 93-05, 1993).

 

3.36.110 Resolution of modification—Notice.
        The city clerk shall cause a copy of the resolution adopted by the city council as provided in Section 3.36.100 to be published once in the newspaper in which the resolution of intention or notice of improvement or notice of hearing on the formation of the maintenance district or notice of hearing on the proposed annexation in said proceedings was published, to be mailed, postage prepaid, to all owners of property in said maintenance district subject to benefit assessment to pay said costs of maintenance and operation, and to be posted on or near the council chamber door or any bulletin board in or adjacent to the City Hall. Said publication, mailing, and posting shall be completed not less than ten days prior to such hearing. (Ord. 93-05, 1993).

 

3.36.120 Hearing and determination.
        At the hearing provided for in Section 3.36.100 protests may be filed, heard, and acted upon in the manner and with like effect provided in Sections 3.36.060 through 3.36.090. (Ord. 93-05, 1993).

 

3.36.130 Budget—Contents.
        The city manager shall annually cause to be prepared a budget for the costs and expenses of maintaining and operating any or all of said improvements of a local nature during the ensuing fiscal year which shall include the following:

        A.    The gross amount required for the costs and expenses of maintaining and operating said improvements;

        B.     The surplus balance available at the end of the fiscal year for such purpose;

        C.     The amount, if any, to be contributed by the city to pay any part of said costs and expenses;

        D.    The amount, if any, to be repaid to the city for funds advanced by the city to pay deficits which occurred in prior years; and

        E.     The balance of the amount necessary to pay said costs and expenses. (Ord. 93-05, 1993).

 

3.36.140 Annual benefit assessment.
        The amount provided in Section 3.36.130(E) shall be raised by annual benefit assessment on all of the lots or parcels of property within the maintenance district. (Ord. 93-05, 1993).

 

3.36.150 Report.
        In each fiscal year in which a balance is provided in the budget to be raised to pay said costs and expenses pursuant to Section 3.36.130(E), the city engineer shall cause to be prepared a report, in writing, for each maintenance district, which shall set forth the budget, the formula or formulae for the annual assessment levy and by properly headed columns, show the following data as to each lot or parcel of property within the maintenance district:

        A.    A description of each lot or parcel of property by a legal description, assessor’s parcel number or other description sufficient to identify the same;

        B.     The amount of assessment to be levied against each lot or parcel of property in accordance with the formula or formulae; and

        C.     Such other information as will be necessary or useful in applying the formula or formulae adopted by the city council. (Ord. 93-05, 1993).

 

3.36.160 Report—Filing with the city clerk.
        When report has been completed by said city engineer, it shall be signed by him or her and filed with the city clerk on or before June 1st each year. Upon receipt of the report, the city clerk shall present it to the city council for its consideration. (Ord. 93-05, 1993).

 

3.36.170 Report—Approval by city council.
        The report shall be reviewed by the city council and said city council may approve the report, as filed, or it may modify the report in any particular and approve it as modified. (Ord. 93-05, 1993).

 

3.36.180 Report—Hearing.
        Upon approval of the report by the city council pursuant to Section 3.36.170, the city council shall, by resolution, appoint a time and place of hearing thereon. (Ord. 93-05, 1993).

 

3.36.190 Report—Notice.
        A.    The city clerk shall cause notice of the hearing on the report to be given by mailing, postage prepaid, to all owners of property subject to said assessment to pay said costs of maintenance and operation; to be published once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city; and to be posted on or near the council chamber door or any bulletin board in or adjacent to the City Hall. Said mailing, publication, and posting shall be completed not less than ten days prior to such hearing.

        B.     The form of notice to be published and posted shall be substantially as follows:

 

 

NOTICE OF HEARING ON
MAINTENANCE DISTRICT

NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that the City Engineer has caused to be prepared and filed with the City Clerk, a report, in writing, which provides the basis for the levy of benefit assessments for the costs of maintenance and operation on all lots or parcels of property within said maintenance district. Said report sets forth the amounts to be provided in the budget for maintenance and operation, a description of each lot or parcel of property in the maintenance district, by a legal description, assessor’s parcel number or other description sufficient to identify the same, and the amount of assessment to be levied for the fiscal year 20__ against each lot or parcel of property. Said report is open to public inspection.

Said report will be heard by the city at its meeting to be held on the ___ day of _________, 20__, at the hour of 7:30 o’clock p.m. in the regular meeting place of said Council, Council Chambers, City Hall, Waterford, California, at which time said Council will examine said report and hear all persons interested therein.

Any interested owner, objecting to the amount of the assessment on any lot or parcel of property owned by him or her, may file with the City Clerk at or before the hour fixed for hearing a protest, in writing, signed by him or her, describing the lot or parcel of property so that it may be identified, and stating the grounds of his or her protest, and may appear at said hearing and be heard in regard thereto.

 

        C.     The form of mailed notice shall be substantially as hereinabove set forth, and shall also contain a description of the lot or parcel of property covered by the notice sufficient to identify it, and the amount of the proposed assessment against said lot or parcel of property as set forth in the report.

        D.    If the city council adopts the report, the requirement for mailed notice shall not thereafter apply to hearings on reports prepared in subsequent years for the annual benefit assessment and notice by posting and publication as provided in this section shall be adequate except that the city clerk shall give notice thereof to owners owning lots or parcels in the following categories:

        1.     Where there is an increase in the amount of the annual benefit assessment by reason of a change of zone or a change in the formula or formulae upon and by which annual assessment levies for the payment of the costs and expenses of said maintenance and operation will be apportioned according to benefits among the several lots or parcels of property within the maintenance district and the zones, if any;

        2.     Where there has been a division of any lot or parcel of land assessed during the previous year, and, as a result thereof, the divided lots or parcels are owned by different persons;

        3.     Where there has been an annexation of said lots or parcels to an existing maintenance district. (Ord. 93-05, 1993).

 

3.36.200 Report—Hearing—Determining final.
        The city council shall hold the hearing at the time and place specified in the resolution and in any order continuing the hearing. During the course of, or upon the conclusion of the hearing, the city council may order changes in any of the matters provided in the report. Upon the conclusion of said hearing, the city council may adopt a resolution confirming the report, either as originally submitted or as changed by it. All decisions and determinations of the city council, on notice and hearing as aforesaid, shall be final and conclusive upon all persons entitled to appeal to it, as to all errors, informalities and irregularities which the city council might have avoided, or have remedied during the hearing on the report. (Ord. 93-05, 1993).

 

3.36.210 Report—Certification and filing.
        The report, together with the certificate of the city clerk as to the fact and date of approval and adoption thereof by the city council as provided in Section 3.36.200 shall forthwith be delivered to the finance officer, who shall thereafter deliver said report, as adopted, to the officer designated by law to extend ad valorem property taxes upon the tax roll on which they are collected. (Ord. 93-05, 1993).

 

3.36.220 Benefit assessments—Posting.
        The officer designated by law to extend ad valorem property taxes upon the tax roll on which they are collected shall post to said tax roll the total amount of the benefit assessment levied and to be collected for said year on each lot or parcel of property within the maintenance district as set forth in said report. The amount so posted shall appear as a separate item on the tax bill. (Ord. 93-05, 1993).

 

3.36.230 Method of collection.
        The special benefit assessments shall be collected upon the last equalized secured and utility tax rolls upon which said ad valorem property taxes are collected. They shall be in addition to all of said ad valorem property taxes, and shall be collected together with, and not separate therefrom, and enforced in the same manner and by the same persons and at the same time and with the same penalties and interest as are said ad valorem property taxes. All laws applicable to the collection and enforcement of said ad valorem property taxes shall be applicable to said special benefit assessment levy, and the assessed lot or parcel of property, if sold for taxes, shall be subject to redemption in the same manner as such real property is redeemed from the sale or ad valorem property taxes, and if not redeemed, shall in like manner pass to the purchaser. (Ord. 93-05, 1993).

 

3.36.240 Omitted property.
        If any property within the maintenance district is erroneously omitted in any such report, said property shall be assessed for the omitted amount in the next year after said omission is discovered, and appropriate provisions shall be made in the report for said year. (Ord. 93-05, 1993).

 

3.36.250 Consolidated hearing.
        The procedures relating to the formation of a maintenance district or the annexation to an existing maintenance district and the alternative method for the levy of the annual benefit assessment hereunder may be consolidated for hearing purposes. (Ord. 93-05, 1993).

 

Article II. Applicability to Maintenance Districts Formed Prior to Effective Date Hereof
3.36.260 Generally.
        The provisions of Sections 3.36.040 through 3.36.250 relating to the alternative method for the levy of benefit assessments shall be applicable to maintenance districts formed before the effective date hereof, regardless of the law pursuant to which said maintenance districts were formed, if all of the owners of all of the lots or parcels of property subject to benefit assessment to pay said costs of maintenance and operation request, in writing, that the alternative method for the levy of the benefit assessment as provided in Sections 3.36.040 through 3.36.250 shall apply. (Ord. 93-05, 1993).

 

3.36.270 City council action.
        The city council may, by separate resolution, declare its intention to order that the alternative method for the levy of the benefit assessment as provided in this chapter be made applicable to maintenance districts formed prior to the effective date hereof and shall fix therein a time and place for a hearing thereon. (Ord. 93-05, 1993).

 

3.36.280 Hearing—Notice.
        Notice of said hearing shall be given by the city clerk who shall cause a copy of said resolution of intention to be mailed, postage prepaid, to the owners of any lot or parcel of property subject to a benefit assessment to pay said costs of maintenance and operation as provided in this chapter, to be published once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, and to be posted on or near the council chamber door or any bulletin board in or adjacent to the City Hall. Said mailing, publication and posting shall be completed not less than ten days prior to such hearing. (Ord. 93-05, 1993).

 

3.36.290 Protest.
        At any time not later than the hour fixed for the hearing of objections in resolution of intention, the owner of any lot or parcel of property subject to assessment in said maintenance district to pay the costs of said maintenance and operation may make written protest thereto. (Ord. 93-05, 1993).

 

3.36.300 Council decision final.
        The city council shall hear and pass upon all protests thereto, and its decision thereon, expressed by resolution, shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 93-05, 1993).

 

3.36.310 Majority protest.
        If the city council finds that protests thereto are made by the owners of more than one-half of the area of the property in said maintenance district subject to benefit assessment to pay said costs of maintenance and operation, no further proceedings shall be taken for a period of six months from the date of the decision of the city council on the hearing, unless the protests are overruled by an affirmative vote of four-fifths of the members of the city council. The city council may adjourn the hearing from time to time. (Ord. 93-05, 1993).

 

3.36.320 Consolidated hearing.
        The procedures of Sections 3.36.040 through 3.36.250 relating to the alternative method for the levy of benefit assessment may be consolidated for hearing purposes with the procedures under Sections 3.36.260 through 3.36.320. (Ord. 93-05, 1993).

Chapter 3.40 POLICE SERVICE FEES
3.40.010 Police service fees.
        Pursuant to the authority contained in Section 37112 of the Government Code of the state of California, the following fees are established for those services provided by the city of Waterford police department. (Ord. 94-11 §1, 1994).

 

3.40.020 Purposes.
        A.    In order to establish a policy of recovering the full costs reasonably borne of providing special services of a voluntary and limited nature to the public and so that general taxes are not diverted from general services of a broad nature and thereby utilized to subsidize unfairly and inequitably such special services and to mitigate the impact of these services on the police department, certain service fees must be exacted. The city council has determined that a police service fee is needed in order to finance these special services.

        B.     The city has conducted an analysis of its services, the costs reasonably incurred in providing those services, the beneficiaries of those services, and the revenues produced by fees and charges for special services. (Ord. 94-11 §1, 1994).

 

3.40.030 Fee establishment.
        A police service fees is hereby established on all services provided for by city council through resolution. The city council shall, in a council resolution, set forth the specific amount of the fees for the specific services provided. On an annual basis, the city council shall review these fees to determine whether the fee amounts are reasonably related to the costs of the services provided. (Ord. 94-11 §1, 1994).

 

3.40.040 Use of fees.
        The revenues raised by payment of the fees shall be accounted for separately. (Ord. 94-11 §1, 1994).

Chapter 3.44 UNIFORM TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX
3.44.010 Title.
        This chapter shall be known as the “Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax Code of the city of Waterford.” (Ord. 95-03 §1, 1995).

 

3.44.020 Definitions.
        Except where the context otherwise requires, the following definitions govern the construction of this chapter:

        A.    “Hotel” means any structure or site, or any portion of any structure or site, which is occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging, or sleeping purposes, and includes any hotel, inn, tourist home or house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodging house, rooming house, apartment house, dormitory, public or private club, mobile home or house trailer at a fixed location (except when located within a mobile home park or when its tenant is the owner or operator of a mobile home park) or other similar structure or site, or portion thereof.

        B.     “Occupancy” means the use or possession, or the right to the use of possession, of any room or rooms, or site or sites, or portion thereof in any hotel for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes.

        C.     “Operator” means the person who is the proprietor of the hotel, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee, or any other capacity. Where the operator performs his or her functions through a managing agent of any type of character other than an employee, the managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this chapter and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his or her principal. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter by either the principal or the managing agent shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both.

        D.    “Person” means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combinations therefrom whatsoever.

        E.     “Rent” means the consideration charged, whether or not received, for the occupancy of space in a hotel, valued in money, whether to be received in money, goods, labor or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property and services of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever.

        F.     “Transient” means any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy by reason of concession, permit, right-to-access, license or other agreement for a period of thirty consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. Any such person so occupying space in a hotel shall be deemed to be a transient until the period of thirty days has expired unless there is an agreement in writing between the operator and the occupant providing for a longer period of occupancy. In determining whether a person is a transient, uninterrupted periods of time extending both prior and subsequent to the effective date of this chapter may be considered. (Ord. 95-03 §1, 1995).

 

3.44.030 Tax imposed—Rate—Debt to city.
        For a privilege of occupancy in any hotel, each transient is subject to and shall pay a tax in the amount of eight percent of the rent charged by the operator. Such tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the city which is extinguished only by a payment to the operator or to the city. (Ord. 95-03 §1, 1995).

 

3.44.040 Tax—Due when—Payment procedure.
        The transient shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel at the time the rent is paid. If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid with each installment. The unpaid tax shall be due upon the transient’s ceasing to occupy space in the hotel. If for any reason the tax due is not paid to the operator of the hotel, the city clerk may require that such tax shall be paid directly to the city clerk. (Ord. 95-03 §1, 1995).

 

3.44.050 Exemptions.
        A.    No tax shall be imposed upon:

        1.     Any person as to whom, or any occupancy as to which it is beyond the power of the city to impose the tax provided in this chapter;

        2.     Any federal officer or employee on official business;

        3.     Any officer or employee of a foreign government who is exempt by reason of express provision of federal law or international treaty.

        B.     Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, no exemption shall be granted except upon a claim therefor made at the time rent is collected and under penalty of perjury upon a form prescribed by the city clerk. (Ord. 95-03 §1, 1995).

 

3.44.060 Collection by operator—Regulations.
        Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter to the same extent and at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient. The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the amount of the rent charged, and each transient shall receive a receipt for payment from the operator. No operator of a hotel shall advertise or state in any manner, whether directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, if added, any part will be refunded except in the manner provided in this chapter. (Ord. 95-03 §1, 1995).

 

3.44.070 Operator registration.
        Within thirty days after the effective date of this chapter or within thirty days after commencing business, whichever is later, each operator of any hotel renting occupancy to transients shall register such hotel with the city clerk and obtain from him or her a “transient occupancy registration certificate” to be at all times posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. Such certificate shall, among other things, state the following:

        A.    The name of the operator;

        B.     The address of the hotel;

        C.     The date upon which the certificate was issued;

        D.    “This transient occupancy registration certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax Code by registering with the city clerk for the purpose of collecting from transients the transient occupancy tax and remitting said tax to the city clerk. This certificate does not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful business in an unlawful manner, nor to operate a hotel without strictly complying with all local applicable laws including but not limited to those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department or office of this city or any other controlling jurisdiction. This certificate does not constitute a permit.” (Ord. 95-03 §1, 1995).

 

3.44.080 Operator—Reporting and remitting.
        Each operator shall, on or before the last day of the month following the close of each calendar quarter, or at the close of any shorter reporting period which may be established by the city clerk, file a return with the city clerk, on forms provided by the city clerk, of the total rents charged and received and the amount of tax collected for transient occupancies. At the time the return is filed, the full amount of the tax collected shall be remitted to the city clerk. The city clerk may establish shorter reporting periods for any certificate holder if deemed necessary in order to ensure collection of the tax, and the city clerk may require further information in the return. Returns and payments are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. All taxes collected by operators pursuant to this chapter shall be held in trust for the account of the city until payment thereof is made to the city clerk. (Ord. 95-03 §1, 1995).

 

3.44.090 Operator—Recordkeeping duties—Inspection authorized.
        It shall be the duty of every operator liable for the collection any payment to the city of any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of three years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as said operator may have been liable for the collection of and payment to the city, which records the city clerk shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times. (Ord. 95-03 §1, 1995).

 

3.44.100 Tax deemed debt to city—Action to collect.
        Any tax required to be paid by any transient under the provisions of this chapter, whether or not collected by the operator, shall be deemed a debt owed by the operator to the city until such time as such tax has been paid to the city. Any person owing money to the city under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction within the county of Stanislaus or within the county of residence of such person at the option of the city for the recovery of such amount. (Ord. 95-03 §1, 1995).

 

3.44.110 Delinquency and fraud—Penalties and interest.
        A.    Original Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter within the time required shall pay a penalty of ten percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax.

        B.     Continued Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any delinquent remittance on or before a period of thirty days following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency penalty of ten percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax and the ten percent penalty first imposed.

        C.     Fraud. If the city clerk determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of twenty-five percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in subsections A and B of this section.

        D.    Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter shall pay interest at the rate of one-half of one percent per month or fraction thereof on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which remittance first became delinquent until paid.

        E.     Penalties Merged With Tax. Every penalty imposed, and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this section, shall become a part of the tax required by this chapter to be paid. (Ord. 95-03 §1, 1995).

 

3.44.120 Failure to collect and report tax—Assessment by city clerk.
        If any operator fails or refuses to collect such tax and to make, within the time provided in this chapter, any report and remittance of such tax or any portion thereof required by this chapter, the city clerk shall proceed in such manner as he or she may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base this estimate of the tax due. As soon as the city clerk shall procure such facts and information as possible to obtain, upon which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by this chapter and payable by any operator who has failed or refused to collect the same and to make such report and remittance, he or she shall proceed to determine and assess against such operator the tax, interest and penalties provided for by this chapter. (Ord. 95-03 §1, 1995).

 

3.44.130 Failure to collect and report tax—Notice—Hearing—Determination—Remittance.
        In case such determination pursuant to Section 3.44.120 is made, the city clerk shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the operator so assessed at his or her last known address. Such operator, may within ten days after the serving or mailing of such notice, make application in writing to the city clerk for a hearing on the amount assessed. If application by the operator for a hearing is not made within the time prescribed, the tax, interest and penalties, if any, determined by the city clerk shall become final and conclusive and immediately due and payable. If such application is made, the city clerk shall give not less than five days written notice, in the manner prescribed in this section, for the operator to show cause at a time and place fixed in such notice why such amount specified therein should not be fixed for such tax, interest and penalties. At such hearing, the operator may appear and offer evidence why such specified tax, interest and penalties should not be so fixed. After such hearing the city clerk shall determine the proper tax to be remitted and shall thereafter give written notice to such operator, in the manner prescribed in this section, of such determination and the amount of such tax, interest and penalties. The amount determined to be due shall be payable after fifteen days unless an appeal is taken as provided in Section 3.44.140. (Ord. 95-03 §1, 1995).

 

3.44.140 Appeal procedure—Determination.
        Any operator aggrieved by any decision of the city clerk with respect to the amount of such tax, interest and penalties, if any, may appeal to the city council by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within fifteen days of the serving or mailing of the determination of tax due. The city council shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal, and the city clerk shall give notice in writing to such operator at his or her last known address. The findings of the city council shall be final and conclusive and shall be served upon the appellant in the manner prescribed above for service of notice of hearing. Any amount found to be due shall be immediately due and payable upon the service of notice. (Ord. 95-03 §1, 1995).

 

3.44.150 Refunds—Overpayment, erroneous or illegal collection—Claim procedure—Operator—Transient.
        A.    Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid or paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received, by the city clerk under this chapter, it may be refunded as provided in subsections B and C of this section, provided a claim in writing therefor, stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the city clerk within three years of the date of payment. The claim shall be on forms furnished by the city clerk.

        B.     An operator may claim a refund or, at the option of the city, take a credit against taxes to be collected and remitted for the amount overpaid, paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received when it is established in a manner prescribed by the city clerk that the person from whom the tax has been collected was not a transient; provided, however, that neither a refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has either been refunded to the transient or credited to rent subsequently payable by the transient to the operator.

        C.     A transient may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid or paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city by filing a claim in the manner provided in subsection A of this section, but only when the tax was paid by the transient directly to the city clerk or when the transient having paid the tax to the operator establishes to the satisfaction of the city clerk that the transient has been unable to obtain a refund from the operator who collected the tax.

        D.    No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section, unless the claimant establishes his or her right thereto by written records showing entitlement thereto. (Ord. 95-03 §1, 1995).

 

3.44.160 Violations designated.
        Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable therefor by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or by imprisonment for a period of not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

        Any operator or other person who fails or refuses to register as required herein, or to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the city clerk, or who renders a false or fraudulent return or claim, is guilty of a misdemeanor, and is punishable as aforesaid. Any person required to make, render, sign or verify any report or claim who makes any false or fraudulent report or claim with intent to defeat or evade the determination or any amount due required by this chapter to be made, is guilty of a misdemeanor and is punishable as aforesaid. (Ord. 95-03 §1, 1995).

Chapter 3.50 COLLECTIONS OF PUBLIC UTILITIES CHARGES
3.50.010 Purpose.
        In order to encourage the timely payment of sewer and water service fees by all users of the waste water treatment and water treatment systems, supplement those funds otherwise timely received, cover the additional monetary costs and lost opportunity costs associated with overdue payments of sewer and water service fees and the collection thereof, and to further facilitate the effective operation and maintenance of the waste water and water treatment systems, the penalty fees and enforcement procedures set forth in this chapter have been adopted. (Ord. 2014-08 §3).

 

3.50.020 Management and administration of funds.
        The finance director or a designee shall be in control of collections of all moneys due the city for utility service charges including water and sewer under the general direction of the city manager, and shall account for the same in the same manner as required for other funds received in an official capacity. (Ord. 2014-08 §3).

 

3.50.030 Charges established by resolution.
        The amounts of all utility service charges metered and unmetered including, but not limited to, charges for monthly sewer and water service charges, meters, screens, standby charges, sewer and water connection fees, reserve capacity charges, lateral and main connection charges, service connection charges, inflow/outflow monitoring devices and sampling devices, penalties, and re-connection fees may be established by resolution. The failure to pay any charge established by resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, or by this chapter, shall constitute a violation. (Ord. 2014-08 §3).

 

3.50.040 Duty to collect charges.
        The finance director and all other appropriate city officers, agents, or employees shall promptly and economically take all actions necessary for the collection of all charges in this chapter which are now or may be provided for. (Ord. 2014-08 §3).

 

3.50.050 Sewer/water service charges.
        Charges for sewer and water shall be charged to every service connected to the municipal waste water and municipal water system in accordance with rates and charges as established by the city council from time to time by resolution. Charges for sewer and water service to properties shall commence upon completion or occupancy of a building, upon expiration of the construction period, or upon installation of a meter, whichever shall occur first.

        All users of the waste water and water treatment systems shall pay for such services and for the privilege of connecting to these systems at the rates, at the time, and under the conditions set forth in this code. Such users shall comply with all provisions of this code relating to the city utility bill generally and the use of the waste water and water treatment plants specifically.

        When sewer or water service is turned on or terminated at any time between the beginning and pending of the monthly billing period for any flat rate or unmetered installation, the amount charged for that month shall be prorated on a daily basis from the date of commencement or termination of service as is appropriate.

        On premises served with city water, the charge for sewer service shall be added to the charge for water service and payment of the total amount must be made in accordance with this chapter.

        On premises not served with city water, the billing of sewer services shall be made in accordance with provisions of this chapter and in accordance with a schedule approved by the city council from time to time by resolution. (Ord. 2014-08 §3).

 

3.50.060 Charges deemed debt due city of Waterford.
        The charges imposed by this chapter shall be deemed a debt due the city of Waterford for which the owner of the property and the user of the services shall be held jointly and severally liable in a civil action in the name of the city of Waterford, or its assignee, as plaintiff. Said action may be brought in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of charges imposed by this title, including late charges, other penalties, costs of suit, and reasonable attorney’s fees, which sum shall be deposited into the city treasury upon collection. (Ord. 2014-08 §3).

 

3.50.070 Persons responsible for payment of utility services charges.
        Owners of real property shall be responsible for utility services charges for said services used on their premises, although payments will be accepted from tenants. Where the utility account is not in the name of the real property owner, this should become the case as soon as property owners are able to do so. The city may require this change immediately when a tenant becomes delinquent in making the required payments, or when tenants change. The city reserves the right to change the utility account into the name of the real property owner at any time and for any reason.

        In case payments are not in accordance with this chapter, the services may be disconnected and shall not be restored until the delinquent charges have been paid or arrangements to do so have been made to the satisfaction of the city; except where a new owner of record or a new tenant has taken up residence since the delinquent charges were incurred.

        In case of a previous tenant leaving a delinquent bill, the city may require that subsequent service be furnished under the name of the owner of real property or his or her agent. (Ord. 2014-08 §3).

 

3.50.080 Deposits for utility services/establishment of credit.
        An advance deposit for utility services, as may be established from time to time by resolution duly adopted by the city council, shall be required for each service based solely on credit worthiness of the consumer. Each applicant for sewer and water service will be required to establish credit before receiving such service. Credit will be deemed established if the applicant meets any one of the following conditions:

 

        A.    If the applicant has been a user of the city sewer/water system or of any other California city as demonstrated by submission of bills for twelve consecutive months of service by the city and during such time has paid all bills without discontinuance of service for nonpayment thereof;

        B.     If the applicant makes a cash deposit in the amount of twice the estimated average periodic bill for sewer or water service. Such estimate shall be made by the finance director or designee, based on the average bill for similar services in the last twelve months.

        Said advance deposit may be applied toward the nonpayment of the utility services charges upon delinquency and subsequent scheduling for disconnection of services for nonpayment, at the time of discontinuance of service or upon reaching credit worthiness satisfactory to the city. If said deposit is applied to a delinquent account, service shall not be resumed on such account until such time as the deposit is replaced to the satisfaction of the city. (Ord. 2014-08 §3).

 

3.50.090 Method of billing for sewer and water service charges.
        All users shall be billed for sewer or water service monthly or bimonthly, at the option of the city. Sewer and water service charges may be collected with the rates, tolls, and charges for other utility services furnished by the city and all such charges may be billed on the same bill. (Ord. 2014-08 §3).

 

3.50.100 Delinquency date/penalty.
        Sewer/water service charges shall be delinquent if not paid in full on or before the date upon which such charges become due and payable.

        Whenever any sewer or water service charge becomes delinquent, there shall be imposed a late penalty of ten dollars. In addition, a ten-dollar penalty fee shall be imposed each month there is an outstanding balance after the delinquency date, unless waived at the discretion of the city. (Ord. 2014-08 §3).

 

3.50.110 Enforcement of payment of delinquent utility service charges.
        In the event any user fails to pay, when due, any utility service charge applicable to premises controlled or owned by him or her, the city may enforce payment of such delinquent charges in any of the following manners:

        A.    The city may in extraordinary circumstances permit the collection of the delinquent payments through a payment plan agreed upon by both parties after supporting documentation is verified where the payment is not less than the past due amount, and for a duration not to exceed sixty days. Where the payment plan is not adhered to as agreed, the city may consider other options available to enforce payment of the delinquent charges. Evidence of a current water service account will be required in order to defer disconnection of the sewer service, and vice-versa.

        B.     The city may have the premises disconnected from the sewer/water system. In the event such disconnection should create a public hazard or nuisance, the director or designated representative may enter upon the premises for the purpose of doing such things as may be reasonably necessary to alleviate or remove such hazard or menace. The user of the premises shall have a duty to reimburse the city for all expenses incurred by the city in disconnecting the premises, or in doing other things authorized by this section, and no reconnection shall be made until all such charges have been paid or arrangements to do so have been made to the satisfaction of the city. The delinquent and reconnection charges shall be in accordance with a schedule approved by the city council from time to time by resolution.

        C.     The city may perfect a lien to collect any and all delinquent payments. The city clerk shall cause to be recorded notice of the lien on the property for delinquent charges due to the city, in the office of the county recorder for the amount due.

        D.    The city may place any and all utility service payments on the tax roll, for collection with its general taxes, and the city clerk shall certify to the county auditor the names and amounts for entry upon the tax roll. After receipt of the amount due, the city clerk shall cause to be recorded a release of lien in the county recorder’s office.

        E.     The city may take such other action as may be authorized by law and by the city council. (Ord. 2014-08 §3).

 

3.50.120 Termination of utility services for non-payment.
        If a payment of not less than the past due amount for sewer/water services is not paid within fifteen days, the city may terminate any and all service for which the bill is rendered, provided notice and opportunity to present objections to the bill is first given as provided in this subsection.

        A.    Prior to the termination of any utility services for nonpayment, the city shall cause a written notice of the payment delinquency and impending termination to be mailed to the owner of the premises to which the utility services are provided, at the owner’s address, via regular USPS or certified mail. If the owner’s address is not the address of the property to which such utility services were rendered, the notice also shall be sent to the address of the property to which such utility services were rendered, addressed to “Occupant.”

        B.     The notice shall be mailed not less than fifteen days prior to the proposed termination date, and should be timed to occur early in the week providing opportunity for a reconnection during business hours.

        C.     The notice shall include all of the following in a clear and legible format:

        1.     The owner’s name and address;

        2.     The amount of the delinquency;

        3.     The date by which payment or arrangement for payment is required in order to avoid termination of utility services;

        4.     A description of the opportunity to file a complaint or request an investigation concerning the delinquent utility service charges or applicable services, or to request an extension of time to pay the delinquent charges because the charges are beyond the means of the owner to pay in full within the time required;

        5.     A description of the procedure by which the owner may request amortization of the delinquent utility service charges;

        6.     A description of the procedure for the owner to obtain information on the availability of financial assistance, including private, local, state, or federal sources, if applicable; and

        7.     The telephone number of a city representative authorized to provide additional information or institute arrangements for payment.

        D.    A notice of the delinquency and impending termination of utility services for commercial water users also shall be mailed to any third party designated to receive notification pursuant to subdivision (c) of Section 10010.1 of the California Public Utilities Code, if any, provided that such notification shall not obligate the third party to pay the delinquency nor prevent or delay a termination of utility services. (Ord. 2014-08 §3).

 

3.50.130 Final notice of utility service termination.
        A.    Not less than twenty-four hours prior to a scheduled termination of water service or sewer service, a reasonable attempt shall be made to contact an adult person residing at the premises of the customer by telephone or personal contact, prior to any termination of service, except that, whenever telephone or personal contact cannot be accomplished, the public utility shall give, by mail, in person, or by posting in a conspicuous location at the premises, a notice of termination of service, at least forty-eight hours prior to termination. The final notice shall include all of the following in a clear and legible format:

        1.     The owner’s name and address;

        2.     The amount of the delinquency;

        3.     The date by which payment or arrangements for payment was required in order to avoid termination of utility services;

        4.     The telephone number of a department representative authorized to provide additional information or institute arrangements for payment; and

        5.     If the notice is directed to a residential customer failing to comply with an amortization agreement, a description of the conditions the customer is required to meet to avoid termination.

        B.     The forty-eight-hour notice should be made at the end of the week, so that actual termination can occur early in the following week.

        C.     Should mobilization and termination work be underway when delinquent payments are made, the utility customer will compensate the city for the work done to date with charges as established by the city council from time to time by resolution. (Ord. 2014-08 §3).

 

3.50.140 Uncollectible utility service charges and refunds of collected utility funds.
        A.    The finance director or designee shall have the discretion to write-off utility service charges that the finance director or designee deems uncollectible or refund utility service charges of any type.

        B.     In order to receive a refund, a city-utility customer must:

        1.     File a sufficient claim within ninety days of the questioned payment, unless waived by the finance director due to the account being closed and the account is paid in full;

        2.     Satisfy the finance director both: (a) that the refund is appropriate, and (b) that the claimant was the utility user of record who paid the funds subject to refund;

        3.     Refunds may be requested either in check or account credit. (Ord. 2014-08 §3).

 

3.50.150 Under-billed or over-billed charges.
        When the finance director or designee determines that a parcel owner was not billed or was under-billed for utility services rendered to the parcel, the parcel owner is responsible and liable for payment of the utility service charges that were not billed for such period as may be determined by the finance director or designee, provided that the maximum period of utility service charges for which the city may back-bill the owner is one year.

        When the finance director or designee determines that a parcel owner was over-billed for utility services rendered to the parcel, the parcel owner is entitled to a credit for the over-billed amount for such period as may be determined by the finance director or designee, provided that the maximum period of utility service charges for which the city may provide a credit to the owner is one year. (Ord. 2014-08 §3).

 

3.50.160 Disputed bills.
        If any user or owner disputes the amount of the sewer or water service charge for any premises controlled or owned by him or her in any bill or invoice, he or she shall, within thirty days immediately following the date upon which such charge becomes due and payable, file a claim with the finance director or designee accompanied by detailed supporting factual data in support of the claim.

        It shall be the duty of each user or owner to prove to the finance director or designee that such charge is in error and the correct amount thereof. If the finance director or designee determines that the charge was in error, the finance director or designee shall correct the bill or invoice. Failure to dispute the amount of any charge in accordance with this section shall be deemed acceptance of the correctness of the charge.

        The dispute shall be handled accordingly:

        A.    If an extension of time to pay is requested, the designated employee shall consider whether the owner should be permitted to amortize the unpaid balance of the utility services account over a reasonable period of time, not to exceed six months.

        B.     The designated employee shall make a decision, which may include adjustment of the amount due and/or extension of the time for payment for a period of up to six months. A copy of the decision shall be mailed to the owner at the owner’s address.

 

        C.     Any person aggrieved by the decision may appeal to the city manager by filing a written notice of appeal within five calendar days of the decision with the city clerk. The written notice shall include his or her objections to the decision and basis for appeal. Any person aggrieved by the city manager’s appeal decision may request the appeal to be scheduled and heard on a future city council meeting date, however no later than thirty days from the initial ruling. After hearing the objections by such person and giving due consideration thereto, the city council shall make its decision on the matters contained in the appeal, and its decision shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 2014-08 §3).

 

3.50.170 Charges for reconnection—Water.
        The reconnection charge shall be in accordance with a schedule approved by the city council from time to time by resolution and completed as soon as feasible during regular business hours. Reconnection will not occur until reconnection fees have been paid to the city. Additionally, the customer must bring their account current or set up a payment plan before reconnection will be ordered. (Ord. 2014-08 §3).

 

3.50.180 Vacant premises.
        Sewer charges shall be paid for vacant or untenanted premises, except buildings under construction, unless and until a notice of the vacancy and a request for the discontinuance of water and sewer service is made or provided to the city and at all times while water is being provided to such premises. (Ord. 2014-08 §3).

Chapter 3.60 PUBLIC FACILITIES FEES
3.60.010 Purpose/findings.
        In order to implement the goals and objectives of the city general plan, and consistent with the exercise of its police power, and to mitigate impacts caused by new development within the city, capital facility fees are necessary. The fees are needed to finance public facilities and to assure that new development pays its fair share for these necessary improvements.

        A.    The city’s general police power, Article 11, Section 7, of the California Constitution, and the “Mitigation Fee Act” set forth in Government Code Section 66000 et seq., provide that public facilities fees may be enacted and imposed on development projects. The city council finds and determines that:

        1.     New development projects cause the need for construction, expansion or improvements of public facilities within the city of Waterford;

        2.     Funds for construction, expansion or improvement of public facilities are not currently available, nor are likely to be available, to accommodate needs caused by development projects and this has, and will, result in inadequate facilities within the city of Waterford.

        B.     The city council finds that the public health, safety, peace, morals, convenience, comfort, prosperity and general welfare will be promoted by the adoption of public facilities fees for construction, expansion or improvement of public facilities.

        C.     The city council finds that the failure to enact public facilities fees will subject city residents to conditions perilous to their health and/or safety and their general welfare.

        D.    The city retained professional consulting firms to study the fiscal impacts of growth in the city of Waterford and to study the capital facilities needed to serve the projected growth (“the studies”).

        E.     The studies determined facilities needs of the city that include needs generated and needed by, residents of the existing city limits and the prospective new annexation area of the city.

        F.     The city council finds that this chapter properly limits the use of all fees collected to public facilities and improvements attributable to new development, and further limits use of fees to specific categories of facilities and improvements until and unless subsequent evidence justifies reallocation.

        G.    The city council finds that pursuant to the express policies set forth in the Waterford city general plan, new development is to pay its fair share for new public facilities generated as a result of the new development, otherwise the cost of these facilities or the failure to provide such facilities will be disproportionate, and unfairly borne, by other city taxpayers, or will unfairly reduce the level of service provided to present city residents.

        H.    Even though development projects for the purpose of affordable housing and projects that are for secondary dwelling units on existing single-family lots may also contribute to the need for certain public facilities, the city council will not impose fees for these development projects and finds that affordable housing units and secondary dwell-ing units provide a cost-effective means of provid-ing housing necessary for low and moderate income households without public subsidy.

        I.      The city council finds that the provisions of this chapter are consistent with the requirements set forth in Government Code Section 66007(b), and the California Constitution, Article 11, Section 7. (Ord. 2015-08 §1; Ord. 07-04 §1, 2007).

 

3.60.020 Definitions.
        For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

        “Capital facility or public facility” includes public improvements, buildings, systems, fixtures, and associated capital needs required to provide public services and community amenities.

        “City” means the city of Waterford, a general law city organized and existing under the Constitution and laws of the state of California, and a political subdivision of the state of California.

        “City council” means the city council of the city of Waterford.

        “Development project” means any project undertaken for the purpose of development. “Development project” includes a project involving the issuance of a permit for construction of reconstruction, but not a permit to operate.

        “Fee” means a monetary exaction, other than a tax or special assessment which is charged to the applicant in connection with approval of a development project for the purpose of defraying all or a portion of the cost of public facilities related to the development project. (Ord. 07-04 §1, 2007).

 

3.60.030 Collection of capital facilities fees.
        The capital facility fees enacted pursuant to this chapter are to be collected prior to the issuance of building permits or at the earliest time possible permitted by law as determined by the planning director or the city building official. (Ord. 07-04 §1, 2007).

 

3.60.040 Authority for adoption.
        The ordinance codified in this chapter is adopted under the authority of the laws of the state of California, including the provisions of the Mitigation Fee Act set forth in Government Code Sections 66000 et seq., and as that Act may be amended from time to time, and pursuant to the California Constitution, Article 11, Section 7. (Ord. 07-04 §1, 2007).

 

3.60.050 Conditions for collection.
        In establishing and imposing a fee as a condition of approval of a development project, the following shall be done:

        A.    Identify the purpose of the fee.

        B.     Identify the use to which the fee is to be put. When the use is for financing public facilities, the facilities should be identified by reference in a capital improvement plan, pursuant to general plan or specific plan requirements, or in other public documents, such as a resolution by the city council that identifies the public facilities for which the fee is charged.

        C.     The city shall, prior to establishing a capital facility fee as a condition of approval of development projects, determine that there is a reasonable relationship between the amount of the fee and the cost of the public facility or facilities attributable to the development on which the fee is imposed.

        D.    Upon receipt of a fee subject to this chapter, the city shall deposit, invest, account for, and expend the fees pursuant to Government Code Section 66006. (Ord. 2015-08 §1; Ord. 07-04 §1, 2007).

 

3.60.060 Annual reports.
        A.    The city manager, or designee, shall report to the city council once each fiscal year a summary of the fees collected, the status of any fee account, and the uses made of the fees deposited in the fee account. This report shall be in conjunction with the reporting requirements set forth in Government Code Section 66006.

 

        B.     Commencing with the fifth fiscal year following the first deposit into the account fund, and every five years thereafter, the city council shall make the following findings with respect to any fees in the fee account that remain unexpended, whether committed or uncommitted.

        C.     Identify the purpose to which the fee is to be put.

        D.    Demonstrate a reasonable relationship between the fee and the purpose for which it is charged.

        E.     Identify all sources and amounts of funding anticipated to complete financing in incomplete improvements previously identified.

        F.     Designate the approximate dates on which the funding is expected to be deposited into the appropriate account or fund.

        G.    A refund of unexpended or uncommitted fees that exceeds one thousand dollars for which a need cannot be demonstrated, along with any accrued interest, may be made to the current owner(s) of a development project on a prorated basis. The city council may refund unexpended and uncommitted fees that have been found to be no longer needed, by direct payment or by off-setting other obligations owed to the city by the current owner of the development project(s). Where the unexpended or uncommitted fee balance is less than one thousand dollars, the balance shall be transferred to the administrative and planning impact fee fund. (Ord. 2015-08 §1; Ord. 07-04 §1, 2007).

 

3.60.070 Fee payment.
        A.    Prior to the issuance of any building permit, or permit for development subject to this chapter, the project applicant shall pay to the city the fees adopted by resolution pursuant to this chapter.

        B.     The amount of the fee shall be determined by the fee schedule in effect as of the date of the filing of the completed application.

        C.     When an application is made for a new permit following the expiration of a previously issued permit for which fees were paid, the fee payment shall not be required.

        D.    In the event that the project changes in some manner, any additional fees that become due as a result of the project change shall be required at the time of the application for the amended project.

        E.     When a fee is paid and the project is reduced, a refund may be applied for.

        F.     When a fee is paid for a project that is subsequently abandoned, the applicant may request a refund of the fee paid, minus the administrative portion of the fee.

        G.    No fee shall be assessed pursuant to this article for the reconstruction of any project, except to the extent that the reconstruction application is for square footage greater than the original development, and in that case the fee shall be based on the additional square footage. (Ord. 07-04 §1, 2007).

 

3.60.080 Capital facilities fee account.
        Fees paid under this article shall be held in a separate capital facility account to be expended for the purpose for which the fees were collected by the city. The city shall retain any interest accrued and allocate it to the account for which the original fees were imposed. The city shall deposit, invest, account for and expend the fees in accordance with Government Code Section 66006, and as that section may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 07-04 §1, 2007).

 

3.60.090 Public hearing—Fee resolution.
        A.    The adoption of public facilities fees is a legislative act and the specific fee amount authorized pursuant to this article shall be adopted by resolution after a noticed public hearing before the city council. The fees adopted shall be based upon and reflect the need for public facilities as identified in the comprehensive facilities master plan for the city of Waterford, and the city facilities needed to serve growth set forth in the studies.

        B.     All fees shall be automatically adjusted annually for inflation by the city manager. The adjustment shall occur on March 1st of each year in accordance with an annual increase in the Engineering News Record Index for Construction Costs for the twelve-month period ending in the preceding December. (Ord. 2015-08 §1; Ord. 07-04 §1, 2007).

 

3.60.100 Fee adjustments and waiver.
        A.    The project proponent and/or applicant for any project subject to the fee described in this chapter may apply to the city manager or designee for relief from imposition of the fee, reduction of the fee, or waiver of the fee, based on the alleged absence of any reasonable relationship or nexus between the impacts of the development and either the amount of the fee charged or the type of facilities to be financed, or other alleged legal basis for exemption. Such application shall be made in writing and filed with the city manager or designee not later than ten days prior to the public hearing on the development permit application for the project, or if there is no permit requiring a public hearing, the time of filing shall be at the time the application for a building or other permit is submitted to the city. The city manager or designee shall respond in writing within fifteen working days from the submission of the request. Failure to take action within that time shall mean that the request has been denied.

        B.     If the project proponent desires to appeal this administrative determination, the project proponent must apply in writing within ten working days of the date of the denial to the city council together with the set appeal fees. The city council shall consider the application for appeal within forty-five days after the filing of the appeal and fee. The city manager or designee shall prepare a staff report and recommendation for consideration of the appeal to the city council. The decision of the city council shall be final. If a reduction, adjustment, or waiver is granted by the city council, any subsequent material change in use regarding the project shall subject such waiver, adjustment or reduction of the fee to reevaluation by the city.

        C.     Reimbursement agreements, or credit against fees required pursuant to this chapter, shall be considered for any project which, as a condition of approval, requires the project to develop or fund any capital facilities included in the capital improvement plan. Such credit shall be subject to the approval of the community development director and/or the city manager in accordance with guidelines established by the city council. The city manager shall determine the basis for calculating the amount of credit for any public improvements developed as a condition of the project’s approval. For all improvements, such credit shall be limited to the amount of the fee that would be assessed to the development project and may not be extended to any other project. (Ord. 2015-08 §1; Ord. 07-04 §1, 2007).

 

3.60.110 Exemptions.
        The following developments shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter:

        A.    Senior citizen housing, as described in Section 51.3 of the California Civil Code.

        B.     Residential care facilities for the elderly as described in subsection (o)(1) of Section 1569.2 of the California Health and Safety Code.

        C.     Multi-level facilities for the elderly as described in paragraph (9) of subdivision (d) of Section 15432 of the California Government Code.

        D.    Public buildings and uses owned and operated by the city of Waterford and the county of Stanislaus, unless the fee is otherwise authorized by local, state, or federal law.

        E.     Buildings used as a public school, college or university operated by a public school district, community college district, or the California State University as defined under the California Education Code, unless the fee is otherwise authorized by local, state, or federal law.

        F.     Re-occupancy of square footage in an existing building or structure when there is no change of use as defined by the Capital Facilities Fee Nexus Study.

        G.    Square footage of outdoor dining in the public right-of-way.

        H.    Residential accessory structures as defined in this chapter.

        I.      For nonresidential development, a change of use within an existing building, structure, or area, or any portion thereof, where there is no increase in the total square footage of the use for which the fee was paid and the use has operated for a minimum of three years as demonstrated by: (1) obtaining all of the necessary federal, state, and local permits to operate; (2) obtaining and maintaining an active business license from the city of Waterford during the entire period; and (3) any other evidence deemed necessary by the city.

        J.      For nonresidential development, a change of use within an existing building, structure, or area, or any portion thereof, where there is no increase in the total square footage of the use for which the fee was paid and the use has operated for a minimum of eighteen months as demonstrated by: (1) obtaining all of the necessary federal, state, and local permits to operate; (2) obtaining and maintaining an active business license from the city of Waterford during the entire period; and (3) any other evidence deemed necessary by the city and the new business is relocating its business from within the city of Waterford and said business has had an active business license for a minimum of three years.

        K.    For the reconstruction of any residential, commercial or industrial development project that has been damaged or destroyed as a result of a natural disaster as declared by the Governor of the state of California, or designated locally by the city council. (Ord. 2018-03 §1; Ord. 2015-08 §1; Ord. 07-04 §1, 2007).

 

3.60.115 Deferrals.
        The city council may adopt a fee deferral program, or programs, to allow specific development types to pay capital facility fees over a period of time. The city council will adopt the terms, duration, and applicability of the fee deferral program(s) by resolution and the program shall take effect immediately upon its adoption. (Ord. 2018-03 §1).

 

3.60.120 Construction.
        This chapter and any subsequent amendment to the public facilities fee program shall be read together. With respect to any public facilities fee enacted by resolution pursuant to this chapter, any provision of such a public facilities fee which is in conflict with this chapter shall be void. (Ord. 07-04 §1, 2007).

 

3.60.130 Capital improvement plan.
        A.    The city will adopt a capital improvement plan which indicates the approximate location, size, time of availability and estimates of costs for public facilities or improvements to be financed with public facilities fees.

        B.     The city manager shall annually submit the capital improvement plan to the city council for adoption at a noticed public hearing.

        C.     The public facilities fee schedule adopted by the city council shall be annually reviewed by the city council for consistency with the capital improvement plan. (Ord. 2015-08 §1; Ord. 07-04 §1, 2007).

 

3.60.140 Severability clause.
        The provisions of this chapter are intended to be severable, and in the event any provision or requirement provided for under this chapter is determined to be invalid or unenforceable, the remainder of the chapter shall remain in effect. (Ord. 07-04 §1, 2007).

 

3.60.150 Violations and enforcement.
        Violations shall subject the violator to placement of a lien on the subject real property in the amount of the fees, accrued interest, and collection costs, including attorneys’ fees. Violators shall be provided a written notice and given thirty days to cure the violations. Any person charged with violation of this chapter may have a hearing before the city council. The procedure for such an appeal is the same as that set forth in Section 3.60.100 above. The decision of the city council shall be final. (Ord. 07-04 §1, 2007).

Title 4 WATER SYSTEM
Chapter 4.00 REGULATION AND BILLING
Chapter 4.01 REGULATIONS FOR THE CONTROL OF BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES AND CROSS-CONNECTIONS
Chapter 4.02 RATES AND CHARGES
Chapter 4.04 WATER MAIN EXTENSIONS
Chapter 4.06 WATER SHORTAGE REGULATIONS

Chapter 4.00 REGULATION AND BILLING
4.00.010 City to own and operate water system.
        The city shall own and operate a water system serving designated areas within and outside of the corporate limits of the city and may construct new works as may be necessary to supply current and future users, within these areas, an adequate and safe domestic water supply. The city council shall designate the areas which shall receive water service from the city water system. (Ord. 2016-01 §1).

 

4.00.015 Authority.
        The management, control and care of the municipal water system shall be vested in the public works director (director) in consultation with the city engineer, under the general direction of the city manager. (Ord. 2016-01 §1; Ord. 05-01 §2).

 

4.00.020 Administration of funds.
        The city manager shall be in charge of the collection of all money that may become due the city for water services and shall pay the same into the water fund, as provided for in Section 4.02.010. (Ord. 05-01 §2).

 

4.00.025 Definitions.
        For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:

        “Apartment” shall mean a room, living unit, or suite of rooms which is designed for, intended for, and/or occupied by one family doing cooking therein.

        “Business” shall mean a place wherein persons are engaged in the manufacture, processing, fabricating, servicing, selling, and/or buying for sale or resale of produce, articles, merchandise, or any goods whatsoever; and shall also apply to the rendering of service for compensation, whether as a trade or a profession.

        “Church” shall mean a place of worship, whether as a part of another building or on separate property, and shall not include a parsonage, separate gymnasium, or classroom.

        “Commercial service” shall mean and include any service that is not defined as a residential service or an industrial service.

        “Connection charge” shall mean one or more of the initial charges made at the time of connection to the city water system.

        “Construction water” shall mean and include on-site water taken from fire hydrants and used for dust control or construction purposes. Permission must be granted by the city and fees paid.

        “Cut water service” shall mean and include any service that has been physically disconnected from the city water system.

        “Director” shall mean the public works director or designee.

        “Discontinued service” shall mean and include any service that has been shut off by the city at the city’s curb stop or main.

        “Dwelling” shall mean a building designed, occupied, or intended for living purposes and shall include single-family dwellings, buildings containing apartments, and rooming and/or lodging houses.

        “Fire hydrant installation” shall mean the complete installation of a fire hydrant assembly.

        “Industrial service” shall mean and include any service to a substantial industrial user as defined in Section 7.04.015.

        “Limited irrigation and sprinkling” shall mean limited irrigation and sprinkling for landscaping, beautification, small gardening, construction and dust control related to construction, and similar purposes only.

        “Living unit” shall mean and include a dwelling designed for a single family.

        “Lot” or a parcel of land shall mean a parcel of land consisting of one or more contiguous lots of record in one ownership to which service is provided for any purpose.

        “Main” shall mean a water line six inches or larger in diameter and appurtenant valves and fittings providing water to one or more laterals or service connections.

        “Meter” shall mean all of the equipment, electronics and parts needed to complete the installation of a water meter per city specifications including any automatic meter reading (AMR) device.

        “Mobile home park” shall mean any lot or parcel of land where one or more sites are rented or leased or intended to be rented or leased, with or without compensation, to accommodate mobile homes or recreational vehicles.

        “New service” shall mean and include any new water service that is connected to the city water system.

        “Pipeline” shall mean all water mains and services constructed in or under city streets.

        “Residence” shall mean a dwelling designed to be occupied by a single family.

        “Residential fire sprinklers” shall mean a wet pipe sprinkler system only designed for one- and two-family residences and manufactured homes.

        “Residential service” shall mean and include any service that conveys water to a single-family residence.

        “Service connection” or “water service connection” means any tap, pipe, or other means of taking water from the city water distribution system. A service connection occurs at the time that a tap, pipe, or other means of taking water is physically attached to the city water distribution system in a manner capable of taking water from the distribution system.

        “Services” shall mean and include any water line connected to the city water main that conveys water from the city system to private property.

        “Water service area” shall mean the area located within the city limits as such limits now or may from time to time exist, and those areas outside the city limits that have been approved for water service by the city council consistent with applicable water right restrictions.

        “Water system” or “system” shall mean any city owned and operated water system, which includes, but is not limited to, wells, storage tanks, main water lines, fire hydrants, and any and all connections, valves, plumbing, and appurtenances thereto, located within the designated and permitted service area. (Ord. 2016-01 §1).

 

4.00.030 Service—Generally.
        Water from the municipal water system shall be delivered to the consumers thereof, both within and without the corporate limits, in accordance with the terms of this chapter. The city shall furnish the service complete from its main to the property line, in case of an alley; to the curb line from a street main when the sidewalk is adjacent to the property line; and to the back of the sidewalk from a street main when the sidewalk is adjacent to the curb line. The owner shall furnish, install and maintain all piping to the city service. Water service once installed will be in the off position. (Ord. 05-01 §2).

 

4.00.040 Metered services.
        A.    All service shall be equipped with meters prior to a certificate of occupancy being issued and shall be charged for water on the metered rate as specified in Chapter 4.02.

        B.     The cost of installation of the meter shall be paid by the user of the water.

        C.     The city shall approve the type and installation of all meters.

        D.    The city shall provide and install any meter the city deems necessary with ten days’ written notice to the tenant and the owner for any service and may thereafter charge for water at metered rates.

        E.     New water services shall be metered at the time of construction.

        F.     All installed water meters and meter reading equipment shall become the property of the city. The retrofit of existing water services shall be performed by the city at the city’s expense.

        G.    The city may install all meters and meter reading equipment at the builder’s expense for all new construction.

        H.    If an installed water meter proves to be defective and does not correctly measure the amount of water consumed, the city shall install a new meter, and the water rate for the billing period while the meter was not operating correctly shall be the average water rate for the twelve billing periods previous to the malfunction of the original meter.

        I.      If a meter or appurtenances are damaged by the carelessness or negligence of the owner or occupant of the premises, the city will repair the meter, and the cost of such repairs shall be charged against the owner of the property and, if not paid within thirty days, shall then become a lien against said property.

        J.      The customer receiving city water service shall keep water meters unobstructed and accessible for reading, maintenance and repair, and shall provide the department’s employees and/or its contractors access to the premises where the customer receives water service as may be required by the city for such purposes. Compliance with this section shall be a condition of receiving or continuing to receive city water service.

        K.    Any metered customer may request in writing that the meter through which water is being furnished be examined and tested by the city to determine whether the meter is registering accurately the amount of water that is being delivered through it. Upon receipt of such request, the city shall examine and test the meter. If the meter is found to register over three percent more water than actually passes through it, the customer’s water bill will be adjusted accordingly. If the meter is found to register a variance of three percent or less, no billing adjustment will be made. Meter testing will be performed at a customer’s request, at no charge to the customer, not more than once every twelve months.

        L.     If a customer requests more frequent testing, the customer’s request shall be accompanied by a deposit of an amount equal to the monthly minimum meter charge. Upon receipt of such request, the city shall examine and test the meter. If the meter is found to register over three percent more water than actually passes through it, the customer’s water bill will be adjusted accordingly and the deposit shall be returned, without interest. If the meter is found to register a variance of three percent or less, no billing adjustment will be made and the deposit shall be used by the city to pay its inspection and testing costs. (Ord. 2016-01 §1; Ord. 05-01 §2).

 

4.00.045 Water meter use—Indemnity and notification.
        No person other than authorized employees of the city or other persons authorized by the director shall install, maintain, repair, move, replace, adjust, tamper with, manipulate, damage, disconnect, or remove any water meter. Any person performing any of the foregoing actions, whether or not authorized by the director, shall indemnify and hold harmless city, its officers, and employees from any claims, actions, costs (including attorney fees), damages, or other liability resulting or arising from such actions, and shall pay the city’s costs of investigating and repairing any resulting damage or replacing any removed items. Customers with metered water service connections shall notify the city of any visible damage to, or removal of, any portion of the meter box containing the water meter. (Ord. 2016-01 §1).

 

4.00.050 Special and amended rates—Authority.
        Anything to the contrary stated in this chapter notwithstanding, the city council shall have the power to establish by agreement or resolution the rates to be charged for providing water services to government agencies, including school districts, private schools and to any person at rates different from those heretofore set forth, on a basis that is fair and equitable to all the parties concerned. (Ord. 05-01 §2).

 

4.00.060 Curb shutoff valves.
        It is unlawful for a consumer, or any person, to turn on or turn off a curb shutoff valve without the permission of the director of public works or designee.

        Except as indicated above, a consumer is subject to a charge for having a curb shutoff valve turned on and off. The charge is thirty-five dollars during normal working hours (eight a.m. to three p.m., Monday through Friday) and fifty dollars at all other times. (Ord. 05-01 §2).

 

4.00.070 Connections.
        A.    All off-site water lines or water lines within a public utility easement, connections, valves, plumbing, and appurtenant water facilities and the construction and installation thereof shall be constructed or installed at the consumer’s expense and shall be to city standards and approved by the city engineer prior to water service turn-on.

        B.     One city water connection shall be provided to each lot, unless otherwise approved by the city engineer and public works director or designee. All off-site lines shall be constructed to city standards.

        C.     No lot line adjustment, parcel map, or similar instrument shall be approved or recorded until the city has verified that separate city water services have been provided to each lot or parcel, except that the installation of a separate city water service at a vacant lot or premises may be postponed until the issuance of a building permit.

        D.    For each project, individual shutoff valves, gate valves, and necessary on-site lines under private ownership shall be provided.

        E.     The building official shall have tested and inspect the mains and services on private property unless an agreement is reached with the city engineer and the building official to have the city engineer arrange to test and inspect. The city engineer shall have tested and inspect the water mains for the general distribution system whenever such mains are within the city right-of-way or public utility easement.

        F.     No person shall supply water in any way for use outside of the premises to which the service is assigned, except by permission of the public works director. (Ord. 2016-01 §1).

 

4.00.075 Service connections generally.
        A.    Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, each lot or parcel shall have a separate water service connection, except for fire service connections serving more than one lot or parcel that are authorized pursuant to the municipal code or provisions of this chapter. All water service lines shall be equipped with an approved corporation stop/valve at the distribution main, and with a curb stop valve unless not required under specifications adopted by the city. Water service lines shall not cross another lot or parcel without first obtaining any and all rights-of-way, easements, or other approvals necessary to do so.

        B.     To be eligible for water service, the property to which service is to be provided must abut a dedicated public easement or a city right-of-way in which a distribution main is constructed at a point immediately adjacent to the property, unless the director authorizes the extension of a distribution main.

        C.     The director may authorize water service for land locked parcels provided that the customer obtains recorded private easements from the affected owner(s) and all other applicable legal requirements are fulfilled. Private easements must abut a distribution main in a dedicated public easement or city right-of-way. Water service lines constructed in private easements are private water lines, and the city shall have no responsibility for the maintenance and repair of such lines.

        D.    The director may authorize water service for a parcel that is not adjacent to a distribution main and is not land locked, on such terms and conditions as may be specified by the director, if the director determines based on written findings that it is not feasible to extend a distribution main due to the unique physical characteristics of the parcel which are so unusual that complying with the requirements of this section would create an exceptional hardship to the parcel owner or the surrounding parcel owners.

        E.     Except as provided herein, the director shall determine the maximum sizes of service connections. For single-family domestic service connections, the maximum size shall be one inch, or one and one-half inches if residential fire sprinkler systems are present, unless otherwise authorized by the director.

        F.     All water service connections are subject to the city’s tap, meter, development, abandonment, and other applicable fees established by city council resolution, and to the city’s cross-connection control standards. (Ord. 2016-01 §1).

 

4.00.080 Valve inspections—Responsibility.
        The owner of any premises on or for which check valves or other protective devices are installed shall inspect these devices for water tightness and reliability at least once per year. Protective devices may, in addition, be inspected and tested for water tightness by the city at any time. If the inspection cannot be made without undue difficulty because of an obstruction or other interference, the consumer will be notified and requested either to correct the condition or have the inspection made at his or her own expense and witnessed by the city. Any defects found in any backflow control device shall be corrected by the consumer within three days. Failure to correct such defects is cause for discontinuance of water service. (Ord. 05-01 §2).

 

4.00.090 Water use outside of premises—Permission.
        No person shall supply water in any way for use outside of the premises to which the service is assigned or appurtenant, except by permission of the director. (Ord. 05-01 §2).

 

4.00.100 Temporary water service.
        A.    The city shall adopt a written temporary water use policy that establishes policies, procedures, and requirements applicable to temporary water service, including procedures governing application for and issuance, denial, renewal, and revocation of fire hydrant use permits, and procedures for payment and forfeiture of deposits.

        B.     Any person requesting temporary water use shall comply with all requirements of the temporary water use policy, including the payment of all applicable fees, charges, and deposits in the amounts established by city council resolution.

        C.     Temporary water service shall be provided through a meter, at current city charges. The city may authorize temporary water service for new residential construction prior to meter installation, upon payment, prior to issuance of a building permit, of a temporary water service fee, for each residential lot, equal to three times the city’s then-current monthly flat rate for water service to a single-family residence. (Ord. 2016-01 §1).

 

4.00.110 Open access to connections.
        Access to service connections and water meters must be provided at all times. A customer receiving city water service shall provide the city’s employees and contractors access to and use of the premises where city water service is received as may be required for the installation, maintenance, repair, or removal of any pipelines, water meters, and other appurtenances used to provide or measure city water service to the customer’s premises or to adjacent premises; or for purposes of connecting, reconnecting, or relocating the connection for city water service to any such premises. Compliance with the foregoing requirements is a condition of the customer receiving or continuing to receive city water service, and the department may shut off water service at the distribution main if the customer refuses to allow access as required in this section. If the customer refuses to allow such access, the city may seek authorization for access from any court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 2016-01 §1; Ord. 05-01 §2).

 

4.00.115 Leaking fixtures.
        It is unlawful for any person to maintain or allow on his or her premises leaky or faulty water fixtures or water using or distributing devices to which city water is connected, so that city water is wasted thereby. The failure to repair or disconnect the faulty device within five days after being notified in writing to do so by the department shall be sufficient cause for the disconnection of city water from the premises until the repairs have been made. After disconnection, water shall be reconnected only in accordance with the provisions of this code. (Ord. 2016-01 §1).

 

4.00.120 Service pipe maintenance—Right of entry.
        All persons must keep the service pipes in good order at their own expense and may be held liable for damages which may result from their failure to do so. When leaky faucets or fixtures are discovered and not immediately repaired, the water service may be disconnected. Authorized employees of the city shall be admitted at all reasonable hours to all parts of any premises supplied with water, except the interior of dwellings, but including the meter box, to see that the regulations contained in this chapter are observed and complied with. (Ord. 05-01 §2).

 

4.00.125 Access to customer premises—Compliance.
        A customer receiving city water service shall provide the department’s employees and/or contractors access to and use of the premises where city water service is received as may be required by the city’s employees or contractors to determine whether there is any violation of any of the provisions of this code, or to abate any violation thereof. If the customer refuses to allow such access, the city may seek authorization from any court of competent jurisdiction for such access and abatement. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall be a condition of the customer receiving or continuing to receive city water service. (Ord. 2016-01 §1).

 

4.00.130 Sprinkler systems.
        All sprinkler systems installed for the irrigation of lawns, plants and flowers shall be so designed and installed that the water is not sprayed or permitted to spray over or upon a sidewalk, alley or street. Portable sprinklers will not be permitted on the sidewalk, nor may they be placed in such a manner as to spray water upon sidewalks, alleys or streets, so as to prevent pedestrians or vehicles from using the public ways at all times without being struck or wet by the spray from the sprinklers. (Ord. 05-01 §2).

 

4.00.140 Interference or bypass of system.
        It is unlawful for any person to interfere with the city service lines, valves or meters or to construct a bypass around a meter or service. (Ord. 05-01 §2).

 

4.00.150 Installation and maintenance of services.
        A.    An application for the installation, relocation and/or change in size of service shall be submitted and the appropriate fees paid prior to any work being done.

        B.     Where a city-owned main or lateral is in service, new services, relocations and/or changes in size for any service, the property owner/developer shall have any work done by a licensed plumbing contractor. The city may install, relocate or change in size any service up to two inches if staff is available and upon deposit of an amount equal to the estimated cost of the work; i.e., labor, equipment, materials, including meter, if required, and overhead. If the actual cost is greater than the estimate, the developer will be billed the difference; if the cost is less, the excess will be refunded.

        C.     All meters and meter boxes shall be approved by the city prior to installation. At the developer’s request and upon receipt of payment, the city may supply any meter, including box, up to two inches in size. Any meters larger than two inches must be supplied by the developer including the meter box. The city will maintain all meters. The city may charge a maintenance fee for the maintenance of the meters. Said maintenance fee shall be set by resolution of the city council.

        D.    The city will maintain services from the water main to the water meter or meter idler, whichever occurs first, within the city right-of-way or public utility easement. Any service, irrespective of any other portion of this code, that is not located within the city right-of-way or public utility easement shall be maintained by the consumer. (Ord. 2016-01 §1).

 

4.00.160 When city will furnish water.
        When mains and laterals are in place or within a reasonable distance from a particular parcel, the city will furnish water service from such line to the back of the sidewalk if a sidewalk is in place or to the property line. (Ord. 2016-01 §1).

 

4.00.170 Multiple consumer developments.
        If more than one consumer is served from one service connection, the owner of the property or his or her agent shall be required to sign for and guarantee the payment of such service connection, and the owner shall be liable for all water served through such connection, except that a project, association, corporation, or other governing body shall be responsible for the payment of water charges to the city. (Ord. 2016-01 §1).

 

4.00.180 Easements when lines are on private property.
        When a line is to be constructed across private property to serve more than one parcel of land, a utility easement shall be granted to the city, and the easement line, size, and installation shall be approved by the city engineer and public works director. (Ord. 2016-01 §1).

 

4.00.190 Maintenance of lines.
        The city will maintain all mains and appurtenances within city rights-of-way on city property or easements including curb valves and meters. The property owner shall maintain all service connection lines and appurtenances to or on his or her property up to the meter or curb valve. (Ord. 2016-01 §1).

 

4.00.200 Damage to water system facilities.
        The customer shall be liable for any damage to the city-owned water service facilities when such damage is from causes originating on the premises by an act of the customer or his or her tenants, agents, employees, contractors, licensees or permittees, including the breaking or destruction of locks by the customer or others on or near a meter, and any damage to a meter that may result from hot water or steam from a boiler or heater on the customer’s premises. The city shall be reimbursed by the customer for all charges related to any such damage. (Ord. 2016-01 §1).

 

4.00.205 Damage to city water distribution system.
        Any person or entity damaging or removing any portion of the city water distribution system shall pay the city’s costs of investigating and repairing such damage and/or replacing any removed item(s), and shall indemnify and hold harmless city, its officers and employees from any claims, actions, costs (including attorney fees), damages or other liability resulting or arising from such damage or removal. (Ord. 2016-01 §1).

 

4.00.210 Prohibited acts.
        A.    No person shall make, or cause to be made, a connection with, or tamper or interfere with in any manner, the city water system, without first obtaining a permit from the city.

        B.     No person shall turn on or off, otherwise interfere with, or cause to be turned on or off or otherwise interfered with, any part or portion of the city water system, without first obtaining a permit from the city.

        C.     No person shall install or connect with the water system any evaporative type air-conditioning cooler or unit unless it is equipped with a recirculation pump and equipped with a thermostat or pressure control valve properly adjusted to regulate the flow of cooling water through the units so that the minimum amount of cooling water, as determined by the manufacturer’s specifications, shall be used.

        D.    No person shall connect to the water system any refrigerating or air-conditioning equipment unless such equipment is air-cooled or has a water tower or evaporation condenser so that only makeup water is used.

        E.     No person shall waste water.

        F.     No person shall install or maintain any pipe, faucet, hose bib, fixture, or appliance connected to the water system in such condition or state of disrepair that water may be or is lost or wasted.

        G.    No person shall supply city water to anyone without city authorization, and no person shall use city water without authorization or without paying the required fees. The city shall have the right, upon five days’ written notice to cease, to disconnect the water service for the person supplying the water.

        H.    No person shall construct a bypass around any meter or service without the prior consent of the city.

        I.      No person shall use water for any purpose by the method of “return wells” wherein water is discharged into a well so that such water is injected into a water-bearing strata below a depth of fifty feet below the surface of the ground.

        J.      No person shall steal, take, carry away, transport, lead, drive away, or cause the same to be done, water from the city water system.

        K.    No person shall fraudulently appropriate, or cause to be fraudulently appropriated, or by any false or fraudulent representation or pretense appropriate water from the city water system.

        L.     No person shall make unauthorized repairs to the city water system.

        M.    No person or water user shall turn on or reconnect a water meter or water connection turned off or disconnected by the city.

        N.    No water user using water supplied by the city shall supply any other person with such water or allow any other person the use of such water from the water user’s water connection, or permit a further connection to be made to the water user’s connection on his or her or any other premises, unless authorized by the public works director.

        O.    No person shall appropriate water for use in the commission of a crime.

        P.     All persons shall abide by the restrictions contained in WMC. (Ord. 2016-01 §1).

 

4.00.220 Utility consumer’s third party notification.
        The city shall make available to its residential utility consumers who are sixty-five years of age or older, or who are dependent adults as defined in Section 15610.23 of the Welfare and Institutions Code, a third party notification service, whereby the city will attempt to notify a person designated by the consumer to receive notification when the consumer’s account is past due and subject to termination. The notification shall include information on what is required to prevent termination of service. The residential consumer shall make a request for third party notification on a form provided by the city, and shall include the written consent of the designated third party. The third party notification does not obligate the third party to pay the overdue charges nor shall it prevent or delay termination of service. (Ord. 05-01 §2).

 

4.00.230 Use of fire hydrants regulated.
        When it is necessary to use water temporarily in connection with any type of construction or other operation at a place where the water supply is inadequate for such purposes, application may be made to the director for a permit to use water from a fire hydrant. No person shall use water from, or connect any apparatus to, a fire hydrant without first obtaining a permit.

        Each permit shall specify the terms and conditions of use and the fire hydrant or hydrants authorized to be used. No person shall attach to the operating stem or cap of a fire hydrant any wrench or tool that is not approved by the public works department for use on fire hydrants. In addition to any other remedy available to the city, any wrench, connecting apparatus, valve, hose, or other item attached to a fire hydrant in violation of this section shall be subject to removal and confiscation by the city. (Ord. 05-01 §2).

 

4.00.235 Tampering with fire hydrants.
        It is unlawful for any person to operate, alter, change, remove, disconnect, connect with, or interfere in any manner with any fire hydrant owned or used by the city without first obtaining written permission from the public works director. (Ord. 2016-01 §1).

 

4.00.240 Water charges for use of fire hydrants.
        Water used from a fire hydrant shall be metered when practicable, as determined by the director, with the meter to be provided by the city. Unmetered water shall be charged at the metered rate, based upon city estimates of the quantity of water use, and such estimates shall be conclusive. The charges shall be in accordance with a schedule approved by the council from time to time by resolution. (Ord. 05-01 §2).

 

4.00.250 Unusual or uncommon quantities of water.
        When an abnormally large, unusual, or uncommon quantity of water is desired for filling a swimming pool or for any other purposes, an application on a city form must be filed and approved by the city prior to taking such water. The granting of permission to take water in unusual quantities will be given only if it can be safely delivered through the city’s facilities and if other consumers are not inconvenienced or impacted thereby and the appropriate charges are paid. (Ord. 2016-01 §1).

 

4.00.255 Water service for community gardens.
        The director may authorize lots or parcels utilized for a community garden, to use the existing water service connection of an adjoining lot or parcel to provide irrigation for the community garden if the owner of the adjoining lot or parcel consents to such use, provided that:

        A.    A backflow prevention device is installed and periodically tested in accordance with such requirements as may be specified by the director to protect the potable water supply of the city and of the adjoining lot or parcel served by the existing water service connection; and

        B.     A water meter is installed on the existing water service connection. The owner of the adjoining lot or parcel served by the existing water service connection shall notify the director prior to the initiation of any such use, and shall be liable for all rates, charges, and fees for the water service furnished to the existing water service connection used to provide irrigation for the community garden. (Ord. 2016-01 §1).

 

4.00.260 Responsibility for equipment.
        The customer shall, at his or her own risk and expense, furnish, install and keep in good and safe condition all equipment that may be required for receiving, controlling, applying and utilizing water, and the city shall not be responsible for any loss or damage caused by the improper installation of such equipment, or the negligence or wrongful act of the customer or of any of his or her tenants, agents, employees, contractors, licensees or permit holders in installing, maintaining, or operating or interfering with such equipment. The city shall not be responsible for damage to property caused by faucets, valves, and other equipment that are open when water is turned on either originally or when turned on after a temporary shutdown. When leaky faucets or fixtures are discovered and not immediately repaired, the water service may be disconnected. (Ord. 2016-01 §1).

 

4.00.265 Inspections.
        No person shall interfere with the inspection by city employees of any water fixture or water-using or water-distributing device connected directly or indirectly to the city water distribution system, for the purpose of determining whether there is a violation of any provision of this chapter. City employees shall obtain the consent of an adult occupant before entering occupied premises or dwellings. If consent is not obtained, the city may seek authorization for access from any court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 2016-01 §1).

 

4.00.270 No city responsibility beyond point of service—Indemnity.
        The city’s responsibility to operate, maintain and repair public water mains shall extend only to the point of service. The operation, maintenance and repair of any private water line connected to the point of service shall be the customer’s sole responsibility. The customer shall indemnify and hold harmless city, its officers and employees from any claims, actions, costs (including attorney fees), damages or other liability resulting or arising from the condition, operation, maintenance or repair of said private water line. (Ord. 2016-01 §1).

 

4.00.275 Fire and other emergencies.
        Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to apply to the use of city water for purposes of extinguishing fire or any other similar emergency. (Ord. 2016-01 §1).

 

4.00.280 City water use.
        The city of Waterford, and its officers, employees, and agents when acting in the course and scope of their employment, shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter; provided, however, that the city manager shall promulgate administrative regulations governing water use by the city, and its officers, employees, and agents, as may be necessary for the city to achieve the conservation of water resources equal to or greater than the level of conservation achieved by the city’s water service customers. (Ord. 2016-01 §1).

 

4.00.290 Water wells.
        No water well shall be drilled or reconstructed within the city without the consent of the city. When city water is available and a request to connect to the city system has been approved, or a request to reconstruct a well has been made, the existing non-city-owned well on the property shall be capped and plugged in accordance with state regulations, unless otherwise authorized by the city. (Ord. 2016-01 §1).

 

4.00.300 Existing water wells.
        The use and maintenance of existing water wells within the city water system service area shall be allowed. (Ord. 2016-01 §1).

 

4.00.310 Water well, use of—When permitted.
        The use of water wells within the limits of the city for potable purposes shall be permitted only when a public water system is not available to the premises on which water is required. A public water system shall, for the purposes of this chapter, be considered available when a water distribution main which can be tapped is located within two hundred feet radius of any part of said premises on which water is required. (Ord. 2016-01 §1).

 

4.00.320 Limitations upon well drilling permits.
        Permits for water wells issued after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be subject to the following limitations:

        A.    Wells shall not be drilled nor the water produced therefrom used for residential, commercial or industrial land use activities except that replacement well(s) for residential, commercial and/or industrial land uses may be established for well(s) which existed and were in active use prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter; provided, that no net increase in water production results from the replacement well(s).

        B.     All property owners with approved well permits pursuant to this chapter shall meter the well’s water production and report the amount of groundwater extracted each calendar year. This report shall be submitted to the city no later than March 1st on a form approved by the city. The property owner shall maintain the water production meter in sound operating condition at all times.

        C.     All property owners with wells approved pursuant to this chapter shall meter the well’s water level on a monthly basis and submit such water level data to the city on a form approved by the city. This report shall be submitted annually to the city prior to March 1st of each year. The property owner shall maintain the meter to measure the water level in sound operating condition at all times.

        D.    As a condition of all approved well permits pursuant to this chapter, the permittee shall assume all liability imposed by law for personal injury or property damage resulting from any work performed by the permittee or his or her agent under a permit, or resulting from the failure of the permittee to perform his or her obligation under a permit. If any claim of such liability is made against the city, its officers, employees, or agents, the permittee shall defend, indemnify and hold them, and each of them, harmless from such claims. (Ord. 2016-01 §1).

 

4.00.330 Notice and order to discontinue use or decommission.
        Whenever a water well is determined by the city to have an unsafe water sample, pose a significant health or safety hazard, or pose a risk of groundwater contamination, the city may issue a stop use order, order the water well repaired, require the water to be treated to reduce health or safety risks, or order the water well to be decommissioned. Such notice shall be served by certified or registered mail, or in person, to the last known owner of the property. If the city orders the water well to be decommissioned, such decommissioning must be completed within ninety days. Upon failure of the owner to comply with such order, the city may cause such water well to be repaired, treated, or decommissioned at the cost and expense of the owner of the property upon which such water well is located. (Ord. 2016-01 §1).

Chapter 4.01 REGULATIONS FOR THE CONTROL OF BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES AND CROSS-CONNECTIONS
4.01.010 Authority.
        Under the terms of the city’s water supply permit issued by the California Department of Public Health, the city is required to comply with Title 17 of the California Code of Regulations (“CCR Title 17”) and California Health and Safety Code Section 4017 regarding cross-connection control. The state regulations imposed by the Department of Public Health are necessary to ensure that the city’s water supply is protected from harmful contaminants and pollutants resulting from backflow. (Ord. 2015-04 §2).

 

4.01.020 Findings and purpose.
        The purposes of this chapter are:

        A.    To protect the city’s municipal water system from contaminants or pollutants by isolating sources of contaminants or pollutants within a customer’s internal water distribution system which could backflow or back-siphon into the city’s water system.

        B.     To eliminate and control cross-connections that exist between a customer’s potable water system and non-potable water systems.

        C.     To evaluate and reduce the following potential hazards to the city’s potable water supply:

        1.     Health hazard: any actual or potential threat of contamination of a physical or toxic nature to the city’s water system or the consumer’s potable water system that would create or, in the judgment of the director, may create a danger to health;

        2.     Plumbing hazard: any internal or plumbing type of cross-connection in a customer’s potable water system that may be either a pollutant or contamination-type hazard. The term “plumbing hazard” includes, but is not limited to, cross-connections to toilets, sinks, lavatories, wash trays, washing machines or lawn sprinkling systems. Plumbing-type cross-connections may be located in many types of structures, including homes, apartment houses, hotels and commercial and industrial establishments. An appropriate type of cross-connection control assembly, if permitted, must properly protect such a connection;

        3.     Pollution hazard: any actual or potential threat to the physical properties of the water system or to the potability of the city’s or the consumer’s potable water system, but which would not constitute a health or system hazard, as defined;

        4.     System hazard: any actual or potential threat of severe damage to the physical properties of the city’s water system or the consumer’s potable water system or of a pollutant or contaminant that may have a protractive effect on the quality of the potable water in the system;

        5.     Industrial fluids system hazard: any fluid or solution that may be chemically, biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration such as to constitute a health, water system, pollution or plumbing hazard if introduced into an approved water supply. This type of contamination includes but is not limited to polluted waters; all types of process waters and used waters; chemicals in fluid form; plating acids and alkalies; circulated cooling tower waters (open or closed) that may be chemically or biologically treated or stabilized with toxic substances; contaminated natural waters, such as from wells, springs, streams, rivers, harbors or irrigation canals; oils; gases; glycerin; caustic and acidic solutions; and all other solutions which may be used for industrial or fire-fighting purposes.

        D.    The city council finds that adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter is necessary to ensure renewal of the city’s water supply permit and to protect the public health, safety and general welfare. (Ord. 2015-04 §2).

 

4.01.030 Definitions.
        In this chapter, unless the context requires otherwise:

        “Air gap separation (AG)” means the physical separation between the free-flowing discharge end of a potable water supply pipeline and an open or nonpressurized receiving vessel. An approved air gap separation shall be at least double the inside diameter of the supply pipe measured vertically above the top rim of the vessel, but shall in no case be less than one inch.

        “Approved backflow prevention assembly” means an assembly approved by the director of public works that has been manufactured in full conformance with the standards established by the American Water Works Association (AWWA) entitled “AWWA C506-69 Standards for Reduced Pressure Principle and Double Check Valve Backflow Assemblies,” and that has completely met the laboratory and field performance specifications of the Foundation of Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research (FCCCHR) of the University of Southern California, established in the “Specifications of Backflow Prevention Assemblies.”

        “Approved potable water supply” means water from any source that has been investigated by the health agency and approved for human consumption.

        “Approved testing laboratory” means the FCCCHR of the University of Southern California; or the director approves another independent laboratory having equivalent facilities for both laboratory and field evaluation of backflow prevention assemblies.

        “Approved water supply” means the source, well or plant whose potability is regulated and monitored by the health agency. This supply includes all sources, wells, pumps, tanks, equipment and appurtenances used to produce, treat or store water for public consumption or use.

        “Auxiliary water supply” means any water supply on or available to the premises other than the city’s water supply. Auxiliary waters may include water from another purveyor’s potable water system or any natural source(s), e.g., a well, spring, river, harbor, irrigation canal, pipeline; used water; or industrial fluids. These waters may be contaminated, polluted, and objectionable or constitute an unacceptable water source over which the city does not have sanitary control.

        “AWWA” means the American Water Works Association.

        “Backflow” means the undesirable reversal of the flow of water, liquids, gases, mixtures or other substances into or towards the city’s water system from any source other than the city’s water system.

        “Backflow prevention assembly” means an assembly or means used to prevent backflow or back-siphonage into a potable water system.

        “Backpressure” means a form of backflow that occurs when any elevation of pressure in the downstream piping system (by pump, elevation of piping, steam and/or air pressure) above the supply pressure at the point of consideration would cause or tend to cause a reversal of the normal flow.

        “Back-siphonage” means the form of backflow due to a reduction in system pressure that causes a negative or sub atmospheric pressure to exist at a site in the water system.

        “CCR Title 17” means the California Code of Regulations, Administrative Code, Title 17, Public Health, which requires the establishment of a cross-connection control and backflow prevention program.

        “City” means the city of Waterford.

        “City’s water system” means the city-owned water mains operated as a public utility to furnish water for domestic purposes. The system includes all facilities and appurtenances between the approved water supply and the point of service such as valves, pumps, pipes, conduits, tanks, receptacles, fixtures, equipment and appurtenances used to convey water for public consumption or use.

        “Contaminant” or “contamination” means an impairment or degradation of the quality of water by the introduction of sewage, industrial fluid, used water, foreign material or auxiliary water from an unapproved source to a degree that creates an actual hazard to the public health through poisoning, the spread of disease or which may impair the usefulness or quality of the water.

        “Control by containment cross-connection” means the installation of an approved backflow prevention assembly at the water service connection to any customer’s premises, where it is physically and economically impracticable to find and permanently eliminate or control all actual or potential cross-connections within the customer’s water system. It shall also mean the installation of an approved backflow prevention assembly on the service line leading to and supplying a portion of a customer’s water system where there are actual or potential cross-connections that cannot be effectively eliminated or controlled at the point of the cross-connection.

        “Controlled cross-connection” means a connection between a potable water system and a nonpotable water system with an approved backflow prevention assembly properly installed and maintained so that it will continuously afford the protection commensurate with the degree of hazard.

        “Cross-connection” means any unprotected actual or potential connection or structural arrangement between the city’s or a consumer’s potable water system and any other source, supply or system through which it is possible to introduce into any part of the public potable system any used water, industrial fluid(s), gases, liquids, materials or substances other than the intended potable water. A bypass arrangement, jumper connection, removable section, swivel or change-over assembly and any other temporary or permanent assembly through which, or because of which, backflow can or may occur shall be considered a cross-connection.

        “Customer,” “consumer” or “user” means the owner or operator of a private water system served by the city’s water system.

        “Customer’s potable water system” means that portion of the privately owned potable water system lying between the point of service and the point of use, including all pipes, conduits, tanks, receptacles, fixtures, equipment and appurtenances used to produce, convey, store or use potable water.

        “Customer’s water system” means any water system located on the consumer’s premises, whether supplied by the city’s water system or an auxiliary water supply. The customer’s water system may be either a potable water system or an industrial piping system.

        “Degree of hazard” means the hazard derived from an evaluation of the conditions within a system that may be classified as either a pollution (nonhealth) or contamination (health) hazard.

        “Designate” means a public works employee with a current certificate in cross-connection control and who meets all of the requirements set forth in CCR Title 17.

        “Director” means the director of the public works department and the city engineer.

        “Double check—detector check (DCDC) valve assembly” means a specifically designed assembly composed of two independently operating, approved check valves installed as a unit between two tightly closing, resilient-seated shut-off valves and fittings with properly located test cocks for testing each check valve, along with a specific bypass water meter in series with a double check valve (DCV). The meter shall register accurately for only very low rates of flow in cubic feet and shall show a registration for all rates of flow.

        “Double check valve (DCV) assembly” means an assembly composed of two independently operating, approved check valves, including tightly closing shut-off valves attached on each end of the assembly and fitted with properly located test cocks for testing that each check valve is watertight. DCV assemblies shall be installed to protect against a nonhealth hazard (e.g., a pollutant).

        “Fire marshal” means that member of the fire department designated by the fire chief under Section 2.104 of the most recent edition of the Uniform Fire Code.

        “Foundation” means the Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research (FCCCHR).

        “Hazardous substances” means any hazardous waste or hazardous substance as defined in any federal or state law or local ordinance, rule or regulation including, without limitation, the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act of 1980 (Title 42 United States Code Section 9601, et seq.); the Carpenter-Presley-Tanner Hazardous Substance Account Act (California Health and Safety Code Section 25300, et seq.); and the Hazardous Waste Control Law (California Health and Safety Code Section 25100, et seq.). Hazardous substances shall also include asbestos or asbestos-containing materials, radon gas, and petroleum or petroleum fractions, whether or not defined as a hazardous substance in any such statute, ordinance, rule or regulation.

        “Health agency” means either the state of California Department of Health Services or the Stanislaus County department of public health services.

        “Hospital” means any institution, place, building or agency that maintains and operates facilities for one or more persons for the diagnosis, care and treatment of human illness, including convalescence and care during and after pregnancy or which maintains and operates organized facilities for any such purposes, and to which persons may be admitted for overnight stay or longer.

        “Industrial fluids” means any fluid or solution that may be chemically, biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration such as to constitute a health, water system, pollution or plumbing hazard if introduced into an approved water supply. Industrial fluids include, but are not limited to, polluted or contaminated waters; all types of process waters and used waters; chemicals in fluid form; plating acids and alkalis; circulating cooling tower waters (open or closed) that may be chemically or biologically treated or stabilized with toxic substances; contaminated natural waters, such as from wells, springs, streams, rivers, harbors or irrigation canals; oils; gases; glycerin; caustic and acid solutions; and all other liquids and gaseous fluids and solutions that are intended for industrial or fire-fighting purposes.

        “Objectionable substance” means a substance introduced into the city’s water supply that may not necessarily pose a threat to public health, but adversely affects the taste, appearance or other aesthetic qualities of the potable water supply.

        “Point of service” means the terminal end of the city’s water system where the city loses jurisdiction and sanitary control over the water at its point of delivery to the consumer’s water system. In general, the point of service is the downstream side of the service connection or the municipal shut-off valve.

        “Pollutant” or “pollution” means any foreign substance (organic, inorganic or biological) present in water that tends to degrade its quality so as to constitute a nonhealth hazard or may impair the usefulness or quality of the water to a degree that does not create an actual hazard to the public health but which adversely and unreasonably affects such waters for domestic use.

        “Premises” means any and all areas on a customer’s property which are served or have the potential to be served by the city’s water system.

        “Public works” means the department in charge of the city’s municipal potable water operations.

        “Reduced pressure principle (RPP) assembly” means an assembly containing two independently operating approved check valves together with a hydraulically operating, mechanically independent pressure differential relief valve located between the check valves and at the same time below the first check valve. The unit shall include properly located test cocks and tightly closing, resilient-seated shut-off valves at each end of the assembly. The assembly shall operate to maintain the pressure in the zone between the two check valves at a level less than the pressure on the public water supply side of the assembly. At cessation of normal flow, the pressure between the two check valves shall be less than the pressure on the public water supply side of the assembly. In case of leakage of either of the check valves, the differential relief valve shall operate to maintain this reduced pressure by discharging to the atmosphere.

        “Service connection” means the city’s water pipe and appurtenances from the city’s water main to the service connection; in particular, the point where the water purveyor loses jurisdiction and sanitary control over the water and its point of delivery to the customer’s water system. If a meter is installed at the end of the service connection, then “service connection” shall mean the downstream end of the meter. There shall be no unprotected take-offs from the service line ahead of any meter or backflow prevention assembly located at the point of delivery to the customer’s water system. The term “service connection” shall also include a water service connection from a fire hydrant and all other temporary or emergency water service connections from the city’s potable water system.

        “Unapproved water supply” means any water that has not been approved for human consumption by a health agency.

        “Used water” means any water that has been supplied by the city from the public potable water system to a customer’s water system, but which has passed through the point of delivery and is no longer under the sanitary control of the water purveyor.

        “Water purveyor” means the city of Waterford. (Ord. 2015-04 §2).

 

4.01.040 Determination of need for backflow prevention.
        A.    The director shall be responsible for protecting the city’s water system from contamination or pollution due to backflow or back-siphonage of contaminates or pollutants through the water service connection. If, in the sole judgment of the director, an approved backflow prevention assembly is required at the point where the city’s water service connects to a customer’s premises for the health and safety of the water system, the director or the director’s agent shall give notice to the customer directing the customer to install an approved backflow prevention assembly at each service connection. Such notice shall be in writing and shall specify a reasonable time frame, as deemed appropriate by the director, for compliance. The city shall not be responsible for the abatement of cross-connections which may exist within a user’s premises.

        B.     The customer shall install an approved backflow prevention assembly at the customer’s own expense within the time frame specified in the written notice. The customer’s failure, refusal or inability to install such assembly shall constitute grounds for the city to discontinue water service to the premises until the appropriate assembly has been properly installed, as required by this chapter. Prior to discontinuing water service, the city shall follow the procedures set forth in Section 4.01.160 and any other applicable law. (Ord. 2015-04 §2).

 

4.01.050 Water system.
        A.    The city’s water system includes all of the source and distribution facilities which are under the complete control of the city from the source of the water supply up to the point where the customer’s water system begins. The city’s water system ends at the point where the customer’s water system begins. A source includes all components of the facilities utilized in the production, treatment, storage and delivery of water to the distribution system. The distribution system includes the network of conduits used for the delivery of water from the source to the customer’s system.

        B.     The customer’s water system includes those parts of the facilities beyond the point where the city’s water system ends that are utilized in conveying city-delivered potable water to a point of use. (Ord. 2015-04 §2).

 

4.01.060 Backflow prevention assembly requirement.
        A.    No water service connection to any premises shall be installed or maintained by the city’s public works department unless the water supply is protected as required by state law and this chapter. Service of water to any premises shall be discontinued by the director if:

        1.     A backflow prevention assembly required by state law or this chapter is not installed, tested or maintained;

        2.     It is found that a backflow prevention assembly has been removed or bypassed; or

        3.     An unprotected cross-connection exists on the premises.

        Service shall not be restored until the customer is in full compliance with this chapter.

        B.     The customer’s premises and water system shall be open for survey and inspection at all reasonable times to an authorized representative of the following city departments: public works, building and planning, code enforcement and the city manager’s office, to determine whether cross-connections or violations of this chapter exist. When such a violation or condition becomes known, the director shall deny or immediately discontinue service to the customer’s premises by providing a physical break in the service line until the customer has corrected condition(s) in conformance with state and city regulations adopted pursuant thereto.

        C.     An approved backflow prevention assembly shall be installed and maintained on each service line to a customer’s water system at or near the property line or immediately outside the building being served, and shall be installed before the first branch line leading off of the service line. (Ord. 2015-04 §2).

 

4.01.070 Type of backflow prevention assembly required.
        A.    The type of backflow prevention that shall be required to prevent backflow into the city’s water system shall be commensurate with the degree of hazard that exists on the consumer’s premises. The type of approved backflow prevention assembly that may be required (listed in increasing levels of protection) includes: an approved double check valve (DCV) assembly, an approved double check—detector check (DCDC) valve assembly, an approved reduced pressure principle (RPP) assembly, or an approved air gap separation (AG).

        B.     The customer may install a higher level of backflow protection than is required by this chapter. Uses not covered by this chapter shall be evaluated on a case-by-case basis and the director shall have sole discretion to determine which type of backflow prevention assembly shall be required.

        C.     Where a premises has an auxiliary water supply that is not otherwise subject to the provisions of this chapter, the city’s water system shall be protected against backflow by an approved air gap (AG) separation or by installation and maintenance of an approved reduced pressure principle (RPP) backflow prevention assembly.

        D.    Where a premises has any water or substance(s) that would be considered objectionable, but not hazardous, to public health if introduced into the water system, the city’s water system shall be protected by installation and maintenance of an approved double check valve (DCV) assembly.

        E.     Where a premises has any material dangerous to health that is handled in such a fashion as to create an actual or potential hazard to the city’s water system (e.g., sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations, plating plants, chemical plants, hospitals, and mortuaries), the city’s water system shall be protected by an approved air gap (AG) separation or by installation and maintenance of an approved reduced pressure principle (RPP) backflow prevention assembly.

        F.     In the case of any premises where there is an uncontrolled cross-connection, either actual or potential, the city’s water system shall be protected by an approved air gap (AG) separation or by installation and maintenance of an approved reduced pressure principle (RPP) backflow prevention assembly at the service connection.

        G.    In the case of a premises with security requirements or other restrictions that make it impossible or impracticable to conduct a complete on-site cross-connection survey, the city’s water system shall be protected against backflow by the installation and maintenance of either an air gap (AG) separation or reduced pressure principle (RPP) backflow prevention assembly at each service connection to the premises.

        H.    Where a premises has any internal cross-connection that cannot be permanently corrected and controlled, intricate plumbing and piping arrangements, or where all portions of the premises are not readily accessible for inspection purposes, and it is impracticable or impossible to ascertain whether or not a dangerous cross-connection exists, the city’s water system shall be protected against backflow by the installation and maintenance of an approved air gap (AG) separation or reduced pressure principle (RPP) backflow prevention assembly at each service connection to the premises. (Ord. 2015-04 §2).

 

4.01.080 Backflow prevention assembly required for specific uses.
        The following facilities and uses shall be required to install and maintain the minimum approved backflow prevention assembly type indicated below in parentheses:

        1.     Aircraft, automotive, rail transit or missile plant (RPP);

        2.     Animal clinic, animal grooming shop and animal boarding facility (RPP);

        3.     Apartment or office complex with a pond, lake or fountain (RPP);

        4.     Automobile repair shop with steam cleaner, acid cleaning or solvent equipment (RPP);

        5.     Auxiliary water system with no known cross-connection (RPP);

        6.     Auxiliary water system or a source with a known cross-connection (e.g., a well, river, harbor, irrigation canal) (RPP);

        7.     Autopsy facility (RPP);

        8.     Bottling plant (beverage or chemical) (RPP);

        9.     Brewery (RPP);

        10.   Buildings.

        a.     Hotel, apartment house, public and private building or other structure, where a sewage pump has been installed (RPP),

        b.     Any nonresidential structure in which the specific business activity cannot be ascertained by the director or designee (RPP),

        c.     A multi-storied (three stories and higher) building that uses booster pumps or elevated storage tanks to distribute potable water within the premises (RPP),

        d.     Any building that exceeds forty feet in height as measured from the service connection to the highest water outlet (RPP);

        11.   Cannery, packing house or reduction plant (RPP);

        12.   Chemical Facility. Any premises served from the city’s water system where there is a facility requiring the use of water in the industrial process of manufacturing, sorting, compounding or processing chemicals. This use includes facilities where chemicals are used as additives to the water supply or in the processing of products (RPP);

        13.   Chemically Contaminated Water System. Any premises served from the city’s water system, where chemicals are used as additives to the water supply, where the water supply is used for the transmission or distribution of chemicals, or where chemicals are used with water in the compounding or processing of products (RPP);

        14.   Church, with or without baptismal font (RPP);

        15.   Clinic. Dialysis or medical (RPP);

        16.   Cold storage plant (RPP);

        17.   Commercial meat cutting, packaging or rendering plant (RPP);

        18.   Concrete plant (RPP);

        19.   Convalescent home, nursing home, residential care, hospice and sanitarium (RPP);

        20.   Dairy and dairy processing facility (RPP);

        21.   Dental office (RPP);

        22.   Dock and portside facility, including pier hydrants, fisheries, fish hatcheries, and fish/shellfish processing facilities (RPP);

        23.   Dry cleaner and dye works (RPP);

        24.   Film processing or manufacturing facility (RPP);

        25.   Food processing facility using nontoxic materials (RPP);

        26.   Food processing facility using toxic materials (RPP);

        27.   Hospital (RPP);

        28.   Ice manufacturing plant (RPP);

        29.   Irrigation System.

        a.     Premises where facilities have been installed for pumping, injecting, or spreading fertilizers, pesticides or other hazardous substances (RPP),

        b.     Premises having a separate service connection for irrigation purposes (RPP);

        30.   Laboratory, including, but not limited to, teaching institution, experimental, diagnostic, biological or analytical (RPP);

        31.   Landscaping with elevated areas or drip irrigation except for landscaping of a single-family dwelling (RPP);

        32.   Laundry, commercial (Standard Industrial Code Classification 7218) (RPP);

        33.   Machine shop (RPP);

        34.   Marina and boat repair (RPP);

        35.   Medical office (RPP);

        36.   Metal manufacturing, processing, stripping and fabrication facility (RPP);

        37.   Mobile home park or recreational vehicle camp (RPP);

        38.   Mortuary and morgue (RPP);

        39.   Multiple services, including two or more interconnected services provided by one or more water purveyors to a single consumer complex. Minimum backflow protection required at each service connection (RPP);

        40.   Office or shopping center with lease space (RPP);

        41.   Painting shop using water in any process (RPP);

        42.   Paper processing and production facility (RPP);

        43.   Pest control business (AG, RPP);

        44.   Petroleum and gas bulk production, transmission, and storage facility (RPP);

        45.   Plastic and fiberglass manufacturing, extruding and injection molding facility (RPP);

        46.   Plating works (RPP);

        47.   Portable spray or cleaning tank that may be connected to the city’s water system (AG, RPP);

        48.   Radioactive Materials or Substances. Plant or facility that processes, handles or stores radioactive material or substance (RPP);

        49.   Radiator Shop. Repair or back flushing (RPP);

        50.   Reclaimed Water Distribution Systems.

        a.     Any premises where the city’s water system is used to supplement the reclaimed water system (AG),

        b.     Any premises where reclaimed water is used and there is no interconnection with the potable water system (RPP);

        51.   Restaurant or building with commercial kitchen (RPP);

        52.   Restricted, classified or other closed facility (RPP);

        53.   Rubber Manufacturing Plant. Natural or synthetic (RPP);

        54.   Sand or gravel plant (RPP);

        55.   School, college, and university with kitchen, chemistry lab, boiler, and/or irrigation system (RPP);

        56.   Sewage and storm water pumping facility (AG);

        57.   Solar Heating Systems.

        a.     Solar collector system which contains any hazardous substance and where there is a direct make-up connection to the city’s water system (RPP),

        b.     Protection of the city’s water system is not required for “once through” solar heating systems including but not limited to domestic hot water systems;

        58.   Tank truck filling from fire hydrant (AG, RPP);

        59.   Vehicle washing facility (RPP);

        60.   Veterinary clinic and animal shelter (RPP).

        The category of uses and facilities designated above are adopted from a model ordinance. Nothing in this section authorizes a use or facility in the city which is otherwise prohibited in the Waterford Municipal Code. (Ord. 2015-04 §2).

 

4.01.090 Backflow prevention assemblies required for fire protection systems.
        The following subsections describe six classes of fire protection systems and specify the minimal backflow prevention assembly required for connection of the fire protection systems to the city’s water system. The director may require an additional backflow prevention assembly to prevent contamination of the city’s water system.

        A.    A Class I system is directly connected only to the city’s public water mains. All sprinkler drains discharge to the atmosphere, dry wells or other safe outlets. A Class I system has no physical connection to other water supplies and contains no antifreeze or other additives. No backflow prevention assembly shall be required for connection of a Class I system to the city’s water system unless special conditions exist as determined by the director and the fire marshal.

        B.     A Class II system is the same as a Class I system, except that a booster pump may be installed in the service line from the street main. No backflow prevention assembly shall be required for connection of a Class II system to the city’s water system unless special conditions exist as determined by the director and the fire marshal.

        C.     A Class III system is directly connected to the city’s main water supply and includes one or more of the following features: (1) an elevated storage tank; (2) a fire pump taking suction from an aboveground reservoir or tank; and (3) a pressure tank. All storage facilities may only be filled by or connected to the city’s water supply and water in the facilities must be maintained in a potable condition. An approved DCDC backflow prevention assembly shall be required for connection of a Class III system to the city’s water system between the post-indicator valve and the on-site fire system. The DCDC shall be installed aboveground to allow a minimum of eighteen inches of clearance around the valve.

        D.    A Class IV system is directly supplied from the city’s main water supply in the same manner as a Class I or Class II system. In addition, a Class IV system includes an unapproved auxiliary water supply on or available to the premises, or an auxiliary supply located within one thousand five hundred feet of a pumper connection. An RPP backflow prevention assembly shall be installed for connection of a Class IV system to the city’s water system. The RPP shall be installed aboveground as closely as possible to the city’s water system.

        E.     A Class V system is directly supplied from the city’s main water system and is interconnected with an unapproved auxiliary water supply from a harbor, river, pond, well or other water supply where industrial fluids, additives, antifreeze and other contaminants or pollutants may be used. An RPP backflow prevention assembly shall be required for connection of a Class V system to the city’s water system. The RPP shall be installed aboveground as closely as possible to the city’s water system.

        F.     A Class VI system contains combined industrial and fire protection systems supplied from the city’s water mains, with or without gravity storage or pump suction tanks. The public works director and fire marshal shall determine the appropriate backflow prevention assembly required for connection of a Class VI system to the city’s water system after they have made a complete survey of the premises for fire protection requirements. (Ord. 2015-04 §2).

 

4.01.100 Application to install a backflow prevention assembly.
        Prior to the installation of any backflow prevention assembly between the city’s water system and the owner’s facility, the owner shall apply for and receive the necessary plumbing and encroachment permits from the building and planning department. (Ord. 2015-04 §2).

 

4.01.110 Installation of an approved backflow prevention assembly.
        The installation of all backflow and cross-connection prevention devices shall be in accordance with the city’s standard details, as adopted by city council resolution, and all provisions of this chapter.

        A.    An approved air gap separation assembly (AG) shall be installed as follows:

        1.     The AG shall be located on the water customer’s side of and as close to the point of service as is practicable.

        2.     All piping from the point of service or the meter to the receiving tank shall be above grade and visible. Unless otherwise approved by the director, the director’s designate, or the health agency, the receiving tank shall be located on the customer’s side no further than five feet from the point of service or the meter.

        3.     There shall be no outlet, tee, tap, take-off or connection of any sort, to or from the service connection or the customer’s water system, between the city’s water main and the AG.

        B.     An approved reduced pressure principle (RPP) assembly shall be installed as follows:

        1.     Aboveground in a horizontal and level position. Unless otherwise approved by the director, the director’s designate or the health agency, the RPP shall be located on the customer’s side no further than five feet from the point of service or the meter.

        2.     A minimum of twelve inches above finished grade but not more than thirty-six inches above finished grade as measured from the bottom of the RPP. The RPP shall be readily accessible for maintenance and testing.

        3.     There shall be no outlet, tee, tap, take-off or connection of any sort, to or from the service connection or the customer’s water system, between the city’s water main and the RPP.

        4.     No part of the RPP shall be submerged during normal operation and weather conditions.

        C.     An approved double check valve (DCV) assembly shall be installed as follows:

        1.     Unless otherwise approved by the director, director’s designate or the health agency, the DCV shall be installed aboveground, in a horizontal and level position and shall be located on the customer’s side no further than five feet from the point of service or the meter.

        2.     Unless otherwise approved by the director, the director’s designate or the health agency, the DCV shall be installed a minimum of twelve inches above finished grade and not more than thirty-six inches above finished grade as measured from the bottom of the DCV. The DCV shall be readily accessible for maintenance and testing.

        D.    An approved double check—detector check (DCDC) valve assembly shall be installed as follows:

        1.     Unless otherwise approved by the director, the director’s designate or the health agency, the DCDC shall be installed aboveground, in a horizontal and level position and shall be located on the customer’s side no further than five feet from the point of service or the meter.

        2.     Unless otherwise approved by the director, the director’s designate or the health agency, the DCDC shall be installed a minimum of twelve inches above finished grade but not more than thirty-six inches above finished grade as measured from the bottom of the DCDC. The DCDC shall be readily accessible for maintenance and testing.

        3.     There shall be no outlet, tee, tap, take-off or connection of any sort, to or from the service connection or the customer’s water system, between the city’s water main and the DCDC.

        E.     An approved backflow assembly shall have at least the same size diameter as the existing or proposed water meter unless otherwise approved in writing by the director.

        F.     Upon installation, the backflow prevention assembly shall be tested by certified personnel of the city’s public works department or designee. Such testing shall be at the customer’s expense and as set by city council resolution. (Ord. 2015-04 §2).

 

4.01.120 Approval of backflow prevention assemblies.
        All backflow prevention assemblies, whether installed by the city or the customer, shall be assemblies of a model and size approved by the director. Final approval of any assembly proposed for installation under the terms of this chapter shall be evidenced by a certificate of approval issued by an approved testing laboratory certifying full compliance with AWWA standards and FCCCHR specifications. The following testing laboratory has been qualified by the director to test and certify backflow prevention assemblies:

 

Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research

University of Southern California, University Park, Los Angeles, CA 90089

 

        Backflow prevention assemblies that may be subject to backpressure or back-siphonage that have been fully tested and granted a certificate of approval by said qualified laboratory and are listed on the laboratory’s current list of approved backflow prevention assemblies may be used without further pretesting or qualification. Testing laboratories other than the laboratory listed above will be added to an approved list as they are deemed qualified by the director. (Ord. 2015-04 §2).

 

4.01.130 Inspection, testing, and maintenance of backflow prevention assemblies.
        A.    It shall be the duty of the water user on any premises on which reduced pressure principle backflow prevention devices, double check valve assemblies and/or pressure type vacuum breakers are installed to have competent inspections made of these devices to verify effective operation on an annual basis. The city, or its designee, may perform the tests and charge a fee to the water user in accordance with a resolution adopted from time to time by the city council.

        B.     All testing of devices and completion of backflow prevention device test and maintenance reports shall be restricted to those persons that have been certified by the Department of Health Services and are in possession of a current valid backflow prevention device tester identification card. No person shall test or shall make reports on backflow prevention assemblies as required in Title 17 of the California Administrative Code and this chapter unless such person is a qualified tester pursuant to this chapter.

        C.     The device shall be tested immediately upon being put into operation and at least once each year thereafter should the device continue in service. A backflow prevention device test and maintenance report must be filed for each test performance. Additional and/or more frequent testing shall be required because of, but not limited to, the following conditions:

        1.     Relocation. If a device is relocated, a test shall be made prior to putting the device back into service.

        2.     Re-Piping. If the supply line is changed, the device shall be tested prior to being put back into service.

        3.     Repair or Overhaul. If repaired, the device shall be tested prior to being put back into service. The device may be required to be tested again in three months. Cleaning is considered to represent repair.

        D.    Devices or assemblies that are not commensurate with the degree of hazard involved shall be tested at least every three months. Devices or assemblies in this category shall be replaced with approved devices either upon successive inspections indicating repeated mechanical failure (excluding cleaning) or as directed by the city.

        E.     At the director’s discretion and as necessary, required operational tests may also be performed by properly certified city staff or contractors hired by the director.

        F.     All backflow prevention devices, installation, tests, re-tests, repairs, overhaul and/or replacement shall be at the expense of the water user. (Ord. 2015-04 §2).

 

4.01.140 Test failure.
        For backflow prevention assemblies which fail to pass certified inspection or operational testing, the customer-user shall, immediately after notification of test results, provide for maintenance and repair of the assembly at their own expense and have the assembly retested. (Ord. 2015-04 §2).

 

4.01.150 Notice of testing due.
        A.    The director shall notify each affected customer-user when it is time for the backflow preventer installed on the customer-user system to be tested. This written notice shall give the customer-user thirty days to have the backflow preventer tested by a qualified tester and to submit the results to the director.

        B.     The director shall send a second notice to each customer-user who does not submit their test results as prescribed in the first notice within the thirty-day period allowed. The second notice shall give the customer-user a two-week period to have their backflow preventer tested and to submit the test results to the city.

        C.     Failure to submit required test results within the time required by the notice is a violation of this chapter subjecting the customer-user to the remedies and penalties provided herein. (Ord. 2015-04 §2).

 

4.01.160 Backflow prevention device removal.
        Approval must be obtained from the city before a backflow prevention device is removed, relocated or replaced.

        A.    Removal. The use of a device may be discontinued and the device removed from service upon presentation of sufficient evidence to the city to verify that a hazard no longer exists or is likely to be created in the future.

        B.     Relocation. A device may be relocated following confirmation by the city that the relocation will continue to provide the required protection and satisfy installation requirements. A retest will be required.

        C.     Repair. A device may be removed for repair, provided the water use is either discontinued until repair is completed and the device is returned to service, or the water use is equipped with other backflow protection approved by the city. A retest will be required.

        D.    Replacement. A device may be removed and replaced provided the water use is discontinued until the replacement device is installed. All replacement devices must be approved and must be commensurate with the degree of hazard involved. Note: Non-approved devices (assemblies) and/or approved devices (assemblies) that are not commensurate with the degree of hazard involved shall be replaced immediately. (Ord. 2015-04 §2).

 

4.01.170 Conditions for terminating water service.
        If the director finds that a customer’s system poses a clear and immediate hazard to the city’s water system and the hazardous condition cannot be immediately abated, the director may authorize the public works department to initiate the procedure for terminating a customer’s water service. The conditions that create a basis for terminating service shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

        A.    The presence of a direct or indirect connection between a potable water system and a sewer system;

        B.     The presence of an unprotected direct or indirect connection between a potable water system and a system or equipment containing toxic chemicals or sewage;

        C.     The presence of an unprotected direct or indirect connection between a potable water system and an auxiliary water system;

        D.    The presence of an unprotected connection between a potable water system and a nonpotable nonpressure system;

        E.     The refusal to install an approved backflow prevention assembly within the time frame specified by the director;

        F.     The refusal to test a backflow prevention assembly within the time frame specified by the director;

        G.    The refusal to repair or replace a faulty backflow prevention assembly;

        H.    The refusal to correct a violation; or

        I.      Any other situation which presents an immediate health and safety hazard to the city’s water system. (Ord. 2015-04 §2).

 

4.01.180 Procedure for terminating water service.
        Where it is necessary to terminate a customer’s water service, the director shall take the steps indicated below depending upon the degree of hazard to public health.

        A.    If in the director’s judgment the condition poses an immediate public health hazard, the director or the director’s designate shall:

        1.     Attempt to verbally notify the customer;

        2.     Immediately discontinue the customer’s service;

        3.     Immediately notify the state and county health departments of the public health hazard; and

        4.     Send a certified letter to the customer specifying the corrections to be taken prior to service being restored.

        B.     If the customer refuses to comply with the terms and conditions of this chapter and the condition does not create an immediate public health hazard, the director or the director’s designate shall:

        1.     Send a certified letter to the customer specifying the corrective action needed, the time period by which it must be completed and the director’s intention to terminate service if the customer fails to comply;

        2.     Attempt to verbally notify the customer twenty-four hours prior to terminating water service; and

        3.     Upon termination, notify the state and county health departments.

        C.     If the customer is unable to comply with the terms and conditions required under this chapter, the customer may request a hearing with the city manager or designated representative. The city manager or representative shall afford the customer an opportunity to be heard, either in writing or orally, as to why the customer’s water service should not be disconnected. (Ord. 2015-04 §2).

 

4.01.190 Penalties for noncompliance.
        A.    No person shall violate a provision of this chapter or fail to comply with a requirement of this chapter. A person who violates a provision of this chapter or fails to comply with a mandatory requirement of this chapter is guilty of an infraction unless the violation is stated to be a misdemeanor.

        B.     An offense which would otherwise be an infraction is a misdemeanor if a person has been convicted of two or more violations of the same offense within the twelve-month period preceding the commission of the offense.

        C.     Under Government Code Section 36900, the penalty by fine for an infraction or misdemeanor shall be consistent with the Waterford Municipal Code.

        D.    The remedies provided under this chapter are cumulative, not exclusive. (Ord. 2015-04 §2).

 

4.01.200 Records.
        A.    Records of such tests, repairs, overhaul, relocation and/or replacement shall be filed with the city. The city shall provide forms for this purpose. A copy of this report shall be submitted to the water user as follows:

        1.     Upon notification of a newly installed device (new or replacement);

        2.     Annually: to comply with the requirements set forth in Chapter 5, Subchapter 1, Group 4, of the California Administrative Code;

        3.     Three months following repair or overhaul (if deemed necessary).

        B.     The report shall be accompanied by correspondence directing the water user to have the necessary repairs made if necessary, and to return a card to the city within a thirty-day period. The time period shall be identified by a return date typed on the report form. In the event that there is need to exceed the return date, information explaining such delay shall be filed with the city in writing prior to expiration of said return date.

        If information is not received, a second notice will be sent. Noncompliance with the second notice will be followed by a city council hearing to discuss discontinuance of water service. (Ord. 2015-04 §2).

Chapter 4.02 RATES AND CHARGES
4.02.010 Water fund—Created.
        A fund is hereby created to be known as the water fund. All revenues derived by the city from the sale of water or otherwise from the operation of waterworks or the provision of water service, within or without the boundaries of the city, shall be credited to the water fund. (Ord. 05-01 §3).

 

4.02.020 Water fund—Purpose.
        The water fund is created for the purpose of providing a source of operational funds, capital outlay funds, debt service funds and incidental funds for the acquisition, construction, operation, maintenance, expansion and improvement of waterworks and a water distribution system in and near the city, including the retirement of revenue bonds issued for the acquisition thereof and the retirement of revenue bonds or other evidences of indebtedness issued for the improvement thereof. (Ord. 05-01 §3).

 

4.02.030 Water fund—Use restriction.
        Except as stated in this chapter, the water fund, once created, shall remain inviolate for the purpose for which it was created. No other use may be made of such fund, unless the use of such fund for some other purpose is authorized by the affirmative votes of a majority of the electors voting on such proposition at a general or special election at which such proposition is submitted. (Ord. 05-01 §3).

 

4.02.040 Water fund—Constituent revenues.
        “Water fund,” as the term is used in this chapter, applies only to those funds collected for the use or extension of the water system and shall not be construed to affect revenues derived from plumbing permit fees. (Ord. 05-01 §3).

 

4.02.050 Metered service—Single-family residence.
        The minimum monthly rate for metered water service for a single-family residence including model homes is as set forth by ordinance or resolution. (Ord. 05-01 §3).

 

4.02.060 Metered service—Additional provisions.
        A.    Consumers whose requirements may overburden the water system, or may require unreasonable investment in additional facilities, or may interfere with the supply to the existing consumers, will not be supplied water under the schedule in Section 4.02.050. In such case, a special agreement will be required, under such terms as the conditions warrant.

        B.     If a meter is found to be out of order, the monthly charge shall be determined by the city manager, based upon previous water consumption.

        C.     If a consumer has more than one meter, a separate minimum charge will be made for each meter, as well as the amount registered for each meter. Compound meters, however, shall be considered as one meter. (Ord. 05-01 §3).

 

4.02.070 Connection—Permit required.
        Whenever any person wishes to connect any building or premises to the city water system, he or she shall first make application to the director for a water connection permit. After the issuance of the permit, the director shall cause such connection to be made with the city water main and extended to the point of service as described in Section 4.00.030. (Ord. 05-01 §3).

 

4.02.080 Connection—For replacement and relocation.
        When an existing water service connection is replaced by one of a larger size, or where it is necessary to relocate a water service for the convenience of a consumer, or where relocation is required because the consumer’s construction will interfere with the operation or maintenance of the service connection, the charge for such replacement or relocation shall be the cost for labor, equipment and materials as the same is determined by the city engineer. (Ord. 05-01 §3).

 

4.02.090 Connection—Tap and service size.
        The size of the tap and service connection installed by any consumer shall be as the city engineer may designate. (Ord. 05-01 §3).

 

4.02.100 Connection—Subdivisions.
        A.    Five or More Lots. The city will not provide water distribution lines or connection services to newly developing subdivisions of five or more lots. The subdivider or developer will arrange to have the water services installed at his or her expense upon furnishing proof that the work will be done in its entirety by a duly licensed and competent person in accordance with city standards.

        B.     Less than Five Lots. The city may elect, at its option, to install water services to newly developing subdivisions of four lots or fewer. Such installations will be accomplished at the expense of the developer or applicant. (Ord. 05-01 §3).

 

4.02.110 Connection—Individual lots.
        Water service to individual lots will be provided by the city at the expense of the applicant. (Ord. 05-01 §3).

 

4.02.120 Connection—Determination.
        The city council may, by ordinance or resolution, establish the costs to be charged for installation of water service by the city. If no such ordinance or resolution is in effect, or if the ordinance or resolution in effect does not cover a given size, class or type of water connection, the charge for water service installation performed by the city shall be determined by the city engineer, based upon actual costs, including, but not limited to labor, materials, and equipment. In those instances where, in the judgment of the city engineer, the best interest of the city would be served, the applicant for water service connection may be required to deposit with the city the estimated cost of such installation, prior to performance of such installation. (Ord. 05-01 §3).

 

4.02.130 Connection—Major water facilities.
        A.    Each property owner who applies for connection of any building or premises to the city water system, or who applies for replacement of an existing water service connection with one of larger size, shall, prior to issuance of the permit for such connection or replacement, pay to the city a water facilities charge, based upon the size of the water service required for such building or premises and the cost to perform the work.

        The amount of such major water facilities charge shall be set forth in the capital facility fees adopted by resolution of the city council and reviewed annually, pursuant to Waterford Municipal Code Section 3.60.130.

        B.     In the case of replacement of an existing water service connection with one of larger size, credit shall be given against the major water facilities charge for the amount which was paid for the smaller connection, or would have paid therefore if this section had been in effect at the time such smaller connection was applied for provided the service is actually removed from the system.

        C.     All funds collected pursuant to this section shall be deposited in the water fund. (Ord. 2016-03 §1; Ord. 05-01 §3).

Chapter 4.04 WATER MAIN EXTENSIONS
4.04.010 Generally.
        Water mains may be extended by an applicant in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the city engineer and meet the “City Standards” which standards meet or exceed the “Standards of Minimum Requirements for Safe Practices in the Production and Delivery of Water for Domestic Use” of the California section of the American Water Works Association. The construction work shall be performed by a properly licensed contractor. Prior to approval of the plans and specifications, a deposit for engineering and inspection costs equal to three percent of the estimated cost of installation shall be deposited with the city before the applicant begins such work. Upon completion of the work, the city manager shall determine the actual costs incurred by city in support of such work. Final inspection acceptance of the work shall be withheld until all moneys due the city are paid. In the event the deposit exceeds the actual cost incurred by city, the difference shall be refunded to the applicant. (Ord. 05-01 §4, 2005).

 

4.04.020 City may perform work.
        If the proposed water main extension is to serve a developed or populated area, the city may elect to perform the extension work. (Ord. 05-01 §4, 2005).

 

4.04.030 Along full frontage—Exception.
        Where a water main is to be extended to serve a parcel of land, the water line shall extend the full frontage of the parcel, unless it is determined by the director that the line is not likely to be extended to serve any other property. (Ord. 05-01 §4, 2005).

 

4.04.040 Line diameter.
        The inside diameter of every water line to be installed shall be not less than six inches, except as may be determined by the director. (Ord. 05-01 §4, 2005).

 

4.04.050 Required bonds.
        In the event the applicant installs water line extension facilities, he or she shall furnish the city with a corporate surety bond written by a company approved by the city, in an amount equal to at least one-half of the estimate made by the applicant’s engineer of the installation costs, to guarantee faithful performance by the applicant, and a like surety bond in an equal amount to guarantee claims of persons employed by the applicant and claims of persons who furnish materials, supplies and implements used by the applicant on such work. (Ord. 05-01 §4, 2005).

 

4.04.060 Ownership.
        When water lines are installed in public streets or easements pursuant to the regulations of the city and have been accepted by the director, they become the property of the city and a part of the water system of the city. (Ord. 05-01 §4, 2005).

 

4.04.070 Extension cost—Collection from subsequent applicant.
        A.    Whenever an applicant applies for a permit to connect property fronting a water line, the installation cost of which was paid by a previous applicant or the city, such applicant shall pay to the city, prior to the granting of such permit, an amount as determined by the city engineer in accordance with the oversizing agreement entered into by a previous applicant and the city:

        B.     Notwithstanding the above, an applicant shall not owe an extension fee if the water line was installed by a previous applicant over ten years prior to the date of applicant’s application, or if the water line was installed through an assessment district or solely with state or federal grant monies.

        C.     Amounts collected as provided in this section (excluding the fee for administration and collection) shall be paid by the city to the applicant who paid the cost of installing such main until such applicant has received an amount calculated as set forth in the oversizing agreement.

        D.    When the city engineer has determined that only one side of a street can be benefited and has made collections on that basis, amounts so collected (excluding the fee for administration and collection) shall be paid by the city to the applicant who paid the cost of installing such water line until such applicant has received an amount calculated as set forth in the oversizing agreement. (Ord. 05-01 §4, 2005).

 

4.04.080 Extension cost refunds—Time limitations.
        The city shall not make refunds to the installing applicants after the tenth anniversary of the date the water line was accepted by the city. (Ord. 05-01 §4, 2005).

 

4.04.090 Cost refunds—Oversize.
        A water line more than eight inches in diameter is considered oversize, and the city shall pay directly to the installing applicant the difference in cost between the average cost of installing an eight-inch diameter water line and the actual cost of installing the oversize water line; provided, that the installing applicant does not need more than an eight-inch diameter water line to serve his or her own premises as determined by the city engineer. The city shall determine the average cost of installing an eight-inch diameter water line, and its findings shall be conclusive. (Ord. 05-01 §4, 2005).

 

4.04.100 Payment.
        Applicants subject to the charge identified in Section 4.04.070 shall pay such charge prior to obtaining the permit to connect the property to the water line, except that if the line and/or laterals are installed by the city and the applicant is to connect a single-family residence to the water line and the residence is, or will be owner occupied by a median-income family as determined by the income limits established by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development or its successor, then the applicant may elect to pay the charge in ten annual installments, plus interest thereon on the unpaid balance. Interest shall be calculated on an annual basis based on the previous year’s average interest rate earned on city investments. Applicants who make the election shall execute a promissory note and deed of trust evidencing the debt to the city. (Ord. 05-01 §4, 2005).

Chapter 4.06 WATER SHORTAGE REGULATIONS
4.06.005 Water conservation—Intent.
        The city council finds and determines:

        A.    To prevent waste and ensure reasonable use of water supplied by the city water distribution system, it is necessary and desirable to enact certain limitations to promote water conservation by city customers.

        B.     These limitations should be focused on outdoor water use, because the maximum demands for water from the city’s water distribution system occur during the summer months, with outdoor irrigation use exceeding all other demands.

        C.     Water use limitations should be designed to promote the use of drip irrigation and other low volume irrigation methods that reduce outdoor water use by applying water more efficiently than traditional irrigation methods.

        D.    Reduction of water use through water conservation protects and promotes the public health, safety and welfare by conserving a vital resource that is subject to ever-increasing demands.

        E.     Reduction of water demands through water conservation will reduce the per capita amount of water used by city customers, and also will reduce the city’s costs for electrical energy, equipment and chemicals utilized to pump and treat water supplied to the city water distribution system.

        F.     By reducing the use of electrical energy, equipment and chemicals, the reduction of water demands through water conservation also protects and promotes the public health, safety and welfare by reducing greenhouse gas emissions associated with the production and transport of electrical energy, equipment and chemicals. (Ord. 2016-01 §1).

 

4.06.010 Declaration of water shortage.
        In response to any condition necessitating increased water conservation, such as a water shortage due to drought, natural disaster, or other reduction of water supply availability, or as may otherwise be required to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, the city council may by resolution declare the existence of a water shortage and impose revised and additional limitations and time restrictions on outdoor water use. While the declaration of water shortage remains in effect, no person shall use, or cause to be used, city water in violation of such limitations or restrictions. Unless the resolution specifies an ending date, the declaration of water shortage shall remain in effect until rescinded or otherwise modified by subsequent resolution of the city council. While a declaration of water shortage is in effect, any requirement in the Planning and Development Code to plant or irrigate trees, shrubs, or other groundcover, or for groundcover to be living, is suspended.  (Ord. 2016-01 §1).

 

4.06.020 Application of regulations.
        The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all persons using water both in and outside the city served by the city water system, and regardless of whether any person using water shall have a contract for water service with the city. (Ord. 05-01 §5, 2005).

 

4.06.030 Provisions superseded.
        Notwithstanding other code provisions inconsistent with this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall supersede and prevail for the duration of the emergency and until repeal of this chapter. (Ord. 05-01 §5, 2005).

 

4.06.040 Prohibited uses.
        It is unlawful for any person to use water obtained from the water system of the city of Waterford through fraud, including misrepresentations made to obtain a particular allocation of water, or for any prohibited use as hereinafter defined:

        A.    The washing of sidewalks, driveways, filling station aprons, porches or other outdoor surfaces except when necessary to protect the public health and safety.

        B.     The washing of the exterior of dwellings, buildings, and structures, with the following exceptions:

        1.     Window washing;

        2.     Washing in conjunction with the painting of the exterior of a dwelling, building or structure;

        3.     Washing of a dwelling, building or structure may be allowed once every twelve months.

        All exceptions listed above must comply with Section 4.06.090(A) and (B) and the hose(s) must be fitted with an automatic shutoff device(s).

        C.     The operation of any ornamental fountain or other such structure making a use of water from the city domestic water system, unless said fountain or structure uses a recirculating water system.

        D.    The use of water, except for domestic use, where an adequate source of water is available whether such alternate source is reclaimed water, well water, spring water, or other source.

        E.     The external washing of trailers, trailer houses, mobile homes, and home exteriors unless in conjunction with painting the exterior of said trailers, or homes.

        F.     The washing of boats or motor vehicles with a hose that is not fitted with an automatic shut-off device.

        G.    The indiscriminate running of water or washing with water not otherwise prohibited above which is wasteful and without reasonable purpose. (Ord. 05-01 §5, 2005).

 

4.06.050 Variances.
        The director may grant variances for uses of water otherwise prohibited if he or she finds and determines that to fail to do so would cause an emergency condition affecting health, sanitation, or fire protection to the applicant or the public. The director’s determination concerning variances shall be final. (Ord. 05-01 §5, 2005).

 

4.06.060 Disconnection for violation.
        Any person within the water service area who is in violation of the water prohibition provisions of Section 4.06.040 shall be subject to immediate disconnection of water service and/or the installation of a meter at the violator’s expense. Upon disconnection of water service a written notice shall be served upon the violator which shall state the time, place, and general description of the violation or penalty, and the method by which reconnection can be made. (Ord. 05-01 §5, 2005).

 

4.06.070 Reconnection conditions.
        Where water service has been disconnected as authorized in Section 4.06.060, the water service shall be immediately reconnected on condition that:

        A.    The public works department be authorized by the appropriate person to install a water meter on the consumer’s water service; and

        B.     An installation charge be paid for the installation of said meter in accordance with the Waterford Municipal Code; and

        C.     A reconnection charge is paid in an amount fixed pursuant to the Waterford Municipal Code Section 4.02.150. (Ord. 05-01 §5, 2005).

 

4.06.080 Equipment tampering illegal.
        It is unlawful for any person to remove, replace, alter or damage any water meter or components thereof including, but not limited to, the meter face, its dials or other water usage indicators. (Ord. 05-01 §5, 2005).

 

4.06.090 Prohibited uses—Mandatory.
        The following uses, methods, tees or techniques of use of water are hereby determined and declared nonessential and are prohibited:

        A.    All Users.

        1.     Allowing broken or defective plumbing, or sprinklers, watering or irrigation systems which permit the escape or leakage of water;

        2.     The use of water in any manner which causes, allows, or permits the flooding of any premises, or any portion thereof;

        3.     All uses of non-potable water without the permission of the public works department.

        B.     Outdoor Watering. The limits of sprinkling, watering or irrigation of lawn, landscape or other vegetated area shall be established by resolution.

        C.     New Planting. Notwithstanding the prohibitions contained in subsection B of this section, new lawns, ground cover, or bedding plants, may be watered every day provided the following conditions are met:

        1.     New lawns, ground cover, or bedding plants shall not include the reseeding of existing lawns or replacement of existing ground cover, or bedding plants, and shall be newly rototilled earth;

        2.     A permit must be obtained from the department of public works and a ten dollar permit fee paid;

        3.     The permit shall be limited to thirty days duration;

        4.     The director of public works may impose such other restrictions as are deemed necessary to prevent the waste of water. (Ord. 2017-06 §1; Ord. 05-01 §5, 2005).

 

4.06.100 Implementation.
        A.    The director is hereby authorized and empowered to delegate his or her authority hereunder to such deputies, officers, employees, or agents of the city as he or she shall designate, and to establish such rules, regulations, and procedures, and to prepare or furnish such forms, warnings, et cetera as he or she deems necessary or appropriate to carry out the provisions of this chapter.

        B.     Upon a determination by the director or designee that a person has consumed or used water in violation of any of the mandatory provisions of this chapter, or of any exception granted pursuant to the provisions of Section 4.06.050, the director may issue an order to cease and desist from such violation, and further order such person to comply forthwith with such provisions or exceptions, or otherwise to take appropriate remedial or preventive action. Any cease and desist order may be served personally, by mail, or by leaving a copy at or posted upon the person’s residence or place of business.

        C.     If, after the issuance of such cease and desist order, such person continues to consume or use, or again consumes or uses, water in violation of any such provision or exception, the director may issue a notice of intention to impose a penalty. Said notice shall:

        1.     Identify the date, time, and circumstances of violation;

        2.     State the amount of penalty to be imposed; and

        3.     Advise the person of the appeal rights as provided herein. The notice of intention to impose a penalty shall be served in the same manner as the cease and desist order.

        D.    After a notice of intention to impose a penalty is served, a penalty shall be assessed to the utility account of the person in the amount of fifty dollars for the first violation, seventy-five dollars for the second violation, and one hundred fifty dollars for the third and each of any subsequent violations. The penalty shall be subject to collection in the same manner as any unpaid water service charges.

        E.     A person shall have the right to appeal the imposition of the penalty assessed to the utility account. The person must request an appeal hearing in writing within fifteen days from the date of service of the notice of intention to impose a penalty. The request for hearing must be addressed to the city clerk and shall be deemed served only when received by the city. Failure to properly serve the request for hearing within the fifteen day period shall be deemed a waiver of the right to appeal the matter, and the penalty will be assessed against the person’s account.

        F.     The appeal hearing shall be held before a hearing officer appointed by the city council by resolution to preside at and render judgment from administrative hearings transacted under the authority of this chapter who shall make a factual finding on the existence of a violation. The person to be assessed shall be allowed to present such witnesses and evidence as he or she may desire and may be represented by an attorney or other representative of his or her choosing at appellant’s expense. The hearing officer shall give written notice by first class mail of the date and time of the appeal hearing at least ten days prior thereto. Said hearing shall be held not later than thirty days from receipt of the request for hearing unless continued by mutual consent of the person to be assessed and the hearing officer. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final. If a violation is found, the penalty shall be assessed to the utility account. (Ord. 05-01 §5, 2005).

Title 5 BUSINESS TAXES, LICENSES AND REGULATIONS
Chapter 5.04 BUSINESS LICENSE TAX
Chapter 5.06 VENDORS
Chapter 5.08 CIRCUSES AND CARNIVALS
Chapter 5.12 PUBLIC DANCES AND DANCE HALLS
Chapter 5.16 ENTERTAINMENT PERMITS
Chapter 5.20 GAMBLING AND UNLAWFUL GAMES
Chapter 5.24 BINGO GAMES
Chapter 5.28 GARAGE SALES
Chapter 5.32 POOL AND BILLIARD PARLORS
Chapter 5.36 RESTAURANTS
Chapter 5.38 OUTDOOR ENTERTAINMENT ACTIVITIES
Chapter 5.40 SECONDHAND DEALERS
Chapter 5.44 INTOXICATING BEVERAGES
Chapter 5.50 CANNABIS BUSINESS TAX

Chapter 5.04 BUSINESS LICENSE TAX
5.04.010 Business enterprise defined.
        The term “business enterprise” as used in this chapter includes all professions, trades and occupations and all and every kind of calling carried on for profit and livelihood. (Ord. 71-2 §2, 1971).

 

5.04.020 License—Required/prohibition.
        It is unlawful for any person to commence, establish, maintain or carry on any business enterprise whatever in the city without first obtaining a license from said city, whether said business enterprise or said person is subject to a city license tax under this chapter or not. (Ord. 2019-05 §2; Ord. 2017-02 §1; Ord. 2016-02 §3; Ord. 71-2 §1, 1971).

 

5.04.030 License—Application.
        All applications for license shall be made to the city clerk on forms furnished by the city clerk and shall state all facts necessary and proper to be known and stated for the issuance of such license, including the kind or character of the business or business enterprise, the location thereof, the full name and residence of the proposed licensee, or commercial mail receiving agency legally authorized to act on the licensee’s behalf for the service of process as outlined in Sections 16000 and 16100 of the California Business and Professions Code, the period of time such business or business enterprise is intended to be continued, or for which the proposed license is to be issued, and such other facts or information as the clerk may require. All applications for license shall be verified by the applicants. Whenever an application is made for a license which must be approved by the city council before being issued, or whenever an application is made for a license to conduct a business of a temporary nature, the clerk may require the person applying for a license to add his or her thumb and fingerprints to the application therefor. (Ord. 2019-03 §1; Ord. 74-3 §1, 1974; Ord. 71-2 §3, 1971).

 

5.04.040 License—Denial.
        If the clerk, upon reading the application, is of the opinion that the granting of the license would endanger the public health, safety or morals, he or she may refer such application to the council, who shall consider the application at its next regular, or at an earlier called special meeting, and if the council, after granting the applicant a hearing, by resolution declares that the granting of said application will in its judgment endanger the public health, safety or morals, said application may be denied. (Ord. 71-2 §4, 1971).

 

5.04.050 License—Display.
        Every person having a license under the provisions of this chapter shall place and exhibit said license at all times while in force in some conspicuous place in his or her place of business, where patrons of said business may see the same when the customary place for dealing with the persons carrying on such business (Ord. 71-2 §9, 1971).

 

5.04.060 License—Collection.
        It shall be the duty of the clerk to collect the licenses provided by this chapter. The clerk may designate the chief of police to assist him or her. (Ord. 71-2 §8, 1971).

 

5.04.065 License—Revocation.
        The city council reserves the right to revoke any license issued under this chapter upon good cause shown. No license shall be revoked until after hearing, before the city council, notice of which hearing shall be given to a license holder not less than five days in advance of the date of such hearing, which notice shall either be delivered to the licensee personally or left at his or her place of business, if he or she conducts business in a fixed, bona fide and established place in the city, or by mailing the notice to him or her at the mail address stated on his or her application. Upon revocation of license, the city council may, in such cases as it deems proper, order refunded to the person whose license is revoked the cash bond and any prepaid license fees of such person. If the revocation of such license is for violation of the terms and provisions of this chapter or other regulatory ordinances of the city, the cash bond shall be forfeited to the city and the refund shall not exceed the amount of prepaid license fees. (Ord. 79-21 §1, 1979; Ord. 71-2 §12, 1971).

 

5.04.070 Business classifications and tax rates.
        Business classifications and applicable tax rates for each classification shall be set by resolution of the city council periodically. (Ord. 2019-03 §1; Ord. 80-10 §1, 1980; Ord. 74-3 §3, 1974; Ord. 71-2 §6, 1971).

 

5.04.080 Exemptions.
        A.    No person shall be exempt from the necessity of procuring a license to do business in the city. License fees, however, will not be charged for licenses in the following cases:

        1.     Disabled war veterans who are exempt by state law from the payment of a license fee;

        2.     Solicitors, peddlers and hawkers engaged in interstate commerce and who are, by law, exempt from payment of a license fee, by virtue of the fact that they are engaged in interstate commerce;

        3.     Persons transacting and carrying on any business exempt by virtue of the Constitution or applicable statutes of the United States or of any state from the payment to municipal corporations of such license fees or taxes;

        4.     Any public utility which does business within the city pursuant to a franchise granted by the city;

        5.     Persons selling produce grown or manufactured wholly by their own labor;

        6.     Temporary business operated by organizations licensed by the U.S. Internal Revenue Service as nonprofit organizations shall be required to obtain licenses; provided, however, that fees shall be waived;

        7.     Any nonprofit institution, corporation, organization or association organized and conducted for non-profit purposes only, when the receipts derived are to be wholly for the benefit of such organization and not in the whole or any part for private gain of any person, or when the receipts are derived wholly from a special event permitted by the city of Waterford. This exemption shall not apply to promoters employed by non-profit institutions, corporations, organizations or associations.

        B.     In each of the above cases, the person claiming exemption from license tax shall first present satisfactory evidence to the city clerk that he or she is entitled to such exemptions, which evidence shall include a written statement under oath setting forth such facts and giving such information as the city clerk may require; and provided further, that all such persons shall comply with all the other provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2019-03 §1; Ord. 80-10 §2, 1980; Ord. 74-3 §2, 1974; Ord. 71-2 §5, 1971).

 

5.04.090 Fee payment.
        A.    Every applicant named in Section 5.04.070 shall immediately upon making the application pay to the clerk the proper amount of license tax for the business or profession described in said application. All license fees are payable annually in advance as of the first day of January of each year. No reduction in the amount of the fee shall be made for license for part of a year. For the first year the license fee will be prorated effective the first day of the month.

        B.     Upon a person making application for the first license to be issued under this chapter, or for a newly established business, in all cases where the amount of license tax to be paid is based upon gross receipts, such person shall furnish to the clerk for his or her guidance in ascertaining the amount of license tax to be paid by the applicant, a written statement, upon a form provided by the clerk, setting forth such information as may be therein required, and as may be necessary to properly determine the amount of license tax to be paid by the applicant.

        C.     The clerk shall not issue to any such person another license for the same or any other business until such person shall have furnished to him or her a written statement and paid the license tax as required in this chapter.

        D.    A penalty of ten percent of the amount of the license tax shall be imposed and collected in each instance where the license tax is not paid on the tenth of the month after the due date, and the city shall cause to issue a second notice of tax due to the licensee. Failure to pay the business license fee and penalty within ten days of the second notice shall result in an additional twenty-five percent penalty, and the city shall cause to be issued to the licensee a third notice. Failure to pay the business license fees and penalties within five days of the third notice shall cause the city to notify the State Board of Equalization that the business license has expired and to file the applicable citation under Section 5.04.110. (Ord. 96-03 §1, 1996; Ord. 95-07 §1, 1995; Ord. 80-10 §§3, 4, 1980; Ord. 71-2 §7, 1971).

 

5.04.100 Filing complaints.
        It is made a duty of the clerk to file or cause complaints to be filed against all persons violating any of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 71-2 §10, 1971).

 

5.04.110 Violation declared infraction.
        Every person violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of an infraction. The amount of such license shall be a debt to the city, and any or all persons or corporations holding such a license, together with their agents, clerks and employees, or any of them, shall be liable for said debt in an action in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of such license, with costs of suit. Each and every day, or fractional part of a day, that any violation of this chapter is permitted shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 79-6 Art. III §G, 1979; Ord. 71-2 §11, 1971).

Chapter 5.06 VENDORS
5.06.010 Findings.
        The city council of the city of Waterford hereby finds and declares that public necessity, health and safety, and for the general welfare, immediately requires that any person operating an itinerant or street vendor business or service as an owner or operator or as an employee of an owner or operator obtain a permit from the city of Waterford and operate pursuant to the laws of the state of California, the county of Stanislaus and the city of Waterford. (Ord. 2011-05 §1).

 

5.06.020 Definitions.
        For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise stated in this chapter, the following words and phrases are defined as follows:

        “Established place of business” means and includes a fixed place, location or building within the boundaries of the city of Waterford, zoned for residential uses with a valid city home occupation permit, or commercial, office, or industrial uses, owned, or rented or leased on a month-to-month or term for years basis, by a person using such place, location or building as his or her permanent place of business.

        “Itinerant vendor” means and includes:

        1.     Any person who has no established place of business within the boundaries of the city of Waterford and who is engaged in transient business traveling from place to place for the purpose of selling any goods, wares, merchandise or services or for the purpose of the taking of orders for the sale of any goods, wares, merchandise or services to be delivered or performed at some future time and date; and

        2.     Any person who has obtained the proper city of Waterford permits and public/private permission to engage in a transient business in one location or set up a temporary location as provided by the Waterford Municipal Code for the purpose of selling any goods, wares, merchandise or services or for the purpose of the taking of orders for the sale of any goods, wares, merchandise or services to be delivered or performed at some future time and date.

        “Non-profit organization” means and includes any organization, foundation, corporation or association recognized by the state of California as a non-profit organization.

        “Person” means and includes natural persons, sole proprietorships, firms, associations, partnerships, or corporations.

        “Roaming sidewalk vendor” means a sidewalk vendor who moves from place to place and stops only to complete a transaction.

        “Sidewalk vendor” means a person who sells food or merchandise from a pushcart, stand, display, pedal-driven cart, wagon, showcase, rack, or other nonmotorized conveyance, or from one’s person, upon a public sidewalk or other pedestrian path.

        “Stationary sidewalk vendor” means a sidewalk vendor who vends from a fixed location”

        “Temporary location” means and includes a location that may not be used in excess of seventy-two hours in any consecutive thirty-day period. (Ord. 2019-07 §1; Ord. 2011-05 §1).

 

5.06.030 Permits—Required—Exemptions—Exceptions.
        A.    No person shall engage in any business whether individually or as the employee or agent of another person, firm, company, corporation, association, organization, or partnership as an itinerant vendor without first complying with all applicable requirements of Title 17 (zoning regulations) and having obtained a business license in accordance with Chapter 5.04 and secured a permit from the chief of police in accordance with the provisions of Section 5.06.170.

        B.     Exemptions. The following are expressly exempt from the provisions of this chapter:

        1.     Qualified participants in a farmer’s market registered with the sponsoring organization approved from time to time by the city council of the city of Waterford;

        2.     Merchants having an established place of business in the city of Waterford, or their employees or agents;

        3.     Wholesalers or their representatives, employees or agents, calling upon retail business.

        C.     Non-profit organizations as recognized by the state of California are not required to obtain itinerant vendor or street vendor permits but shall register their itinerant vendor activity with the city of Waterford police department pursuant to Section 5.06.170. (Ord. 2011-05 §1).

 

5.06.040 Street vendors.
        A.    Except as otherwise provided in this section, no street vendor shall operate within this city:

        1.     Without a permit issued by the city of Waterford pursuant to Section 5.06.050.

        2.     In such a manner as to constitute a violation of Vehicle Code Sections 22400 and 22507;

        B.     When a person or entity owns more than one vehicle, wagon, or pushcart subject to the provisions of this section, such person or entity shall not permit an additional vehicle, wagon, or pushcart owned by said person or entity to vend at any permitted location for a period of twenty-four hours within one thousand feet of such a location when another vehicle, wagon, or pushcart owned by the same person or entity has already vended within that twenty-four-hour period at that permitted location.

        C.     The provisions of this section shall not apply to persons delivering such articles upon order of or by agreement with a customer from a store or other fixed place of business or distribution.

        D.    It is unlawful for any person to own, lease, drive, operate, or cause or permit to be driven, or operate any food vending truck or in the city of Waterford unless such person has obtained a permit pursuant to Section 5.06.050 and submitted a motor vehicle liability insurance policy covering each food vending truck issued by a solvent corporation holding a certificate of authority to do insurance business in the state of California.

        E.     It is unlawful for a sidewalk vendor to own, lease, operate, or cause or permit to operate a pushcart, stand, display, pedal-driven cart, wagon, showcase, rack, or other nonmotorized conveyance in the city of Waterford unless such person has obtained a permit pursuant to Section 5.06.050.

        F.     Each vehicle operating under the provisions of this chapter and pursuant to the permit issued under Section 5.06.050 shall be equipped with a trash receptacle of a size sufficient to accommodate all trash and refuse generated by its vending activities.

        G.    Each vendor shall pick up and deposit in the trash receptacle on the vehicle any paper, cups, wrappers, litter, or other refuse of any kind which were a part of the goods or merchandise supplied from the vehicle and which have been left or abandoned within twenty-five feet of such vehicle or any public property other than in a trash receptacle provided for such purposes. No vendor or operator shall dispose of any trash or refuse in any such public or private trash receptacle other than a trash receptacle owned, operated, or otherwise provided by and under the control of such vendor or operator.

        H.    Vendor shall not dispose of liquid or semi-solid or solid waste on city-owned property and shall dispose of waste in compliance with the provisions of Chapter 8.04. (Ord. 2019-07 §2; Ord. 2011-05 §1).

 

5.06.050 Permits—Applications.
        Any person desiring to obtain an itinerant vendor or street vendor permit or desiring to obtain a permit for his or her employee or agent shall file a written application with the chief of police on the application form provided by the police department. Such application shall set forth the following information:

        A.    The applicant’s name and address(es), both residential and business;

        B.     If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation exactly as it appears in the articles of incorporation, as well as the names and addresses of all officers, directors and stock holders holding five percent or more of the stock in the corporation;

        C.     If the applicant is a partnership or unincorporated association, the names and addresses of all partners, including limited partners, or principals. Additionally, if the applicant is a partnership, then it must designate a managing partner and that person must complete the application form;

        D.    The applicant’s date of birth, weight, height, color of eyes and hair;

        E.     The name under which the itinerant vendor operates;

        F.     The name of each city, county and state, including the specific addresses therein, in which the applicant has been engaged or has conducted itinerant vendor activity within the immediately preceding five years;

        G.    A statement of all felonies and misdemeanors for which the applicant has been convicted, including nolo contendere, within the five years immediately preceding the date of the application;

        H.    The applicant’s valid drivers license number;

        I.      The applicant’s valid Social Security number;

        J.      The type of permit requested (i.e. owner, operator or employee);

        K.    Any and all other information requested by the chief of police to facilitate the processing of the application and to ensure that the public’s health, safety and general welfare is protected:

        L.     A signed statement that the information contained in the application as submitted by the applicant is true to the best of the applicant’s knowledge under the penalty of perjury under the laws of the state of California. (Ord. 2011-05 §1).

 

5.06.060 Permits—Fees.
        Any person desiring to obtain a permit shall pay to the city of Waterford, and submit along with the application referenced in Section 5.06.050, the fees established from time to time by resolution of the city council of the city of Waterford for itinerant vendors. (Ord. 2011-05 §1).

 

5.06.070 Permits—Background police investigation—Temporary permits.
        A.    The chief of police shall conduct and complete an investigation of the truthfulness of the facts set forth in the application filed pursuant to Section 5.06.050 and the moral fitness, reputation, character, integrity and competency of the applicant.

        B.     The applicant shall report to the Waterford police station to be fingerprinted, the cost of which shall be borne by the applicant. A complete fingerprint background investigation through the California Department of Justice can take an estimated six to sixteen weeks to complete.

        C.     The chief of police, within fifteen days after the application is received, shall conduct a preliminary background check of references and law enforcement agency records within Stanislaus County and counties contiguous to Stanislaus County pursuant to a written release from applicant.

        D.    If the chief of police finds nothing in the preliminary background investigation which would indicate that the applicant’s moral fitness, reputation, character, integrity or competency would pose a threat to the public safety, health or welfare, the chief of police may issue a ninety-day temporary permit while the complete fingerprint background investigation is being completed by the California Department of Justice pursuant to Section 5.06.070(B). To qualify for a temporary permit, the itinerant vendor shall: (1) file a permit application pursuant to Section 5.06.050; (2) reside in Stanislaus County or a county contiguous to Stanislaus County; and (3) be subject to a background check of references and law enforcement agency records within Stanislaus County and counties contiguous to Stanislaus County pursuant to a written release from applicant. If the complete fingerprint background investigation is not completed by the California Department of Justice on the expiration date of the ninety-day temporary permit, the chief of police may extend the expiration date by not more than sixty days. (Ord. 2011-05 §1).

 

5.06.080 Permits—Issuance.
        The chief of police shall grant and issue the permit for a period not to exceed one year and subject to the conditions established below and any other conditions that the chief of police establishes if the chief of police finds nothing in the preliminary background investigation or the complete fingerprint background investigation through the California Department of Justice which would indicate that the applicant’s moral fitness, reputation, character, integrity or competency is not good or would pose a threat to the public safety, health or welfare. (Ord. 2011-05 §1).

 

5.06.090 Permits—Conditions to promote quality assurance.
        The following conditions shall apply to each and every permit issued:

        A.    The applicant must be eighteen years or older, or if the applicant is between the age of fourteen and seventeen, inclusive, and submit proof of a valid work permit issued by the applicant’s school.

        B.     The applicant must not have been convicted within the five years immediately preceding application for a permit for a crime involving honesty or veracity, violence, dangerous or deadly weapons, or not more than once during the same five-year period of the use or possession of narcotics or other such illicit substance.

        C.     The applicant must operate in accordance with the provisions and requirements of the laws of the United States of America, the state of California, the county of Stanislaus, and the city of Waterford.

        D.    The applicant must operate in a courteous, honest and forthright manner, which includes, but is not limited to, the following:

        1.     Displaying his or her permit pursuant to Section 5.06.140 and upon request present it for review by the person the permittee is soliciting;

        2.     Refraining from soliciting those persons that have indicated that they do not want to be solicited, either orally or by the posting of a sign;

        3.     Not threatening or coercing any person.

        E.     The applicant must procure and present to the city of Waterford a bond in the penal sum of one thousand dollars.

        F.     If the applicant proposes to operate on private property, he or she must first obtain zoning clearance from the city of Waterford planning department, planning division, and shall comply and operate pursuant to all applicable zoning laws, regulations, and special conditions as administered by the city of Waterford planning department by authority of the Waterford Municipal Code.

        G.    Any and all other conditions established by the chief of police or the city manager, or designee, on any one individual permit to ensure the public health, safety and general welfare. (Ord. 2011-05 §1).

 

5.06.100 Permits—Denial—Suspension—Revocation.
        A.    Denial. The chief of police may deny the permit if it appears that:

        1.     The applicant has been convicted, including a plea of nolo contendere, of a felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude under any state or federal law; or

        2.     There is any cause which, in the opinion of the chief of police, jeopardizes the public health, safety or general welfare.

        B.     Suspension and Revocation. The chief of police is authorized to temporarily suspend or permanently revoke the permit of any person permitted under this chapter for any of the reasons that follow after five days’ written notice to the permittee specifying the grounds for the proposed suspension or revocation and requiring the permittee to appear at a certain time and place to show cause why such permit should not be suspended or revoked:

        1.     Noncompliance with any of the conditions established by Section 5.06.090;

        2.     If it appears that the permittee has engaged in any unlawful business, act or acts;

        3.     When any matter comes to the attention of the chief of police that the information provided in the permittee’s application was false;

        4.     When complaint(s) have been lodged against the permittee that same has threatened or jeopardizes the public health, safety or general welfare. (Ord. 2011-05 §1).

 

5.06.110 Permits—Appeal of the chief of police’s denial, suspension or revocation.
        A.    Any permittee or applicant may appeal the decision of the chief of police to deny, suspend or revoke a permit to the city manager, or designee, by submitting such appeal in writing within ten days of the date of the denial, suspension or revocation.

        B.     The city manager, or designee, shall set a date and time for a hearing not later than ten days from the receipt of the written appeal on the appeal and give at least five calendar days’ written notice thereof by mail addressed to the applicant’s permanent address as reflected in the application.

        C.     At the hearing, which may be continued from time to time, the city manager may take oral and documentary evidence from any interested person regarding the moral fitness, reputation, character, integrity and competency of the applicant or any other factors which were used by the chief of police in his or her reasonable judgment that resulted in the denial, suspension or revocation of a permit. Any applicant or permittee who fails to appear at the hearing after notice was given, without obtaining a continuance from the city manager, or designee, may be deemed to have waived any right to introduce evidence or object to the final decision of the city manager or designee.

        D.    If the applicant fails to appear at the time and place set for hearing, the city manager will consider the matter resolved by the ruling of the chief of police.

        E.     The city manager, or designee, shall make a ruling at the end of such hearing or within five days thereafter to either:

        1.     Uphold the decision of the chief of police in the denial, suspension or revocation of the permit;

        2.     Overrule the decision of the chief of police and grant or reinstate the permit;

        3.     Amend the suspension length of the permit for any such period as may be deemed necessary and proper;

        4.     Grant or reinstate the permit with additional conditions established thereto. (Ord. 2011-05 §1).

 

5.06.120 Permits—Appeal of the city manager’s decision.
        A.    Any applicant may appeal the decision of the city manager, or designee, by filing such appeal with the city clerk in writing within ten days of the date of the city manager’s decision.

        B.     The city clerk shall schedule a public hearing at the next regularly scheduled city council meeting in accordance with the calendar deadlines established by the city clerk for placing an item on the city council agenda. The city clerk shall give at least five calendar days’ written notice thereof by mail addressed to the applicant’s permanent address as reflected in the application.

        C.     If the applicant fails to appear at the time and place set for hearing, the city council will consider the matter resolved by the ruling of the city manager or designee.

        D.    If the applicant does appear, the applicant will have to show by clear and convincing evidence that the city manager, or designee, was incorrect in his or her ruling.

        E.     The city council shall have the power to concur with the ruling of the city manager, or designee, or reject the ruling and order the issuance of the permit. In either event, the decision of the city council shall be the final administrative remedy available to the applicant. (Ord. 2011-05 §1).

 

5.06.130 Permits—Non-transferable.
        Any permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be non-transferable and such shall be used only by the person to whom it has been issued. (Ord. 2011-05 §1).

 

5.06.140 Permits—Display.
        A.    The permittee shall display his or her permit on his or her person at all times while engaged in any such business.

        B.     The permittee shall also have in his or her possession written permission to be on and conduct business on such public or private property from the owner, or his or her authorized representative. The permittee shall, upon demand of any peace officer or fire inspector, present such written permission. (Ord. 2011-05 §1).

 

5.06.150 Prohibited areas.
        A.    Any permit issued pursuant to this chapter does not allow or authorize the permittee to operate on a public highway or road right-of-way nor does it allow the permittee to operate on public or private property without the prior written permission of the current owner, or his or her authorized representative.

        B.     No area may be used for a use where such activity is prohibited by the Waterford Municipal Code. (Ord. 2011-05 §1).

 

5.06.160 Permit—Renewal.
        Any permit issued pursuant to this chapter may thereafter be renewed yearly by the applicant, if the permit has not been suspended or revoked, upon the applicant requesting same from the chief of police and paying in advance the renewal fee as established time to time by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 2011-05 §1).

 

5.06.170 Registration requirements for those organizations exempted pursuant to Section 5.06.030(B).
        A.    Any organization not required to obtain permits pursuant to Section 5.06.030(B) and engaged as itinerant vendors must nonetheless register their organization and participants with the city of Waterford police department prior to engaging in such activity.

        B.     Registration pursuant to subsection A of this section must be made in writing at least five days prior to the commencement of such activity and shall contain at least the following information:

        1.     The name of the organization;

        2.     The names of all itinerant vendors;

        3.     The nature of the activity and the dates that same will be conducted;

        4.     Any other such information that the chief of police may require to insure the public safety, health and general welfare. (Ord. 2011-05 §1).

 

5.06.180 Violation—Penalty.
        Any property owner, person, firm, or corporation, whether as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or by imprisonment in the county jail for a term not exceeding six months, or by both. The city attorney in his or her discretion may reduce any violation of this chapter to an infraction, punishable by a fine of not more than two hundred fifty dollars. Any property owner, person, firm, or corporation shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person, firm or corporation, and shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person, firm or corporation, and shall be punishable as provided herein. Penalties under the administrative enforcement provisions of Chapter 1.17 of this code may be imposed in lieu of, but not in addition to, penalties imposed by the court for any single violation. (Ord. 2011-05 §1).

Chapter 5.08 CIRCUSES AND CARNIVALS
5.08.010 Definitions.
        For purpose of this chapter, the words set forth in this section are defined as follows:

        A.    “Carnival” means a traveling or itinerant commercial amusement enterprise consisting of sideshows, vaudeville, games, merry-go-rounds or other mechanical amusement devices temporarily located within the city; however, a “carnival” shall not be construed to include or mean a festival or amusement enterprise set up and conducted by any permanent religious, charitable or nonprofit organization of the city upon real property owned by such organization and conducted within an area of twenty thousand square feet or less.

        B.     “Circus” means a traveling or itinerant commercial amusement enterprise utilizing an enclosure of any kind, but usually circular or rectangular, partially surrounded by seats, used for exhibitions of horsemanship, acrobatic performances, acts of clowns, feats of animal training or the like, temporarily located within the city. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(5)(part), 1970).

 

5.08.020 License—Required.
        It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, either as principal, agent or employee, to open, carry on or operate in the city limits any circus or carnival without first obtaining from the city a license to do so. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(5)(part), 1970).

 

5.08.030 License—Application—Information required.
        A.    Before such license is issued, the applicant shall make a written application upon a form provided by the city clerk. Such application, together with all license fees required hereunder, shall be submitted to the city clerk at least ten days (except as hereinafter provided) prior to the opening date of such circus or carnival and shall contain the following:

        1.     The name under which it shall be operated;

        2.     The name and permanent address of the owner;

        3.     A certificate of adequate public liability and property damage insurance in an amount as set by the city council by resolution;

        4.     A certificate of adequate workmen’s compensation insurance;

        5.     The address of the proposed operation, including a legal description of the property on which said proposed operation will be located, together with a drawing showing the geographical limits of all uses, including entrances, exits and public parking spaces which will be made available for customers and viewers;

        6.     A description of restroom facilities available; and

        7.     The dates of operation, including daily opening and closing times.

        B.     If, within the discretion of the city manager, a hardship will be imposed by requiring the applicant to submit the application ten days or more prior to the opening date, such an application may be received and processed hereunder during a shorter period of time; provided, however, a penalty of fifty percent of the first day’s license fee shall be charged in addition to all other fees provided in this chapter. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(5)

(part), 1970).

 

5.08.040 License—Application—Referral.
        The city clerk shall refer the application to the city manager who shall be responsible for authorizing or refusing the issuance of a license by the city clerk. The city manager shall first refer the application to the public safety director, police chief, fire warden, health officer, director of planning, director of public works and such other agencies as he or she may deem appropriate. Such agencies shall advise the city manager as to whether or not the business for which the application is submitted complies with and conforms to all applicable laws, ordinances, health and fire regulations. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(5), 1970).

 

5.08.050 License—Conditions for granting.
        The license provided for in this chapter shall be granted and accepted with the express understanding and agreement that the city manager may revoke the license at any time if he or she determines that it was obtained by false or fraudulent representations, or if he or she determines that said circus or carnival is conducted in an unlawful manner, or that the same is detrimental to the social peace or public morals of the community. Said revocation shall be in letter form and delivered either in person or by certified mail; provided further, that the holder of any license which is revoked may appeal within ten days after notice of revocation, to the city council which shall conduct a hearing on said revocation within thirty days. In this connection, it is the express intention of this chapter that the sole responsibility for the operation of any circus or carnival for which a license is issued here-under, shall be upon the licensee, and regardless of whether or not such operations are carried out by his or her agents, servants, employees or others, with or without his or her knowledge. The city council shall be the judge of the sufficiency of the causes for revocation, and the decision of the council thereon shall be final and conclusive. In the event of a revocation for a violation of this chapter and notification by the city manager, it shall be the duty of the police chief or public safety director, and he or she is authorized and empowered to immediately close such carnival or circus and to eject all participants therein from the premises. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(5)(part), 1970).

 

5.08.060 License—Appeal of denial.
        In the event that the city manager refuses authorization for a license, the applicant may file a written notice of appeal, within ten days after notice of refusal, to the city council, which shall conduct a hearing thereon at its next regular meeting and at which time it may grant or deny the license for which application is made. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(5)(part), 1970).

 

5.08.070 Cash deposit required.
        In addition to the fees herein provided, each circus or carnival shall post a cash deposit of two hundred dollars at the time of the application for the purpose of insuring that the premises on which the operations are to be conducted are left in a clean and sanitary condition upon conclusion thereof. Such deposit shall be returned to the person depositing the same after the health officer has duly inspected the vacated site and certified to the city clerk as to its cleanliness. If, in the opinion of the health officer, the premises are not in a clean and sanitary condition, he or she shall take such steps as he or she deems necessary to clean said premises, including the employment of persons and equipment for such purposes. The cost of such cleaning shall be paid out of the moneys deposited at the time of the application. Any surplus of funds deposited shall be returned to the person depositing the same. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(5)(part), 1970).

 

5.08.080 Prohibited where.
        It is unlawful to conduct a circus or carnival in any area other than one which has been zoned as M (Industrial District), C-2 (Commercial) or A-1 (Agricultural) in accordance with Title 17 of this code. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(5)(part), 1970).

Chapter 5.12 PUBLIC DANCES AND DANCE HALLS
5.12.010 Definitions.
        For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning as set forth in this section:

        A.    “Known,” when used in connection with the words “prostitute” or “male or female procurer” or “vagrant,” means and includes known to the manager, owner or lessee of the dance hall, or to the person conducting a dance, or to the police, or other authorities having to do with the regulation or supervision of public dance halls or public dances to be one of the persons named, or who has such reputation or character, or one who has pleaded guilty to or has been convicted of being a prostitute, male or female procurer or vagrant.

        B.     “Person” means and includes natural persons, co-partnerships, corporations and associations and shall include both sexes.

        C.     “Public dance” means and includes any dance to which the general public may gain admission with or without the payment of a fee.

        D.    “Public dance hall” means and includes any room, place or space in which a public dance, as defined in subsection C above, is conducted. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(5)(part), 1970).

 

5.12.020 Permit—Required.
        It is unlawful to maintain, operate or conduct a public dance hall as defined in this chapter within the city limits until the person owning or conducting the dance hall, or other place in which the same may be held, has first obtained a written permit therefor as hereinafter provided. It is further unlawful to hold or conduct a public dance in a place other than a public dance hall for which a permit has been obtained, unless the person holding or conducting such dance applies for a written permit as hereinafter provided. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A, 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(5)(part), 1970).

 

5.12.030 Permit—Application—Public dance hall.
        Applications for a permit to keep and conduct a public dance hall shall be on forms supplied by the city clerk and shall be substantially as follows:

 

APPLICATION FOR PERMIT TO
CONDUCT A PUBLIC DANCE HALL

 

_______________, 20__

The undersigned hereby makes application for a permit to keep and conduct a public dance hall at  ______________________ in the City of Waterford, County of Stanislaus, State of California, from date of issuance of permit, ________to________ and ________ including _________________, 20__.

 

It is hereby expressly agreed that in the event this permit shall be issued, that said dance hall shall be conducted in strict accord with the provisions of law regulating public dance halls, and the undersigned agrees that the permit is given and accepted subject to the provisions of this application, and that he shall be held responsible for violation of any provision of law or ordinance regulating public dance halls.

 

There are _____ square feet of dancing space in said hall.

 

The undersigned is the proprietor of the hall located at the above address, in which hall an application for keeping and conducting a public dance hall is hereby made.

 

_________________________

Signature of the Applicant

 

_________________________

Post Office Address of the Applicant

 

The foregoing application is approved and the number of attendants required to be present when said dance hall is open to the public is ________.

 

________________________________

Chief of Police of the City of Waterford

 

The foregoing application is approved and permit issued this ___ day of ______ 20__.

 

________________________________

City Clerk of the City of Waterford

 

(Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(5)(part), 1970).

 

5.12.040 Permit—Application—Public dance.
        Application for a permit to conduct a public dance shall be upon forms supplied by the city clerk and shall be substantially as follows:

 

APPLICATION FOR PERMIT TO
CONDUCT A PUBLIC DANCE

 

_______________, 20__

The undersigned hereby makes application for a permit to give a public dance at  ______________________ in the City of Waterford, County of Stanislaus, State of California, from date of issuance of this permit, to be held on the  _____ day of ________, 20__. It is hereby expressly agreed that in said dance shall be conducted in strict accord with the provisions of law regulating public dances, and the undersigned agrees that the permit is given and accepted subject to the provisions of this application, and that he shall be held responsible for any violation of any provision of law or ordinance regulating any public dance.

 

The owner or lessee of the premises in which such dances are to be held is

 _______________ name,

_______________ occupation.

 

_________________________

Signature of the Applicant

 

_________________________

Post Office Address of the Applicant

 

The foregoing application is approved and the number of attendants required to be present when said dance hall is open to the public is ________.

 

________________________________

Chief of Police of the City of Waterford

 

The foregoing application is approved and permit issued this ___ day of ______ 20__.

 

________________________________

City Clerk of the City of Waterford

 

(Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A, 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1 (5)(part), 1970).

 

5.12.050 Permit—Application—Referral.
        Upon receiving such application, the city clerk shall refer the same to the police chief for investigation, who may refer the application to the building inspector, fire warden or such other agencies as may be appropriate, as to whether or not the place for which it is asked a permit be given complies with and conforms to all laws, ordinances, health and fire regulations applicable thereto, and is properly ventilated and supplied with separate and sufficient toilet conveniences for each sex within the building in which the dance is to be conducted, and is a safe and proper place for the purpose for which it shall be used, and as to the moral character of the applicant. The police chief shall report thereon immediately to the city clerk. The city clerk shall thereupon grant or refuse said permit. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(5)(part), 1970).

 

5.12.060 Fee—Required.
        Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it is unlawful to maintain or conduct any public dance without paying to the city clerk therefor the fee fixed in this section. The fee to be paid shall be as follows:

        A.    Public dance hall, twelve dollars and fifty cents per quarter;

        B.     Single public dances, five dollars each. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A, 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(5)(part), 1970).

 

5.12.070 Fee—Exceptions.
        No license fee shall be required if no charge, fee, token or valuable consideration is given or received for admission to a public dance or dance hall, or if so given or received, all of the proceeds thereof are used, given or appropriated to charitable uses, after reduction and reimbursement of reasonable and necessary expenses of the dance. In such case, a verified statement of the applicant showing the conditions set forth in the foregoing sentence shall be endorsed upon the permit. The exemption from license fee provided in this section shall not, however, apply to public dances or the conduct of a public dance hall incident to or maintained in conjunction with any restaurant, tavern or similar establishment. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(5)(part), 1970).

 

5.12.080 Permit—Term.
        All permits granted hereunder shall be good for the date, or until the time in said permit specified, not exceeding one year. The same shall not be assignable. If the permits as provided in this chapter are revoked by the city council, no new permit shall be granted to such person, or to any person who was an agent or employee of such person at the time of any violation of this chapter, or at the time of the application for a new permit. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(5)(part), 1970).

 

5.12.090 Permit—Revocation—Appeal.
        The police chief shall have the right to revoke or suspend any permit issued hereunder and to take possession of such permit upon any grounds for refusal to issue a permit under this chapter. In addition, the failure of a holder of a permit to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall also constitute grounds for revocation or suspension of such permit. The action of the police chief in this respect shall be subject to an appeal to the city council. Notice of such appeal shall be filed with the city clerk within ten days after the revocation or suspension. Upon failure to file such notice within the ten-day period, the action of the police chief in revoking or suspending the permit shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(5)(part), 1970).

 

5.12.100 Permit—Revocation—Granting of new permit.
        If at any time the permit for a public dance hall is revoked for a violation of the provisions of this chapter, then in that event at least three months shall elapse before another permit shall be granted to the manager, owner or lessee of such premises. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(5)(part), 1970).

 

5.12.110 Permit—Appeal of denial.
        In the event that the city clerk refuses to issue any such permit for a public dance hall or the holding of a public dance, the applicant may appeal to the city council, who shall after hearing grant or deny the issuance of the permit applied for. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(5)(part), 1970).

 

5.12.120 Permit—Conditions for granting.
        All permits as provided in this chapter shall be granted and accepted upon the further understanding and agreement that all the terms, provisions and regulations contained in this chapter, as the same now is or may hereafter be amended, shall be fully complied with. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(5)(part), 1970).

 

5.12.130 Hours of operation.
        All dances shall be stopped and discontinued and all public dance halls shall be closed between the hours of two a.m. and six a.m. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(5)(part), 1970).

 

5.12.140 Attendants required.
        Every person who conducts a public dance hall or place where dancing is permitted shall at all times maintain and keep one or more attendants who shall be present at all times when said dance hall or place is opened to the public and when a public dance is being conducted therein. It shall be such attendant’s duty to see that the provisions of this chapter relating to the conduct of the persons attending said dance hall are enforced. The attendants shall be approved from time to time by the police chief, and no public dance shall be conducted without the presence of said attendant. The compensation of such attendant shall be paid by the person conducting, owning or managing said dance hall. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(5)(part), 1970).

Chapter 5.16 ENTERTAINMENT PERMITS
5.16.010 Person defined.
        The word “person” includes the plural and also includes corporations, partnerships or voluntary associations of any kind. (Ord. 71-4 §6, 1971).

 

5.16.020 Permit required.
        No person shall provide or permit any type of entertainment in any restaurant, coffee shop, eating establishment, cocktail lounge or place where food or other refreshments are served and which is open to the public, unless such person first obtains a permit to do so from the city council as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 71-4 §1, 1971).

 

5.16.030 Application.
        Applicants for all entertainment permits shall file a written application with the city clerk, which shall show the following:

        A.    Name and permanent address of applicant;

        B.     A detailed description of entertainment proposed;

        C.     The date, hours and location of proposed entertainment;

        D.    The names of persons having the management or supervision of the applicant’s business, and such other reasonable information as the council may require, including information as to the identity and character of person or persons having the management of applicant’s business;

        E.     The nature of the business to be carried on in connection with such entertainment. (Ord. 71-4 §2, 1971).

 

5.16.040 Fee—Application referral.
        A fee of one hundred dollars per year shall be paid by each licensee, and the advance payment of the fee of one hundred dollars shall accompany the filing of the application. The application shall be referred to the chief of police or such other person or persons as the council may desire for the purpose of making the investigation, and the council may have such reasonable time or times as may be necessary or convenient for such investigation and passing upon the application. (Ord. 71-4 §3, 1971).

 

5.16.050 Term—Conditions for granting.
        Permits may be granted by the council for a specific occasion, or if request is for a continuous permit, the permit shall be issued for no longer than one year. Before granting a permit the council must be satisfied as to the good character of the applicant and that the entertainment as proposed will not be detrimental to the public welfare, and that said entertainment will not create a nuisance. The council further ordains that any entertainment as herein defined which is either given without a permit or after refusal of a permit shall constitute a nuisance. (Ord. 71-4 §5, 1971).

 

5.16.060 Exceptions.
        The provisions of this chapter shall not apply in the following instances:

        A.    The use of a radio, television, music recording machine or juke box in any establishment;

        B.     Entertainment at any recreation park, circus or fairground;

        C.     Entertainment conducted by a bona fide club or society for charitable purposes and the bona fide members of such club only, or school entertainment’s or community programs. (Ord. 71-4 §4, 1971).

 

5.16.070 Violation declared infraction.
        Any person violating the provisions of this chapter is guilty of an infraction, and this chapter may also be enforced by civil process, including a writ for injunction or any other appropriate civil legal remedy. (Ord. 79-6 Art. III §H, 1979; Ord. 71-4 §7, 1971).

Chapter 5.20 GAMBLING AND UNLAWFUL GAMES
5.20.010 Gambling house prohibited.
        No person shall keep, conduct or maintain any house, room, apartment or place, used in whole or in part as a gambling house or place where any game is played, conducted, dealt or carried on with cards, dice, dominos or other device, for money, checks, chips, credit or any representative of value, as the result of which game chance is any determining factor, except as set forth in Section 5.20.040. The word “cards” as used in this chapter is not intended to and shall not include games known as bridge or whist. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(2)(part), 1970).

 

5.20.020 Permitting use as gambling house prohibited.
        No person shall knowingly permit any house, room, apartment or place owned by him or her or under his or her charge or control to be used in whole or in part as a gambling house or place of playing, conducting, dealing or carrying on any game, played with cards, dice, dominos or other device, for money, checks, chips, credit or any representative of value, as the result of which game chance is any determining factor, except as set forth in Section 5.20.040. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(2)(part), 1970).

 

5.20.030 Betting prohibited.
        No person shall deal, operate, attend, play or bet at or against any game, as the result of which game chance is any determining factor, which game is played, conducted, dealt or carried on with cards, dice, dominos or other device, for money, checks, chips, credit or any representative of value, in any house, room, apartment or place, except as set forth in Section 5.20.040. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(2)(part), 1970).

 

5.20.040 Exceptions.
        The following exceptions are made to the provisions of Sections 5.20.010 through 5.20.030:

        A.    Private Games. Said provisions shall not apply to occasional private games, otherwise lawful, carried on for purely social purposes in a private home, neither shall said provisions apply to otherwise lawful games, other than card games, conducted by a private group of customers, for the sole purposes of determining which member of said group shall pay for food, refreshments or beverages for immediate consumption by the group.

        B.     Benevolent Organizations Licensed. A license may be issued in the reasonable discretion of the police chief to any incorporated or chartered fraternal, labor, benevolent or charitable organization or to any religious association, which organization or association has been continuously carrying on within the city the activities for which it was organized for a period of not less than two years immediately preceding making application thereof. Said license shall authorize such organization or association to conduct a game room or rooms wherein games not in conflict with any state law may be played and conducted, incidental to the other activities of such organizations, but in conformity with the provisions of this subsection. No advertising or advertising signs shall be permitted in connection with said operation. The licensee shall have a paid attendant in such room at all times when games are in progress, and it shall be his or her duty to report to the licensee any violation of law.

        C.     Members Only. No such game room shall be open to the public, but shall be used only by the members of the respective organization or association licensed and shall be maintained in the building principally used by the licensee.

        D.    Bingo Games for Charitable Purposes Permitted. Said provisions shall not apply to bingo games in the city which are conducted for charitable purposes in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 5.24 of this code. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part) and Art. III §1, 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(2)(part), 1970).

 

5.20.050 License—Application.
        Application for a license under the provisions of Section 5.20.040(B) shall be made to the police chief in writing and shall set forth facts which applicant contends entitled it to a license thereunder. Said application shall be verified. Said license shall be valid only for the city fiscal year, and shall be issued originally or renewed annually upon application to the police chief without action by the city council, unless a written objection to the issuance of the license has been filed with the police chief or he or she recommends denial of the license, in which event the application shall be referred by him or her to the city council for action in accordance with the provisions of Section 5.20.060. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(2)(part), 1970).

 

5.20.060 License—Denial, suspension or revocation.
        An application or license under the provisions of Section 5.20.040(B) may be denied, suspended or revoked by the city council upon proof to its satisfaction of a violation of any law by the applicant or licensee, or upon a determination of the city council that the applicant or licensee does not meet the requirements of said section, or upon determination by the city council that the conduct of the particular game room would be or is inimical to the public health, morals, safety, peace or general welfare. If a license is revoked, no new license shall be issued to the licensee for a period of one year subsequent to the revocation. No license shall be denied, suspended, or revoked until after a hearing has been held by the city council, notice of which shall be given in writing by the police chief at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing by depositing the notice with postage fully prepaid thereon in the mail, addressed to the applicant or licensee at the address appearing on its application of license. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(2)(part), 1970).

Chapter 5.24 BINGO GAMES
5.24.010 Bingo defined.
        As used in this chapter “bingo” means a game of chance in which prizes are awarded on the basis of designated numbers or symbols on a card which conform to numbers or symbols selected at random. (Ord. 77-8 §12, 1977).

 

5.24.020 Permitted for charitable purposes.
        The city is authorized pursuant to Section 19, Article IV of the California Constitution and Section 326.5 of the Penal Code to provide for, and does provide for bingo games, but only for charitable purposes in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 77-8 §1, 1977).

 

5.24.030 License—Required.
        No person, firm, corporation, organization or association shall engage in, carry on, maintain, conduct or cause to be engaged in, carried on, maintained or conducted a bingo game in the city without first having secured a license from the police chief in accordance with the requirements of this chapter, nor without complying with the regulations contained in this chapter pertaining to the operation of bingo games. (Ord. 77-8 §2, 1977).

 

5.24.040 License—Eligibility.
        Organizations exempted from the payment of the bank and corporation tax by Sections 23701a, 23701b, 23701d, 23701e, 23701f, 23701g and 23701l of the Revenue and Taxation Code and mobile home park associations and senior citizens organizations, are eligible to apply to the city for a license to conduct bingo games in the city under the provisions of Section 326.5 of the Penal Code and the provisions of this chapter; provided, that the proceeds of such games are used only for charitable purposes. (Ord. 77-8 §3, 1977).

 

5.24.050 License—Applicant qualification.
        No license shall be issued to any organization unless such applicant is an eligible organization under Section 5.24.040 and its application conforms to the requirements, terms and conditions of this chapter. (Ord. 77-8 §5, 1977).

 

5.24.060 License—Application—Term.
        Applications for a license to conduct bingo games pursuant to this chapter shall be executed under penalty of perjury and submitted to the police chief on forms to be obtained from the city manager upon payment, to the city, of the license fee prescribed in Section 5.24.070(F). The license issued shall be for a term of one year from the date of issuance, subject to removal and annual fee. (Ord. 77-8 §4, 1977).

 

5.24.070 License—Application—Contents.
        The application for a license shall contain the following:

        A.    The name of the applicant organization and a statement that the applicant is an eligible organization under Section 5.24.040;

        B.     The name and signature of at least two officers, including the presiding officer, of the organization;

        C.     A list of the names of members of the applicant organization who will, from time to time, operate and staff bingo games;

        D.    The particular property within the city, including the street number, owned or leased by the applicant, used by such applicant for an office or for performance of the purposes for which the applicant is organized, on which property bingo games will be conducted, together with the occupancy capacity of such place;

        E.     Proposed days of week and hours of day for conduct of bingo games;

        F.     The annual license fee fixed by the city council by resolution shall accompany the application. The fee, whether for the initial license or renewal, shall not exceed fifty dollars, and if an application for a license is denied, one-half of any license fee paid shall be refunded to the organization;

        G.    The applicant shall also submit, with its application, a letter or other evidence from the State Franchise Tax Board, Secretary of State or other agency having knowledge of such facts, showing that the applicant meets at least one of the conditions of eligibility stated in Section 5.24.040;

        H.    A statement that the applicant agrees to conduct bingo games in strict accordance with the provisions of Section 326.5 of the Penal Code and this chapter as they may be amended from time to time, and agrees that the license to conduct bingo games may be revoked by the police chief upon violation of any of such provisions;

        I.      Said application shall be signed by the applicant under penalty of perjury. (Ord. 77-8 §6, 1977).

 

5.24.080 License—Investigation of applicant.
        Upon receipt of the completed application, the police chief shall make an investigation to determine if all of the statements in the application are true and shall refer the application to other interested agencies, including but not limited to the building inspector, the county health officer and the fire marshal, to determine if the appropriate zoning ordinances and regulations, building code ordinances, health ordinances and regulations, and the provisions of the Uniform Fire Code have been or will be complied with. (Ord. 77-8 §7, 1977).

 

5.24.090 License—Issuance—Contents.
        Upon being satisfied that the applicant is fully qualified, under the law, to conduct bingo games in the city, the police chief shall issue a license to said applicant, which shall contain the following information:

        A.    The name and nature of the organization to whom the license is issued;

        B.     The address where bingo games are authorized to be conducted;

        C.     The occupancy capacity of the room in which bingo games are to be conducted;

        D.    The date of the expiration of such license;

        E.     Such other information as may be necessary or desirable for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 77-8 §8, 1977).

 

5.24.100 License—Posting.
        An organization licensed pursuant to this chapter shall not conduct or permit to be conducted a bingo game unless said license is posted in a conspicuous place during the conduct of any bingo game. The licensee shall produce and exhibit the same when applying for renewal thereof, and whenever requested to do so by any peace officer or officer authorized to issue, inspect or collect licenses. (Ord. 77-8 §9, 1977).

 

5.24.110 License—Revocation—Suspension and hearing.
        A.    Whenever it appears to the police chief that the licensee is conducting a bingo game in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, the police chief shall have the authority to summarily suspend the license and order the licensee to immediately cease and desist any further operation of any bingo game.

        B.     Any person who continues to conduct a bingo game after any summary suspension thereof under subsection A above is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

        C.     The order issued under subsection A above shall also notify the licensee that it shall have five days from the date of such order to request a hearing to determine whether such license shall be revoked. Failure to request, in writing, such hearing before the police chief within said five-day period, shall result in a revocation of the license.

        D.    Upon such request by the licensee whose license has been suspended under subsection A above for a hearing to determine whether such license shall be revoked, the police chief shall provide such hearing within ten days after receipt of such request at which hearing the suspended licensee may appear before the police chief for the purpose of presenting evidence why the license should not be revoked. No license shall be revoked under this section unless notice of the time and place of such hearing shall have first been given at least five days before the hearing, if written request for a hearing has been made, by depositing in the United States mail a notice directed to said suspended licensee at the address given in the application. The notice shall set forth a summary of the ground advanced as the basis of the suspension and revocation.

        E.     Any organization whose license is revoked under this section shall not conduct any bingo game in the city until such time as the city council, on appeal, determines to overrule the decision of the police chief. (Ord. 77-8 §10, 1977).

 

5.24.120 License—Revocation—Alternative procedure.
        A.    Whenever it appears to the police chief that the licensee is conducting bingo games in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, or that the license was obtained by fraudulent representation and no summary suspension is ordered, under Section 5.24.110, the license may be revoked; provided, however, the licensee may appear before the police chief at the time fixed by the police chief, for the purpose of presenting evidence why the license should not be revoked. No license shall be revoked under this section unless written notice shall have first been given at least five days before the hearing thereof by depositing in the United States mail a notice directed to said licensee at the address given in the application. The notice shall set forth a summary of the grounds advanced as the basis of the revocation.

        B.     Any organization whose license is revoked under this section shall not conduct any bingo game in the city until such time as the city council, on appeal, determines to overrule the decision of the police chief. (Ord. 77-8 §10.1, 1977).

 

5.24.130 License—Revocation—Appeal.
        A.    Any holder of a license whose license is revoked under this chapter shall have the right, within ten days after receiving notice in writing of the revocation, to file a written appeal to the city council. Such appeal shall set forth the specific ground or grounds on which it is based. The city council shall hold a hearing on the appeal within thirty days after its receipt by the city, or at a time thereafter agreed upon and shall cause the appellant to be given at least ten days’ written notice of such hearing. At the hearing the appellant or its authorized representative shall have the right to present evidence and a written or oral argument, or both, in support of its appeal. The determination of the city council on the appeal shall be final.

        B.     Any organization whose license is finally revoked may not again apply for a license to conduct bingo games in the city for a period of one year from the date of such revocation; provided, however, if the ground for revocation is cancellation of the exemption granted under one of the provisions of the Revenue and Taxation Code mentioned in Section 5.24.040, such organization may again apply for a license upon proof of reinstatement of said exemption. (Ord. 77-8 §11, 1977).

 

5.24.140 Prize value.
        The total value of prizes awarded during the conduct of any bingo games shall not exceed two hundred fifty dollars in cash or kind, or both, for each separate game which is held. (Ord. 77-8 §13, 1977).

 

5.24.150 Use of profits—Recordkeeping.
        A.    With respect to organizations exempt from payment of the bank and corporation tax by Section 23701d of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all profits derived from a bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. Such profits shall be used only for charitable purposes. With respect to other organizations authorized to conduct bingo games pursuant to this section, all proceeds derived from a bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. Such proceeds shall be used only for charitable purposes, except as follows:

        1.     Such proceeds may be used for prizes;

        2.     A portion of such proceeds, not to exceed ten percent of the proceeds after the deduction for prizes, or five hundred dollars per month, whichever is less, may be used for rental of property, overhead and administrative expenses.

        B.     The licensee shall keep full and accurate record of the income and expenses received and disbursed in connection with its operation, conduct, promotion, supervision and any other phase of bingo games which are authorized by this chapter. The city, by and through its authorized officers, shall have the right to examine and audit such records at any reasonable time, and the licensee shall fully cooperate with the city by making such records available. (Ord. 77-8 §14, 1977).

 

5.24.160 Financial interest in licensee only.
        No individual, corporation, partnership or other legal entity except the licensee shall hold a financial interest in the conduct of a bingo game operated by the licensee. (Ord. 77-8 §15, 1977).

 

5.24.170 Exclusive operation by licensee.
        A bingo game shall be operated and staffed only by numbers of the licensee organization whose names shall have been previously given to the police chief in accordance with Section 5.24.070(C). Such members shall at all times during the conduct and operation of any bingo game be conspicuously identified by a name tag or other appropriate means, as members authorized to operate and staff such game. Such members shall not receive a profit, wage, or salary from any bingo game. Only the licensee shall operate such game, or participate in the promotion, supervision or any other phase of such game. (Ord. 77-8 §16, 1977).

 

5.24.180 Conducted only on licensee’s property.
        A licensee shall conduct a bingo game only on property owned or leased by it, and which property is used by such organization for an office or for performance of the purposes for which the organization is organized, although it is not necessary that the property be used or leased exclusively by the licensee. The license issued under this chapter shall authorize the holder thereof to conduct bingo games only on such property, the address of which is stated in the application. In the event the described property ceases to be used as an office or as a place for performance of the purposes for which the licensee is organized, the license shall have no further force or effect. A new license may be obtained by an eligible organization, upon application under this chapter, when it again owns or leases property used by it for an office or for performance of the purposes for which the organization is organized. (Ord. 77-8 §19, 1977).

 

5.24.190 Open to public.
        All bingo games shall be open to the public, not just to the members of the authorized organization. (Ord. 77-8 §17, 1977).

 

5.24.200 Attendance limited to occupancy capacity.
        Notwithstanding that bingo games are open to the public, attendance at any bingo game shall be limited to the occupancy capacity of the room in which such game is conducted as determined by the fire department and building inspector of the city in accordance with applicable laws and regulations. Licensee shall not reserve seats or space for any person. (Ord. 77-8 §18, 1977).

 

5.24.210 Use of credit prohibited.
        No licensee shall issue chips or money to a patron on credit or loan (including but not limited to IOU’s and checks to be held) or allow any patron to play on credit. (Ord. 77-8 §21, 1977).

 

5.24.220 Physical presence at game required.
        No person shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game, unless the person is physically present at the time and place in which the bingo game is being conducted. (Ord. 77-8 §22, 1977).

 

5.24.230 Intoxicated persons not to participate.
        No person who is in a state of intoxication shall be allowed to participate. (Ord. 77-8 §23, 1977).

 

5.24.240 Minors not to participate.
        No person under the age of eighteen years of age shall be allowed to participate in any bingo game. (Ord. 77-8 §20, 1977).

 

5.24.250 Hours of operation.
        No licensee shall conduct any bingo game more than six hours out of any twenty-four hour period. No bingo game shall be conducted before nine a.m., nor after two a.m. of any day. (Ord. 77-8 §24, 1977).

 

5.24.260 Posting of rules and regulations required.
        The licensee shall post in a conspicuous place during the conduct of any bingo game the rules and regulations of said game. (Ord. 77-8 §25, 1977).

 

5.24.270 Receipt or payment of profit by a person a misdemeanor under state law.
        It is a misdemeanor under Section 326.5(b) of the Penal Code of the state for any person to receive or pay a profit, wage, or salary from any bingo game authorized under this chapter, a violation of which is punishable by a fine not to exceed ten thousand dollars, which fine shall be deposited in the general fund of the city. (Ord. 77-8 §26, 1977).

 

5.24.280 City may enjoin violation.
        The city may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin a violation of Section 326.5 of the Penal Code or of this chapter. (Ord. 77-8 §27, 1977).

Chapter 5.28 GARAGE SALES
5.28.010 Intent and purpose.
        It is the intent and purpose of the city council, in adopting the ordinance codified in this chapter, to regulate those activities which, in the most technical sense have business or commercial characteristics but which, because of the manner in which they are conducted or the purposes for which they are being operated are truly noncommercial in nature. Said regulations are intended to prevent the expansion of such noncommercial operations into truly commercial operations and to regulate the method of conducting the activity so that it will be confined to noncommercial type of operation. It is the purpose of this chapter to prevent such activities from unfairly competing with licensed revenue-producing commercial and business enterprises and to prevent the conduct of commercial enterprises upon other than commercially zoned property. (Ord. 77-1 §2, 1977).

 

5.28.020 Definitions.
        For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall be defined as follows:

        A.    “Garage sale” means a sale conducted by a person or persons for the purpose of selling, trading, bargaining, exchanging or otherwise disposing of unwanted or surplus household furnishings or goods, or other tangible personal property, usually conducted in a garage, on a patio, upon a driveway, or on or in any portion of a premises in a residential zone or use and for which no inventory or permanent or detailed records are kept on the transactions thus carried out. All sales designated “lawn sale,” “attic sale,” “rummage sale,” “moving sale,” “flea market sale” or other terms of similar or like intent and having the foregoing characteristics and purposes shall be deemed garage sales.

        B.     “Person” means and includes a corporation, firm, partnership or association as well as an individual. (Ord. 77-1 §3, 1977).

 

5.28.030 Exceptions.
        This chapter shall not apply to the following persons:

        A.    Persons selling goods pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent jurisdiction;

        B.     Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public officials. (Ord. 77-1 §11, 1977).

 

5.28.040 Permit—Required.
        Any person or persons proposing to promote, advertise or conduct a garage sale shall, prior thereto, obtain a garage sale permit from the finance director. (Ord. 77-1 §4, 1977).

 

5.28.050 Permit—Application.
        Any person desiring the permit required by Section 5.28.040 shall make verified application therefor in a form satisfactory to the finance director. The application shall contain the following:

        A.    The name of the applicant;

        B.     The address of the applicant;

        C.     The location of the proposed garage sale;

        D.    The date or dates upon which it is proposed to conduct the garage sale;

        E.     A general description of the property proposed to be offered for sale, including serial numbers from those items assigned such numbers. (Ord. 77-1 §5, 1977).

 

5.28.060 Permit—Issuance—Information required.
        Upon receipt of the application, the finance director shall issue the applicant a garage sale permit; provided, that no garage sale permit has been issued to the applicant for a garage sale at any location in the city within the twelve-month period immediately preceding the date or dates of the proposed garage sale. The permit shall specify the following:

        A.    The name of the permittee;

        B.     The exact address or location where the garage sale is to be conducted;

        C.     The date or dates upon which the sale is to be conducted;

        D.    The hours of the day during which said sale is to be conducted;

        E.     The requirement that only one sign in the public right-of-way may be used to advertise said sale, which sign shall be displayed only at the location of the sale, and only during the date or dates and hours of said sale; and the further requirement that said sign shall not exceed six square feet in area nor six feet in height;

        F.     A general description of the property to be offered for sale;

        G.    The requirement that the permit shall be revoked for failure to comply with all terms and conditions thereof, or the provisions of this chapter or other applicable provisions of law;

        H.    The requirement that the permit shall be prominently displayed at the location of the garage sale; and

        I.      Such other conditions relating to the promotion, advertising and conducting of the garage sale which, in the opinion of the police chief, are necessary or proper for the preservation of the peace, elimination of traffic hazards, safety of pedestrians, preservation of public or private property, or like or similar matters. (Ord. 77-1 §6, 1977).

 

5.28.070 Permit—Issuance—Frequency.
        Not more than one garage sale permit shall be issued to any person during any twelve-month period. No garage sale permit shall be issued permitting the promotion, advertising or conducting of a garage sale for more than three consecutive days. (Ord. 77-1 §7, 1977).

 

5.28.080 Permit—Subsequent issuance.
        For subsequent garage sales in any consecutive twelve-month period, a use permit must first be obtained from the planning commission, and shall comply with all requirements of the zoning and business license ordinances of the city. (Ord. 77-1 §8, 1977).

 

5.28.090 Permit—Revocation.
        The finance director shall have the power to revoke at any time any permit granted in accordance with this chapter upon determining that the garage sale permitted thereby has been promoted, advertised or conducted in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, or in violation of the provisions or conditions of the garage sale permit issued for such sale, or in such manner as to deceive or defraud the public, or that the permittee has committed any of the following:

        A.    Made any material misstatement in the application for such permit;

        B.     Been guilty of any fraudulent practice, or practices in the promotion, advertising or conduct of the sale authorized by such permit;

        C.     Violated any of the provisions or conditions of the permit, or violated any of the provisions of this chapter or of any other provision or law in promoting, advertising, or conducting such sale. (Ord. 77-1 §9, 1977).

 

5.28.100 Right of appeal.
        Any person denied a permit, or aggrieved by the conditions attached thereto, or having had a permit revoked, may appeal the decision of the finance director or planning commission to the city council by filing, within ten days after notice of the denial or conditions or revocation, a written request for review of said decision and stating facts supporting such request. The council shall, upon the review, affirm, modify or reverse the decision of the finance director or planning commission. (Ord. 77-1 §10, 1977).

 

5.28.110 Violation declared infraction.
        Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of an infraction. (Ord. 77-1 §12, 1977).

Chapter 5.32 POOL AND BILLIARD PARLORS
5.32.010 Pool or billiard parlor defined.
        For the purpose of this chapter, a pool or billiard parlor means a room in which there is one or more pool or billiard tables used for the purpose of playing pool or billiards, for which compensation is paid to the owner, proprietor, manager, lessee or possessor thereof. (Ord. 79-17, 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(2)(part), 1970).

 

5.32.020 Hours of operation.
        It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, either as principal, agent, servant or employee, to operate, conduct or keep open any pool or billiard parlor between the hours of two a.m. and six a.m. following. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(2)(part), 1970).

 

5.32.030 Visibility of play required.
        No person, firm or corporation shall maintain, operate or carry on any pool or billiard parlor in such a way that any part or portion of said room is partitioned off from the main room; nor operate, conduct or maintain any such pool or billiard parlor, or permit games of pool or billiards to be played or conducted, so that any player thereof shall not be fully visible from the front part of the main room at all times. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(2)(part), 1970).

Chapter 5.36 RESTAURANTS
5.36.010 Definitions.
        For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall be defined as follows:

        A.    “Food” or “beverage” means and includes all articles used, for food, drink, confectionery or condiment, whether simple or compound, and all substances and ingredients used in the preparation thereof for human consumption.

        B.     “Itinerant restaurant” means any restaurant, operating from temporary facilities, serving, offering for sale, selling or giving away food or beverage and includes, but is not limited to, a restaurant where only wrapped sandwiches or other wrapped and packaged, ready-to-eat foods are served, and any mobile unit on which food is prepared and served.

        C.     “Person” means natural person, club, including veterans’ club, firm, corporation, partnership, organization, association or political subdivision.

        D.    “Restaurant” means any coffee chop, cafeteria, short order café, luncheonette, tavern, sandwich stand, soda fountain, itinerant restaurant, vehicle, private and public school cafeteria or eating establishment, in-plant or employee eating establishment, whether private or public, organization, club, including veterans’ club, boardinghouse, guest house, or political subdivision, which gives, sells or offers for sale, food to the public, guests, patrons, members or employees as well as kitchens in which food is prepared on the premises for serving elsewhere, including catering function.

        E.     “Vehicle” means any vehicle upon which food or beverage is displayed, sold or offered for sale, or given away. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(5)(part), 1970).

 

5.36.020 Permit—Required.
        It is declared unlawful for any person to engage in the business of conducting a restaurant within the city without first having obtained, and thereafter keeping posted in a conspicuous place on the premises for which it is issued, an unexpired permit to conduct such business as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(5)(part), 1970).

 

5.36.030 Permit—Application.
        Any person desiring a permit to conduct a restaurant in the city shall file with the health officer of Stanislaus County, or his or her authorized representative, an application in writing requesting that a permit be issued to the person therein named. Plans for any new restaurant construction and remodeling shall be submitted to the health officer, or his or her authorized representative, for approval. Such application shall be upon a form supplied by said health officer, and shall state that if the permit be granted, the applicant shall conform to and comply with all requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(5)(part), 1970).

 

5.36.040 Permit—Issuance—Display.
        Immediately upon receipt of such application, the health officer, or his or her authorized representative, shall investigate the premises on which it is proposed to conduct said business and determine whether the same and the equipment used or to be used therein, comply with the rules and regulations prescribed by this chapter and with the laws of the state pertaining to restaurants, and if satisfied that said premises and equipment comply with such rules and regulations and laws, he or she shall issue a permit to the applicant to conduct such business. Said permit, when issued, shall be kept posted in a conspicuous place on the premises for which it is issued, and no permit shall be transferable from one person to another (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(5)(part), 1970).

 

5.36.050 Permit—Term.
        Each permit issued by the county health officer for conduct of a restaurant shall expire at the end of twelve calendar months from the date of issuance thereof, or at such time as the person to whom such permit was issued ceases to conduct said restaurant, whichever shall first occur. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(5)(part), 1970).

 

5.36.060 Permit—Revocation.
        Any permit to conduct a restaurant may be revoked by the county health officer in the event that he or she determines that any of the regulations contained in this chapter have been violated, whereupon said permit shall be surrendered to said health officer. Any person whose permit has been revoked by the health officer as herein provided, may appeal to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal within ten days of such act of revocation, with the city clerk and ex officio clerk of the city council. At its next regular meeting following the filing of a notice of appeal, the city council shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal, and the clerk shall provide notice of said hearing to the appellant and to the health officer. At the hearing, the city council may receive evidence and inquire into such revocation and shall have power in its discretion to restore such permit, or affirm the act of the health officer in revoking said permit. Any restaurant the permit for which has been revoked by the health officer, shall remain closed pending the hearing of any appeal and decision thereon by the city council. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(5)(part), 1970).

 

5.36.070 Operation regulations.
        Any person operating a restaurant within the city shall be governed by the following regulations. The violation of any said regulation shall be and constitute grounds for revocation of the permit to conduct said business within the city:

        A.    Regulation No. 1—Statutes. Any person operating a restaurant shall meet and comply with all requirements of the California Food Sanitation Act and the California Restaurant Act and all other laws of the state pertaining to restaurants and the premises on which the same are conducted.

        B.     Regulation No. 2—Equipment. Any piece of equipment or any fixture in any restaurant which has deteriorated to such an extent as to be no longer satisfactory for use shall be replaced promptly by equipment deemed satisfactory by the county health officer.

        C.     Regulation No. 3—Hood. Each cooking stove, griddle, or fat fryer used in connection with the restaurant business must have an approved power ventilation system. Hoods, where used, must have an area at least twenty-five percent greater than the area of the stove, griddle, or fat fryer and must lead to a forced air ventilating flue.

        D.    Regulation No. 4—Sink. Wherever utensils are washed and chemically sanitized, a three-compartment, smooth surfaced sink of noncorrodible material must be provided which must have smooth metal supports, corrugated metal drain-board and smooth metal splash board extending the full length of the sink and drainboard; provided, however, that a two-compartment sink described as above shall be acceptable wherever proper facilities for hot water sanitization are available; provided further, that mechanical dishwashing machines approved by the health officer and sinks constructed of material approved by the health officer may be used. Metal-1ined wood for sinks and drainboards is prohibited. Likewise, wood or metal-1ined wood is prohibited for use as soiled-dish receptacles.

        E.     Regulation No. 5—Lavatory Facilities. Adequate and convenient hand-washing facilities shall be provided within or adjacent to toilet rooms, including hot and cold running water, soap and approved sanitary towels.

        F.     Regulation No. 6—Plumbing. Every plumbing fixture must be provided with running water. Plumbing fixtures from which wastes are discharged must be properly trapped and each trap must be effectively vented and these fixtures must be connected to an approved sewerage system.

        G.    Regulation No. 7—Refrigeration. Frozen foods must be properly refrigerated so as to assure their preservation. Every cold room and every ice box or refrigerator must be held at a temperature below fifty degrees Fahrenheit. Cream pies must be kept under refrigeration. Wastewater from any ice box, refrigerator or from any pump, must not be discharged onto the ground, but into a sink which is properly plumbed, as in Regulation No. 6.

        H.    Regulation No. 8—Display or Storage. Fruits, vegetables and all other foods must not be openly displayed or stored lower than eighteen inches above the level of the floor. Dirt floors are prohibited in any storage room.

        I.      Regulation No. 9—Health Requirements. No person shall handle or serve food or drink in any restaurant or sanitize any of the utensils and/or dishes in any restaurant for a period of time in excess of thirty days unless such person shall have in his or her possession a negative X-ray card showing and indicating that within one year prior thereto his or her chest had been X-rayed and that such person was then free from tuberculosis. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(5)(part), 1970).

Chapter 5.38 OUTDOOR ENTERTAINMENT ACTIVITIES
5.38.010 Legislative intent.
        It is the intent of the city of Waterford in enacting this chapter to accomplish the following:

        A.    To provide individuals and organizations who desire to conduct occasional outdoor entertainment-activities of short duration with a concise, responsive and prompt license application process which clearly identifies the requirements for obtaining a license;

        B.     To exercise the police power of the city to the fullest extent in order to regulate outdoor entertainment activities in recognition that such activities can pose a serious threat to the safety, health and welfare of the public; and

        C.     To adopt a licensing procedure pursuant to the provisions of Sections 16100 et seq., of the California Business and Professions Code as the exclusive method of regulating the activities governed by this chapter. (Ord. 99-02 §1, 1999).

 

5.38.020 Authority.
        This chapter is adopted pursuant to the police power of the city of Waterford, as embodied in Article XI, Section 7, of the California Constitution for the purpose of regulating the activities described herein so as to assure that the public’s health, safety and general welfare are not threatened or harmed. The requirement of a license for which a fee is charged is adopted herein pursuant to said police power and pursuant to Sections 16100 et seq., of the California Business and Professions Code in recognition by the city council of the city of Waterford that the investigation of an application for a license and other actions taken to enforce the provisions of this chapter, including, but not limited to, the enforcement of conditions associated with an issued license, are tasks which consume city resources and are beyond the tasks ordinarily provided by the city. (Ord. 99-02 §1, 1999).

 

5.38.030 Application of chapter.
        This chapter is intended to and shall only apply to outdoor entertainment activities, as defined herein. (Ord. 99-02 §1, 1999).

 

5.38.040 Exclusivity.
        The provisions of this chapter shall supersede the provisions of any other chapter, and the issuance of a license pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to satisfy and supersede any and all other chapters which would otherwise be applicable to the activities governed by this chapter. (Ord. 99-02 §1, 1999).

 

5.38.050 Outdoor entertainment activities defined.
        “Outdoor entertainment activity” means any musical, theatrical or other entertainment activity to which members of the public are invited or admitted and which is held at any place other than a facility for which a valid use permit has been issued by the city of Waterford which authorizes the activity to take place at said location and such permit regulates outdoor entertainment activity. (Ord. 99-02 §1, 1999).

 

5.38.060 Chief of police services defined.
        As used herein, any and all references to “chief of police services” shall be understood to mean the chief of police, or if law enforcement services are being provided by the sheriff of Stanislaus County, the officer designated by the sheriff providing chief of police services in the city of Waterford, and any person designated by the chief of police or sheriff, whichever is applicable. (Ord. 99-02 §1, 1999).

 

5.38.070 City manager defined.
        As used herein, any and all references to “city manager” shall be understood to mean the city manager of the city of Waterford and any person designated by the city manager of the city of Waterford. (Ord. 99-02 §1, 1999).

 

5.38.080 License required.
        A.    It is unlawful for any individual or organization to operate, maintain, conduct, advertise, sell or furnish tickets for admission to an outdoor entertainment activity in the incorporated area of the city unless the license required by this chapter has been obtained from the city.

        B.     It is unlawful for the owner or possessor of any real property to knowingly engage in any of the activities set forth in subsection A of this section or to knowingly allow any other person to do so without a license having been obtained pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 99-02 §1, 1999).

 

5.38.090 License application contents and fee.
        A.    Application for a license required by this chapter shall be made in writing to the city manager, or designee, at least fourteen days prior to the proposed date of the activity and shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee in the amount as may be set from time to time by resolution of the city and shall contain the following information:

        1.     The name, age, residence, mailing address and telephone number of:

        a.     The person(s) making the application;

        b.     The property owner(s).

        2.     If the property owner(s) is not an applicant for the license, then the applicant(s) shall obtain and provide the city with a statement signed by the property owner which confirms that the property owner has given his or her permission for his or her property to be used as the site for the outdoor activity.

        3.     A description of the location of the premises, including a map or diagram, where the activity is proposed to be conducted, and which includes an indication of all land to be used for parking or other uses incidental to the activity.

        4.     The proposed date or dates and hours of operation of the activity.

        5.     A description of the nature of the activities.

        6.     An estimate of the maximum number of persons expected to be admitted to the activity, including spectators, participants and vendors, if any.

        7.     A statement of the applicant’s program and plans to provide the following:

        a.     Fire protection;

        b.     Security;

        c.     Potable water supply and facilities;

        d.     Food supply and concessions;

        e.     Rest rooms and sanitation facilities;

        f.      Medical facilities and services;

        g.     Vehicle parking, access for vehicles and traffic control;

        h.     Overnight facilities and ground illumination in the event that arrangements are made for participants to remain at night or overnight; and

        i.      Provisions for clean-up of the premises and removal of all trash, rubbish, etc.

        8.     A statement of the applicant’s plan for public safety and security for the activity.

        B.     The completed application shall be presented to the city manager or designee, who will provide a copy of the application to chief of police services, or designee. (Ord. 99-02 §1, 1999).

 

5.38.100 License application investigation.
        Upon receipt of a complete application and the application fee, chief of police services shall investigate the matter with particular attention to the concerns related to the public’s safety, health and welfare  as may be discovered. Chief of police services has the authority to issue a license, with or without conditions, or to deny an application in the exercise of his or her discretion. (Ord. 99-02 §1, 1999).

 

5.38.110 Conditions of license.
        A.    Chief of police services may require that the applicant meet reasonable conditions and may issue a license provided that said conditions are met at any and all times during the operation of the outdoor entertainment activity. Conditions may include, but are not limited to, provisions to address or regulate any or all of the following subjects:

        1.     Fire protection;

        2.     Security;

        3.     Potable water supply and facilities;

        4.     Hours of operation;

        5.     Noise level;

        6.     Food supply and concessions;

        7.     Rest rooms and sanitation facilities;

        8.     Medical facilities and services;

        9.     Vehicle parking, access for vehicles and traffic control;

        10.   Dust control;

        11.   Overnight facilities and ground illumination in the event that the sheriff has approved arrangements made for participants to remain at night or overnight;

        12.   Provisions for clean-up of the premises and removal of all trash, rubbish, etc.; and,

        13.   Requiring applicant to contract with the sheriff for additional law enforcement services pursuant to Section 53069.8 of the California Government Code.

        B.     Chief of police services, in its discretion, may require that the applicant provide adequate security, by the way of performance bonds, indemnity bonds or deposits of cash in order to satisfy any conditions imposed upon the issuance of a license and the conduct of the activity.

        C.     If conditions are imposed by chief of police services, the applicant shall furnish proof to the satisfaction of chief of police services that any and all conditions have and will be met during the operation of the activity and that any required security has been given, before the license may be issued.

        D.    Any security required may include the posting of an indemnity bond, a performance bond in favor of the city in connection with the operation of the activity, or a cash deposit in an amount sufficient to provide the city with the means to satisfy the condition in the event that the applicant fails to do so. The amounts of any and all of the security shall be determined by the sheriff.

        E.     The applicant may also be required by city manager to enter into an indemnification agreement with the city obligating the applicant to defend and indemnify the city, its agents, officers, employees against any and all loss, injury and damage of any nature whatsoever, including injury and damage to persons or property or both arising out of or in any way connected with the outdoor entertainment activity.

        F.     Chief of police services may also require that the applicant provide a corporate surety bond prepared by a corporate bonding company authorized to do business in the state, indemnifying the city and the owners of property adjoining the outdoor entertainment activity site for all costs necessitated by such activity to clean up and/or remove debris, trash, garbage or other waste from, in and around the premises. The bond shall be in an amount determined by city manager to adequately provide for such indemnification. (Ord. 99-02 §1, 1999).

 

5.38.120 License—Daily operation fee.
        Prior to the issuance of a license, chief of police services shall collect a daily operation fee hereby imposed by this chapter in an amount as may be set from time to time by resolution of the city council for each day the activity is scheduled to take place and shall issue upon receipt of said funds a license to the applicant. (Ord. 99-02 §1, 1999).

 

5.38.130 License revocation.
        A.    Chief of police services shall have the right to immediately revoke any license issued pursuant to this chapter and immediately suspend or terminate the outdoor entertainment activity if it is determined by chief of police services that any of the following has occurred or is occurring:

        1.     The licensee fails, neglects or refuses to fulfill any of the conditions imposed upon the granting of the license;

        2.     The licensee permits the activity to be conducted in a manner determined by the sheriff to be disorderly so as to present a potential for harm to the public’s health, safety or welfare;

        3.     The licensee violates or attempts to violate any law of the state of California, the United States of America or the provisions of this code; or

        4.     It is determined by chief of police services that the licensee has made a false, misleading or fraudulent statement in the application for the license, or in any other document required to be provided to chief of police services in conjunction with the application for the granting of a license.

        B.     Written notice of such revocation may be forwarded by chief of police services by regular mail to the licensee at the address given in the application; however, such revocation shall become effective immediately upon the issuance of the revocation by chief of police services who is hereby authorized to take whatever action is reasonably necessary to terminate the outdoor entertainment activity.

        C.     Chief of police services may suspend operation or permanently terminate any activity subject to a license under this chapter without prior notice and prior to the expiration of the license in the event of the occurrence or threatened occurrence of a riot, major disorder or serious breach of peace when in the sheriff’s opinion it becomes necessary to do so in order to prevent injury to person or persons and/or damage to property. (Ord. 99-02 §1, 1999).

 

5.38.140 License—Nontransferable.
        No license granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be transferable or removable to another location. (Ord. 99-02 §1, 1999).

 

5.38.150 Penalty for violation.
        Any violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars, or by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than six months, or by such fine and imprisonment or both. A separate offense shall be deemed to have been committed for each day that a violation occurs or continues. Waterford Municipal Code section 1.12.020. (Ord. 99-02 §1, 1999).

 

5.38.160 Appeal on denial of application.
        In the event that an application for a license is denied by chief of police services, the applicant may appeal such denial to the city manager and if not satisfied with the decision of the city manager, may appeal to the city council by making an application for a hearing on their request to the city clerk. The city clerk shall schedule the appeal from the denial at a regular meeting of the city council to take place not less than fifteen nor more than thirty days after receipt of the request for hearing by the city clerk. The city clerk shall give notice of the hearing and copies of the request for hearing to chief of police services in order that chief of police services be available to present the reasons for denial of the application to the city council at the time the matter is considered by the council. (Ord. 99-02 §1, 1999).

Chapter 5.40 SECONDHAND DEALERS
5.40.010 Definitions.
        For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms used in this chapter are defined as follows:

        A.    “Secondhand dealer” means and includes any person, copartnership, firm or corporation whose principal business is primarily that of engaging in buying, selling, trading, taking in pawn, accepting for sale on consignment, accepting for auctioning or auctioning secondhand tangible personal property.

        B.     “Secondhand tangible personal property” means and includes any personal property, whether in its original form or condition or not, which has been previously sold to or used by a person other than the secondhand dealer who acquires or receives such personal property. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(5)(part), 1970).

 

5.40.020 Applicability of provisions.
        The provisions of this chapter shall apply to any secondhand dealer in used component parts of any mechanical equipment or of motor vehicles and motor vehicle accessories, but shall not apply to used car dealers or used equipment dealers who are not engaged in the business of buying and selling used vehicle parts or accessories, or used machinery parts, and shall not apply to persons dealing in or conducting transactions concerning used beds, sofas, chairs, tables, or rags, bottles, barrels, cans or secondhand or castoff clothing or shoes, or to any secondhand personal property acquired as provided and set forth in Section 21629 of the Business and Professions Code. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(5)(part), 1970).

 

5.40.030 License—Required.
        It is unlawful for any person to act as a secondhand dealer without first making an application for and receiving from the city clerk a license to act as such secondhand dealer in the city. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(5)(part), 1970).

 

5.40.040 License—Application—Information required.
        Any person desiring a license hereunder shall make application to the city clerk upon blanks furnished therefor. If the application is made by an individual, he or she shall make oath that the contents of said application are true, and the contents of the application shall include the name and age of applicant, his or her present address or addresses, and the name under which, and the place where, the applicant has conducted a similar business within twelve months immediately preceding the date of said application. If the business is to be engaged in by a partnership, association or corporation, the application for a license shall be made by the general manager thereof, or by one having the authority of a general manager. In such case, the application shall state the true name of the organization, the date of its organization, its type, the location of its principal place of business, the names and addresses of its officers, or, in the case of a copartnership, the names and addresses of all the partners. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(5)(part), 1970).

 

5.40.050 License—Application—Photographs and fingerprints.
        The applicant, at the request of the police chief, shall accompany such application with photographs and fingerprints of all the individuals who are to be actually engaged in the management of the business or in buying or otherwise acquiring secondhand tangible personal property for the business for which the license is requested. In the event any other person, after the license has been granted, shall be engaged in the management of the business or in buying or otherwise acquiring such secondhand tangible personal property, the licensee shall furnish to the police chief on request the photograph and fingerprints of such person. No license shall be issued until any such demand has been complied with, and any license which shall have been issued shall be suspended or revoked if the licensee does not, within a reasonable time, comply with the provisions of this section. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(5)(part), 1970).

 

5.40.060 License—Applicant investigation.
        The license applied for shall not be issued to the applicant until the police chief, after investigation, files a report upon such application designating whether or not the applicant is a proper person to be granted the license applied for. No applicant shall be reported as a proper person to be granted a license under this chapter unless and until it appears that said applicant’s conduct or proposed conduct of the business of secondhand dealer does and will comply with all pertinent laws and ordinances, including but not limited to those relating to the public health and to zoning. The police chief shall be allowed sixty days from the date of the application, if he or she desires, within which to file such report. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(5)(part), 1970).

 

5.40.070 License—Fee.
        The required annual fee for a license under this chapter shall be twelve dollars, payable quarterly or annually. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(5)(part), 1970).

 

5.40.080 License—Appeal of denial.
        In the event of adverse report by the police chief on application for license under this chapter, the applicant may, within ten days after written notice of such adverse report, file with the city council a notice of intention to appear before the council to appeal from the action of the police chief. Upon failure to file such notice within such ten-day period, the action of the police chief in reporting adversely on an application shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(5)(part), 1970).

 

5.40.090 License—Suspension or revocation—Notice and hearing.
        The police chief, upon receiving verified information of or having knowledge of violation by any licensee of any of the terms hereof, or of any statute of the state, shall serve upon said licensee, or his or her agent, a notice to appear before the city council to show cause why the license should not be suspended for a limited period, or revoked. Said notice must be served not less than two days before the time fixed by the police chief for such hearing. The city council, upon such hearing, may take testimony and receive evidence in regard to the alleged violation and determine on the basis thereof whether or not the license shall be suspended for a limited period, or revoked. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(5)(part), 1970).

 

5.40.100 License—Suspension or revocation—Reapplication permitted when.
        Whenever a license is suspended under the terms and provisions of this chapter, an application may be made for reinstatement of the license after, but not before, the expiration of a period of thirty days from the date of the suspension; whenever a license is revoked under the provisions hereof, an application may be made for a license after, but not before, the expiration of a period of ninety days from and after the date of the revocation. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(5)(part), 1970).

 

5.40.110 Report—Required.
        At the time and place of the acquisition of any secondhand tangible personal property as set forth herein, or pursuant to Section 21628 of the Business and Professions Code, said secondhand dealer shall write on the report form prescribed and furnished by the police chief a brief description of the person so selling, giving in trade, giving in pawn, or otherwise transferring possession of said property and shall obtain a signature of such person thereon. Said report form and information shall be made and kept available for inspection by any law enforcement officer. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(5)(part), 1970).

 

5.40.120 Report—Vehicle registration information.
        If any article of tangible personal property is delivered to or received by a secondhand dealer from a vehicle or a person operating a vehicle, the license number, state of registration, and the year, make, type and color of said vehicle shall also be obtained and placed on said report form. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(5)(part), 1970).

 

5.40.130 Report—Property description.
        The description of any tangible personal property not within the definition of identifiable property as defined by Section 21627 of the Business and Professions Code shall include, but shall not be limited to:

        A.    The manufacturer’s name or brand, if any;

        B.     The size, color and material of which made;

        C.     Any number, word, mark or initial found thereon; and

        D.    Any obvious defect which may assist in the identification of the property. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(5)(part), 1970).

 

5.40.140 Report—Time limit for filing.
        In addition to any “Identifiable” secondhand tangible personal property, as such term is defined by Section 21627 of the Business and Professions Code of California, every secondhand dealer shall also report all other secondhand tangible personal property which he or she has purchased, taken in trade, taken in pawn, accepted for sale on consignment, or accepted for auctioning, to the police chief in accordance with the provisions of this chapter not later than twelve noon of the second day following the acquisition of such property, on such forms as may from time to time be furnished by the police chief, which report shall be postmarked not later than twelve noon of the day of the filing of said report, unless said report is personally delivered to the police chief at the time set for said reporting. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(5)(part), 1970).

 

5.40.150 Report—Forms.
        A.    The police chief shall prescribe and furnish such report forms as may be required for the purposes set forth herein to secondhand dealers, which forms shall conform with the forms prescribed by the California State Bureau of Criminal Identification and Investigation and shall contain in addition to the information required by said Bureau of Criminal Identification and Investigation such additional information as is prescribed in this chapter and may be required by the police chief as shown on said forms.

        B.     Said report forms shall provide appropriate space for identification information concerning the person from whom any articles of tangible personal property are acquired or obtained and a space for the signature of such person. Such identification information shall be taken from identification documents of the person concerned, including but not limited to an unexpired motor vehicle operator’s license. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(5)(part), 1970).

 

5.40.160 Report—Stolen property.
        Every secondhand dealer shall immediately notify the police chief by telephone, or other means likely to reach the police chief without delay, whenever said dealer has reason to believe from the circumstances of any offer to transfer possession of any article of tangible personal property by any transferor or intended transferor that said property so offered has been stolen. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(5)(part), 1970).

 

5.40.170 Property retention period.
        Every secondhand dealer shall, in addition to compliance with the provisions of Section 21636 of the Business and Professions Code, retain in his or her possession for a period of at least ten days all secondhand tangible personal property other than identifiable personal property as defined in Section 21627 of said Code. The ten-day holding period with respect to such secondhand tangible personal property shall commence with the date the report of its acquisition is made to the police chief by the secondhand dealer. The police chief may, for good cause, authorize prior disposition of any such property described in a specific report, and in such case a secondhand dealer may then sell or dispose of such property prior to the expiration of such ten-day period, provided he or she obtains the name, address and description of the buyer and retains this information for a period of three years as a matter of record which shall be made available for inspection by any law enforcement officer. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(5)(part), 1970).

 

5.40.180 Recordkeeping—Notice of sale.
        It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, as owner, manager, agent or employee of any establishment or place open to the patronage of the public, to invite, induce or knowingly allow any patron, guest, invitee or customer of said establishment or place to sell or offer to sell to any other patron, guest, invitee or customer of said establishment or place, or to exchange or offer to exchange with any other patron, guest invitee or customer of said establishment or place, any article of personal property unless:

        A.    The owner, manager or employee of said establishment or place keeps on said premises, when said establishment or place is open to the public, a bound record book with its pages consecutively numbered, which book shall be open to the inspection of the police chief or his or her deputies or agents, and which book shall contain the following: A description and serial number, if any there be, of each article of personal property intended to be sold or exchanged, and the name, address, occupation and signature of the person selling or exchanging or intending to sell or exchange said article of personal property, together with the name and address of the transferee of said property and the day, month and year of said transfer.

        B.     At least two days prior to conducting any sale or exchange of personal property on said establishment or place of business, the owner, manager, agent or employee thereof shall notify the police chief in writing of the time and place such sale or exchange will be conducted, unless such sales or exchanges are conducted at regular stated intervals, in which event said police chief shall be so notified in writing by said owner, manager, agent or employee at least two days prior to conducting the first of said sale or exchange, and said notice shall specify the times when the places where subsequent sales or exchanges are to be conducted. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(5)(part), 1970).

 

5.40.190 Use of false name prohibited.
        It is unlawful for any person to use a fictitious name as his or her own or to give a fictitious or incorrect address as his or her address in the preparation of any report to be prepared pursuant to any of the provisions hereof, or pursuant to Division 8, Chapter 9, Article 4 of the Business and Professions Code. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(5)(part), 1970).

 

5.40.200 Purchase from minor prohibited.
        It is unlawful for any secondhand dealer to purchase, or otherwise acquire, any secondhand tangible personal property offered to such a dealer by any person known, or who such dealer should reasonably have known, to be under the age of eighteen years. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(5)(part), 1970).

 

5.40.210 Hours of operation.
        It is unlawful for any secondhand dealer to purchase, or otherwise acquire, secondhand tangible personal property within this city between the hours of nine p.m. of one day and seven a.m. of the next day. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(5)(part), 1970).

 

5.40.220 Violation declared infraction.
        Every person violating, failing, neglecting and/or refusing to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of an infraction, and each such person is guilty of a separate offense for each day during any portion of which the violation, failure, neglect and/or refusal to comply with any of the provisions hereof is committed, continued or permitted by such person. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part) and Art. III §K, 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(5)(part), 1970).

Chapter 5.44 INTOXICATING BEVERAGES
5.44.010 Drinking or serving unlawful when.
        It is unlawful for any person to drink, and for any person, corporation, society, lodge or organization to serve intoxicating beverages:

        A.    In or upon any of the streets, sidewalks, alleys, parks, mini-parks, or other public recreational areas in the city, at a place within fifty feet of any church or commercial building, without first securing a permit from the chief of police; or

        B.     Upon the private property of another, when the person in control of said property is not present, without the written permission of the person in control of such private property.

        This prohibition shall not apply within the Community Center Building or beneath the outdoor shelter (“Pavilion”) at Beard Park during organized rentals of such facilities from the city of Waterford. (Ord. 92-18 §1, 1992; Ord. 78-3 §1, 1978).

 

5.44.020 Permit—Application.
        An application for a permit to serve or drink any intoxicating beverage in or upon any street, sidewalk, or alley or other public property referred to in Section 5.44.010 of this chapter, shall be made not later than five days prior to the date upon which such activity is to take place. (Ord. 78-3 §2, 1978).

 

5.44.030 Permit—Conditions of issuance.
        Before issuing such permit, the chief of police shall satisfy him or herself that the public peace, safety, health and general welfare will not be endangered or jeopardized by the issuance of such permit. The chief of police may impose conditions upon the issuance of such permit to insure that such activity will be compatible with the preservation of the public peace, safety, health and general welfare. The chief of police may consider any relevant factual material, including, but not limited to, the proposed place or location of such activity and the character and reputation of the applicant and other persons who will be involved in the conduct and operation of the activity under the permit if issued. If the chief of police finds that the issuance of such permit will endanger or jeopardize the public peace, safety, health or general welfare, such issuance shall be denied. (Ord. 78-3 §3, 1978).

 

5.44.040 Permit—Term.
        The permit so issued shall be good for such period of time as prescribed by the chief of police. (Ord. 78-3 §4, 1978).

 

5.44.050 Permit—Permittee to display copy upon request of authorized person.
        The permittee shall have a copy of the permit in his or her possession and shall produce such permit upon request made by the chief of police or any of his or her representatives. (Ord. 78-3 §6, 1978).

 

5.44.060 Permit—Revocation.
        The chief of police shall have the authority, and the authority is given him or her, to revoke such permit at any time if the activity being conducted under the permit is conducted in such a manner that the chief of police deems it to be detrimental to the public peace, safety, health or general welfare. (Ord. 78-3 §5, 1978).

 

5.44.070 Permit—Appeal procedure upon denial or revocation.
        Any person aggrieved by the denial or revocation of a permit may appeal such action of the chief of police to the city council by written notice delivered to the city clerk within five days after notification to such person of such denial or revocation. The council shall hear the appeal at its next regularly scheduled meeting following receipt of such notice, at which time the council may approve or conditionally approve the issuance of a permit denied by the chief of police and may approve or reverse the revocation of a permit. The decision of the city council shall be final. (Ord. 78-3 §7, 1978).

 

5.44.080 Violation—Penalty.
        Any person, society, lodge, organization or corporation who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by imprisonment in the Stanislaus County jail for not to exceed six months, or by a fine of not to exceed five hundred dollars, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 78-3 §8, 1978).

Chapter 5.50 CANNABIS BUSINESS TAX
5.50.010 Definitions.
        For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

        “Business” means professions, trades, occupations, gainful activities, and all and every kind of calling whether or not carried on for profit.

        “Cannabis” or “marijuana” has the meaning as defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 11018.

        “Cannabis business” means any business activity involving the commercial cultivation, distribution, and exchange of cannabis, including, but not limited to, the planting, cultivation, harvesting, transporting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, processing, preparing, storing, packaging, providing, wholesale and retail sales, whether fixed, mobile, permanent or temporary, where cannabis is made available, sold, given distributed, or otherwise provided in accordance with the existing laws of the state of California, whether for medical or nonmedical reasons.

        “City” means the city of Waterford, a municipal corporation of the state of California, in its present incorporated form or in any later reorganized, consolidated, enlarged, or reincorporated form.

        “Collector” means the director of finance or other city officer or employee charged with the administration of this chapter.

        “Fixed place of business” means the premises occupied in the city for the particular purpose of conducting a business there and regularly kept open for that purpose with a competent person in attendance for the purpose of attending to such business.

        “Gross receipts” means the total amount charged or received for the performance of any act, service, or employment of whatever nature it may be, whether or not such service, act, or employment is done as a part of or in connection with the sale of goods, wares, merchandise, for which a charge is made or credit allowed. Gross receipts shall be calculated without any deduction on account of any of the following: (1) the cost of tangible property sold or bartered; (2) the cost of materials or products used, labor or service cost, interest paid, losses, or other expense; or (3) transportation costs.

        “Person” means all domestic and foreign corporations, associations, syndicates, joint stock corporations, partnerships of every kind, clubs, business or common law trusts, societies, and individuals transacting and carrying on any business in the city.

        “Reporting period” means a year, quarter, or calendar month, as determined by the collector. (Ord. 2020-02 §1).

 

5.50.020 Cannabis business tax.
        A.    Every person engaged in a cannabis business shall pay an annual business license tax of up to fifteen cents for each one dollar of gross receipts, regardless whether the city has authorized the cannabis business.

        B.     The tax rate shall be set by resolution of the city council. The city council may, in its discretion, implement such cannabis business tax rate it deems appropriate, and may by resolution increase or lower such tax rate from time to time, provided that the cannabis business tax shall not exceed fifteen cents for each one dollar of gross receipts.

        C.     Any tax adopted by the city council pursuant to this chapter shall apply only to those cannabis businesses operating outside the scope of a development agreement approved by the city council. However, the tax may apply to all cannabis businesses in the event the city council cancels the cannabis pilot program.

        D.    The collector shall establish reporting periods for the periodic collection of gross receipts. The reporting period may fall under yearly, quarterly, or monthly reporting, or any reasonable reporting period established by the collector.

        E.     Failure to pay the cannabis business tax shall be subject to penalties, interest charges, and assessments, as the city council may establish by resolution, and the city may use any and all code enforcement remedies available at law to collect such payments.

        F.     The payment of the cannabis business tax shall not be construed as authorizing the conduct or continuance of any illegal business or of a legal business in an illegal manner. Nothing in this section shall be applied or construed as authorizing the sale of cannabis.

        G.    The collector or his or her designee shall annually audit any cannabis business taxes imposed by this section to verify that tax revenues have been properly expended in accordance with the law.

        H.    The cannabis business tax is not a sales tax and shall not be assessed as such.

        I.      This section was submitted to the qualified voters of the city for approval by majority vote.

        Any amendment to the maximum tax rate therefore may not become effective until such amendment is approved by the voters. The voters expressly authorize the city council to amend, modify, change, or revise any other provisions of this section as the city council deems in the best interest of the city. The city council or city manager may promulgate rules, regulations and procedures to implement this section and to ensure the efficient and timely collection of any taxes or any related penalties imposed by this section. (Ord. 2020-02 §1).

Title 6 ANIMALS
Chapter 6.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 6.04 DEFINITIONS
Chapter 6.08 ADMINISTRATION
Chapter 6.12 ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS AND PROCEDURES
Chapter 6.16 ANIMAL CONTROL
Chapter 6.20 DOGS
Chapter 6.24 KENNELS
Chapter 6.28 DANGEROUS ANIMALS
Chapter 6.32 IMPOUNDMENT
Chapter 6.36 RABIES CONTROL
Chapter 6.40 DEAD OR ABANDONED ANIMALS
Chapter 6.44 VIOLATION—PENALTY
Chapter 6.48 ANIMAL SERVICE FEES
Chapter 6.52 BREEDING AND TRANSFERRING OF DOGS AND CATS, AND LICENSING OF CATS

Chapter 6.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
6.01.010 Stanislaus animal services agency is created.
        Stanislaus County and its city member partners Modesto, Patterson, Ceres, Waterford and Hughson created a joint powers agency known as Stanislaus animal services agency (“SASA”). SASA was formed to jointly operate and manage an animal shelter for the partners’ and their respective residents’ mutual benefit and to provide animal services needed or requested by each partner, pursuant to the joint powers agreement dated October 27, 2009. SASA is specifically authorized and charged with the enforcement and administration of this title and the laws dealing with animals. SASA is appointed to be the department of animal services for the county. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.01.015 Stanislaus animal services executive director.
        The animal services executive director (sometimes referred to as “director”) is employed as the chief administrative officer of SASA. The director’s position is created in the unclassified service of the county; and who shall be appointed by resolution of the board of SASA. The animal services executive director shall hold office at the pleasure of the board of SASA. As a county employee, the salary of the animal services executive director and the staffing levels of SASA shall be as determined by resolution of the board of SASA. For purposes of this title, any reference to animal services executive director shall include his or her authorized staff, unless otherwise noted. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.01.016 Animal services executive director—Supervision authority.
        The SASA staff shall be county employees for all intents and purposes. These SASA staff shall be under the supervision of the animal services executive director, that is, the director him or herself. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.01.017 Animal services executive director—Duties.
        The animal services executive director is primarily responsible for the enforcement and administration of this title. In conjunction with the duties set forth by the board of SASA, his or her duties shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

        A.    To administer the animal shelter and keep such records as may be required by law and the board of SASA;

        B.     To take up and impound animals when authorized by this title;

        C.     To remove and dispose of the carcass of any animal found on any public highway, street, alley, or any other public place in the unincorporated area of the county;

        D.    To quarantine animals and to cooperate with the county health officer;

        E.     To administer licensing programs as delegated by the licensing authority; and

        F.     To provide opportunities for owners to find lost animals and for those who find lost animals to return them. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.01.020 Animal shelter maintained.
        SASA shall maintain a suitable animal shelter for impounding animals. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.01.030 Establishment of regulations.
        SASA and its board may establish by resolution, regulations for the administration and implementation of this title. SASA regulations, when adopted, shall become and thereafter be a part of this title. A copy of the regulations established by resolution of the board of SASA shall be filed with the clerk of the board of SASA and with the clerk of the board of supervisors and be available for inspection at the animal shelter. SASA shall establish by ordinance a schedule of fees for licenses and for services provided in accordance with this chapter. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.01.040 Enforcement.
        The animal services executive director and animal services authorized staff and the county health officer and his or her deputies are empowered, and it shall be their duty, to enforce the provisions of this title. Any person whose duty it is to enforce the provisions of this title may at any reasonable time enter upon private property for such purpose. It is unlawful for any person to interfere with, oppose, or resist any authorized person enforcing this title. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.01.050 Authority to pursue an animal.
        Any person charged with the duty to enforce this title who is in pursuit of an animal, shall have the authority to go upon the property of the owner or other person, in order to impound such animal; provided, however, he or she shall not enter a dwelling without a search warrant and he or she shall exercise reasonable care to avoid causing damage to the property. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.01.060 Authority to arrest and issue notices to appear.
        Pursuant to the provisions of California Penal Code Section 836.5, the animal services executive director, the health officer and his or her deputies, and a duly appointed state humane officer, law enforcement officers, and animal services authorized staff as defined in Section 6.04.170 of this title, are authorized to arrest without a warrant and issue a written notice to appear whenever any such person has reasonable cause to believe that the person to be arrested has committed a misdemeanor in his or her presence, which is a violation of this title or a violation of any other ordinance or statute, which he or she has the duty to enforce. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.01.070 Equipment to impound authorized.
        Any person charged with the duty to enforce this title may use any humane equipment or device necessary to take up and impound an animal. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.01.080 Firearms authorized.
        The animal services executive director and staff that he or she may specifically designate in writing are authorized to carry weapons when acting in the course and scope of their employment pursuant to Section 26025 of the Penal Code. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

Chapter 6.04 DEFINITIONS
6.04.010 Generally.
        The words and terms used in this title shall have the meaning stated as set forth in this chapter, unless the meaning is clearly intended to be otherwise. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.04.030 Animal shelter.
        “Animal shelter” means a facility operated by SASA for the impoundment, relinquishment, quarantine, and adoption of animals. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.04.050 Health department.
        “Health department” means the health department of the county. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.04.060 Health officer.
        “Health officer” means the county health officer and his or her authorized deputies. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.04.070 Impoundment.
        “Impoundment” means the taking up and holding of an animal by the animal services executive director in accordance with the provisions of this title or other applicable laws or regulations. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.04.080 Kennel.
        “Kennel” means a place where five or more dogs or cats over four months of age are kept for commercial or noncommercial purposes. The term “kennel” shall not apply to animal shelters operated by governmental agencies, nonprofit societies for the care of stray animals or to veterinary hospitals. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.04.090 Licensing authority.
        “Licensing authority” means the SASA and its animal services executive director. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.04.100 Animal ownership.
        A.    “Animal owner” or “owner” for purpose of this title means any person harboring, keeping or providing care or sustenance to a domestic animal for fifteen consecutive days or more on property within the jurisdiction of the county. Such a person shall be subject to the requirements of this title. This definition does not apply to government agencies, animal rescue organizations which have demonstrated to SASA that they have implemented an ongoing spay/neuter program as well as an adoption program, or humane societies or societies for the prevention of cruelty to animals if such societies are incorporated under the provisions of California Corporations Code Section 10400 and the Nonprofit Public Benefit Corporation Law in Part 2 of the California Corporations Code, beginning at Section 5110 and successor sections, or persons who provide licensed boarding, kennel, training or veterinarian services for the owners of dogs and cats.

        B.     Subsection A of this section shall not be interpreted to apply to a person caring for barn cats or a colony of feral cats if such person:

        1.     Registers with SASA as a caretaker for barn cats or feral cats;

        2.     Regularly feeds or arranges for the feeding of the cats, including on weekends and holidays;

        3.     Traps or makes a reasonable effort to trap all barn or feral cats over the age of seven weeks in his/her care, and has them spayed or neutered;

        4.     Makes a reasonable effort to test all trapped cats for feline leukemia and FIV and has those who test positive humanely euthanized or isolated indoors;

        5.     Identifies barn or feral cats that have been spayed or neutered by means of ear notching, ear tipping, or ear tagging; and

        6.     Has all trapped cats vaccinated according to state and local laws. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.04.110 Person.
        “Person” means one or more human beings and all fictional entities such as corporations, estates, associations, partnerships and trusts. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.04.120 Rabies vaccination.
        “Rabies vaccination” means the inoculation of an animal with a rabies vaccine approved by and in the manner prescribed by the California State Department of Public Health. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.04.130 Veterinarian.
        “Veterinarian” means a person licensed to practice veterinary medicine in the state. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.04.140 Guide dog.
        “Guide dog” means any guide dog or seeing-eye dog, which was trained by a person licensed under the provisions of Chapter 9.5 (commencing with Section 7200) of Division 3 of the Business and Professions Code, or as defined in the regulations implementing Title III of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.04.150 Signal dog.
        “Signal dog” means any dog trained to alert a deaf person, or person whose hearing is impaired, to intruders or sounds. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.04.160 Service dog.
        “Service dog” means any dog individually trained to the requirements of a person including, but not limited to, minimal protection work, rescue work, pulling a wheelchair, or fetching dropped items. A “service dog” is also any dog individually trained to do work or perform tasks for the benefit of an individual with a disability, or any dog approved by the animal services executive director, which he or she believes to come within the definitions listed, after consultation with knowledgeable professionals. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.04.170 Animal services authorized staff.
        The animal services executive director shall appoint suitable persons to act as animal services authorized staff. All animal services authorized staff shall enforce this title. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

Chapter 6.08 ADMINISTRATION
6.08.010 Records of Stanislaus animal services agency.
        The animal services executive director shall keep records concerning the operation of the animal shelter as set forth by statute or regulations established pursuant to Section 6.01.030. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.08.020 Information on animal care.
        The animal services executive director is authorized to distribute to the people of the county brochures and information pertaining to care and control of animals. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.08.030 Notice—Administrative hearings and appeal of administrative decision.
        A.    Notice of Hearing. The animal services administrative hearing, hereafter called animal court, shall be a public hearing, administered by SASA. The hearings shall be held on the first Wednesday of each month. The person issued the citation shall have at least thirty days from the date on the citation (the date of issuance) to appeal the violation(s). Upon receipt of the written appeal, the matter will be set for hearing at the next animal court. Notice of the hearing shall be issued in person or by mail through the U.S. Postal Service.

        The alleged violator who requests a hearing shall be responsible for the cost(s) of the hearing and will be required to leave a deposit in the amount shown in the fee schedule for the alleged violations, unless a lesser amount is permitted to be deposited at the discretion of the animal services executive director or designee. If the alleged violator fails to appear at the scheduled hearing, the deposit shall be forfeited and any additional fees owed for the alleged violation(s) will be the violator’s responsibility to pay. If the alleged violator appears at animal court and is found guilty of the offense charged, the fees imposed by the animal court will be deducted from the deposit. If the fees imposed by animal court exceed the amount of the deposit, the alleged violator will be responsible to pay the difference. If the fees imposed are less than the deposit, the difference will be refunded to the person. If the person is determined to be not guilty, the deposit will be refunded.

        B.     Hearing Procedure. The following sets forth the procedural rules applicable to the administrative hearing:

        At the date, time and place set for the hearing, one of at least three hearing officers, appointed by the board of SASA, assigned to the hearings in a fixed rotational order, shall hear testimony and receive evidence presented by the alleged violator appealing the issuance of a citation, SASA and/or a third party complainant. At the outset of the hearing, the alleged violator may challenge the hearing officer first assigned to the matter. As a result, the hearing may be continued until the next month to be held before the hearing officer next in order. The hearing officer shall review all evidence introduced at the hearing of each alleged violation of this title in order to determine whether the alleged violation conforms to the law and whether it is supported by substantial evidence. Animal court shall record the hearing in a suitable format and shall preserve the recording, all photographs and other documentary evidence introduced at the hearing for the thirty-six-month period immediately following closure of the hearing.

        Animal court shall render a written decision upon conclusion of the hearing; unless it is determined that further investigation into the matter is warranted. If this occurs, the matter will be continued until the next scheduled hearing at which time the new evidence shall be presented to the hearing officer and then a written decision shall be rendered. Any and all costs incurred by SASA, including fines, shall immediately become payable to SASA. Any person not making immediate payment shall be subject to approved collection procedures.

        The written decision rendered by the hearing officer shall contain findings of fact and conclusions of law. The decision shall also set forth the right to appeal the decision of animal court to the board of SASA. A copy of the decision shall be mailed, by certified mail, to the last known address of the alleged violator/owner(s) of the animal and any third party complainant.

        C.     Appeal Procedure. Decisions of animal court may be appealed to the board of SASA. The appeal shall be filed with the clerk of the board of SASA within fifteen days after the mailing of the decision of animal court provided the appellant follows the following steps:

        1.     Delivers to the clerk of the board of SASA within fifteen days after the decision is made orally at the hearing, or if mailed then twenty days, a written appeal which clearly sets forth the reasons for the appeal; and

        2.     The appellant shall be responsible for the cost(s) of the appeal.

        Upon receipt of the appeal, the clerk of SASA will schedule a hearing de novo. The hearing de novo panel shall be comprised of three panel members: two animal court hearing officers, other than the one who presided over the subject animal court hearing, and one member currently sitting on the board of SASA and who does not represent the jurisdiction in which the citation was issued. If one of the hearing officers was challenged before the first hearing, that hearing officer remains ineligible to sit on the hearing de novo panel. If required, a second SASA board member, who also does not represent the jurisdiction in which the citation was issued, will sit as the third panel member.

        The appeal hearing shall be heard within sixty days after the appeal is filed with the clerk of the board of SASA.

        If upon appeal the de novo hearing panel finds that no violation exists, then the costs of the appeal and the record shall be borne by SASA, and all assessed fees shall be refunded to the appellant.

        If upon appeal the de novo hearing panel finds there was a violation and the appellant desires to further appeal, that appeal shall be to the Stanislaus County Superior Court.

        D.    Potentially Dangerous and Vicious Dogs. If a petition is to be filed alleging probable cause to believe that a dog is potentially dangerous or vicious pursuant to Food and Agricultural Code, Division 14, Chapter 9, commencing with Sections 31602 et seq., and specifically Section 31621, the petition shall be filed with the clerk of the board of SASA. The hearing shall be held before animal court to dispose of the petition. Animal court shall notify the owner or keeper of the dog that a hearing will be held under the provisions set forth in Sections 31621 and 31622. In order that such hearing is held timely, the hearing may take place, after proper service of the notice and a copy of the petition, at a special session of animal court. An appeal from an animal court’s determination on this issue shall be to the Stanislaus County Superior Court as set forth in Section 31622, not before the board of supervisors or the board of SASA. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.08.040 License renewal or suspension.
        Whenever provision is made in this title for a license or permit, such license or permit shall be renewed annually thereafter or at the next succeeding regular renewal date as provided by law by the licensing authority. The animal services executive director or the health officer may revoke or suspend a license whenever such action is necessary to protect the public health and safety or to accomplish the purposes of this title. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

Chapter 6.12 ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS AND PROCEDURES
6.12.010 Purpose of this chapter.
        The Stanislaus animal services agency (“SASA”) created by the five cities of Modesto, Ceres, Patterson, Hughson and Waterford and the county of Stanislaus on October 27, 2009, has the authority to provide animal control and enforcement of Title 6 of the Waterford Municipal Code in the city of Waterford. SASA is administered under the direction of the animal services executive director (also known as the animal services director under Section 6.01.010) (“executive director”) of the Stanislaus County Code. It is the intent of the city of Waterford, for so long as it is a member of SASA, that SASA in addition to the city of Waterford, may as part of the administration, administer and enforce violations of Chapter 6.04 and Section 6.04.050 of this title as administrative citations. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.12.020 Definitions.
        “Administrative citation” for purposes of this chapter means a civil citation issued pursuant to this chapter stating that there has been a violation of one or more provisions of Title 6 and setting the amount of the administrative penalty(ies) to be paid by the responsible party.

        “Enforcement officer” means the SASA, its executive director and SASA staff as authorized in Title 6 of the Waterford Municipal Code, and city of Waterford representatives authorized to enforce code enforcement.

        “Hearing officer” means the individual who shall conduct the administrative citation appeal hearings and other administrative hearings pursuant to this chapter and shall render decisions pursuant to the applicable administrative hearing procedures set forth in this chapter.

        “Responsible party” means any individual(s) who owns the animals for which an administrative citation under Title 6 is being written. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.12.030 Administrative penalty—Amounts.
        A.    Any responsible party violating Chapter 6.04 and Section 6.04.050 may be issued an administrative citation by an enforcement officer, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

        B.     Each and every day a violation of the provisions of Chapter 6.04 and/or Section 6.04.050 exists constitutes a separate and distinct offense and shall be subject to citation.

        C.     The enforcement officer may issue a citation for a violation not committed in their presence, if the enforcement officer has determined through the investigation that the responsible party did commit or is otherwise responsible for the violation. The enforcement officer may issue administrative citations alone or in addition to all other enforcement proceedings available to them in this code, or by state or federal law, whether administrative, civil or criminal in nature.

        D.    Unless provided otherwise in this code, administrative penalties for violating Chapter 6.04 and Section 6.04.050 of this title would be punishable as an infraction and shall be assessed as follows:

        1.     One hundred dollars for a first violation;

        2.     Two hundred dollars for a second violation of the same ordinance within one year;

        3.     Five hundred dollars for each additional violation of the same ordinance within one year;

        4.     The maximum fines imposed in this section are based upon the provisions of Government Code Section 36901 and will be increased automatically and without amendment to this section upon any amendment to Government Code Section 36901 increasing the amount of fines permitted.

        E.     The responsible party shall be provided an opportunity to correct the violation prior to the imposition of the administrative penalty as follows:

        1.     If a responsible party fails to correct a violation within thirty days after an administrative citation is served under this chapter, the administrative penalty established by the citation shall become effective and due immediately. Administrative citations for additional violations of the same ordinance shall not be served with less than thirty days passing between subsequent citations. The administrative penalty shall not exceed eight hundred dollars.

        2.     The administrative penalty, or any portion thereof, for a violation which has become effective following the thirty-day corrective period may be waived by the executive director, or designee(s), in his or her sole discretion only if the responsible party corrects the violation in accordance with all conditions established by the enforcement officer. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.12.040 Content of citation.
        The administrative citation shall be issued on a form approved by SASA. The administrative citation form shall contain the following information:

        A.    The name, if known, and mailing address of the responsible party.

        B.     The administrative citation shall refer to the date(s) and location of the violation and the approximate time(s), if applicable, that the violation was observed.

        C.     The administrative citation shall identify each violation by the applicable section number of Title 6 in this code and by either the section’s title or a brief descriptive caption.

        D.    The administrative citation shall describe the action(s) required to correct the violations, including the how, where, to whom, and within what number of days the penalty shall be paid and consequences of failure to pay the penalty within this time period.

        E.     The administrative citation shall require the responsible party to immediately correct the violation where appropriate, or otherwise indicate a reasonable compliance deadline date and shall explain the consequences for failure to correct the violation.

        F.     The administrative citation shall state the amount, if any, of the penalty imposed for the violation. Multiple violations may be listed on the same citation form. In the event of multiple violations, the administrative citation shall list the penalty amount, if any, for each violation and the total amount of all the penalties. However, different citations are to be written for each different dog of the same owner(s).

        G.    The administrative citation shall identify all appeal rights and include instructions on how to appeal the citation, including instructions regarding the advance deposit hardship waiver.

        H.    The administrative citation shall contain the printed name and the signature of the enforcement officer issuing the citation and, where reasonably possible, obtain the signature of the responsible party, if he, she, or they, can be located.

        I.      The administrative citation shall be served upon the responsible party. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.12.050 Service of citation.
        A.    Service of an administrative citation may be made upon the responsible party either by personal delivery or by first class mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, and shall be deemed completed when it is personally delivered to the responsible party, or, if mailing is used, five days after deposit in the mail for mailing to an address within California or ten days after deposit for mailing to an address outside California. If the copy of the administrative citation sent by certified mail to a responsible party is returned by the United States Postal Service with the mail receipt unsigned, or marked “unclaimed” and/or “refused,” then service by first class mail shall be deemed effective provided it is also not returned by the United States Postal Service.

        B.     In lieu of personally serving the responsible party by personal delivery or first class mail, postage prepaid, service of the administrative citation, and any amended or supplemental citation, may be made by substituted service using the methods described in Sections 415.20 through 415.95 of the California Code of Civil Procedure.

        C.     The failure of any responsible party to receive a copy of the administrative citation shall not affect the validity of the proceedings. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.12.060 Administrative penalties and costs.
        If the violation is not corrected within the time limits established in Section 6.12.030(E), then additional administrative citations may be issued for the same violation. The amount of the penalty shall increase at the rate specified below.

        A.    Payment of the penalty shall not excuse the failure to correct the violation nor shall it bar further enforcement action by the enforcement officer.

        B.     So long as the city of Waterford is a member of SASA, the penalties assessed shall be due to SASA within thirty calendar days from the date the administrative citation is issued, thereafter the penalties assessed shall be due to the city of Waterford within thirty calendar days from the date the administrative citation is issued.

        C.     Except as provided below, any responsible party who fails to pay any penalty imposed pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be liable for payment of the applicable late payment charges as follows:

        1.     For payments received within thirty days after the due date, a late fee is due according to the current fee schedule.

        2.     For payments received more than thirty days after the due date, a late fee is due according to the current fee schedule. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.12.070 Administrative appeal of administrative citation.
        A.    Notice of Appeal. Any responsible party to whom the administrative citation has been issued may appeal the administrative citation by completing and filing a written notice of appeal form with SASA. At such time as the city of Waterford is not a member of SASA, then the city manager shall serve as the hearing officer on all appeals.

        1.     The written notice of appeal must be filed within twenty calendar days of the date the administrative citation was served in a manner set forth in Section 6.12.050 and in this section. The written notice of appeal shall be filed together with an advance deposit, for the full amount of the penalty stated on the administrative citation.

        2.     Failure to file a written notice of appeal and the full amount of the advance deposit within this time period shall constitute a waiver of the right to appeal the administrative citation. As a result of failing to appeal an administrative citation, the administrative citation automatically becomes a final administrative order twenty-five calendar days after service.

        3.     Any administrative citation penalty that has been deposited shall be refunded if it is determined, after a hearing, that the responsible party charged with the violation was not responsible for the violation or that there was no violation as charged in the administrative citation. The time requirement for filing a written notice of appeal form shall be deemed jurisdictional and may not be waived.

        B.     Advance Deposit Hardship Waiver. Any responsible party intending to appeal an administrative citation and who is financially unable to make the advance deposit as required by this section may file a written request for an advance deposit hardship waiver. The written request must be filed before filing the written notice of appeal. The written request shall be filed with the executive director. An approved form shall be made available for this purpose and conform to the requirements of Government Code Section 68511.3 or at minimum shall contain the same elements as the application form for waiver of court fees and costs prepared by the Judicial Council of California for use in California courts. The person requesting the advance deposit hardship waiver shall indicate on the corresponding notice of appeal that an advance deposit hardship waiver request has been submitted.

        C.     Advance Deposit Hardship Waiver Evaluation Procedures. Pending a decision by the executive director, or designee, to grant or deny the request, the advance deposit requirement shall be stayed and no administrative hearing shall be scheduled. The executive director, or designee, may waive the advance deposit requirement and issue a waiver only if the person requesting the waiver submits to the executive director’s attention a sworn affidavit, together with any supporting documents or materials, reasonably demonstrating the person’s actual financial inability to submit the advance deposit in advance of the appeal hearing. Within ten days of receipt of the advance deposit hardship waiver request, the executive director, or designee, shall issue a written decision to grant or deny the request. If the request is denied, the written decision shall explain the reason(s) for denial of the waiver and shall state the due date for payment of the advance deposit. The written decision of the executive director, or designee, shall be sent via first class mail to the requesting party and shall be final. An administrative hearing shall not be scheduled until the advance deposit is received. If the request is denied and the advance deposit is not remitted within the time frame indicated in the written decision, the right to an appeal shall be deemed waived and payment of the administrative penalty shall become due immediately. The amount due shall be subject to all applicable late fees, which shall accrue from the original due date as indicated on the administrative citation.

        D.    Contents of Notice of Appeal. The notice of appeal shall be submitted on SASA approved forms and shall contain the following information:

        1.     A brief statement setting forth the responsible party’s (hereinafter “appellant”) interest in the proceedings;

        2.     A brief statement of the material facts that the appellant claims supports their contention that they did not commit, cause, or otherwise allow a violation of one or more provisions of Chapter 6.04 and/or Section 6.04.050 of this title to occur, exist, or continue as alleged in the administrative citation at issue; or that they are not a responsible party as defined in Section 6.12.020;

        3.     A mailing address at which the appellant agrees that notice of any additional proceeding, or an order relating to the imposition of an administrative citation penalty, shall be received and accepted by the appellant by first class mail;

        4.     The notice of appeal must be signed and dated by the appellant. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.12.080 Administrative hearing.
        Upon receipt of a timely, written notice of appeal from the appellant, an administrative hearing shall be held as follows:

        A.    Hearing Date. The hearing shall be held at the day, time and place of animal court in Section 6.02.040, or unless set forth otherwise at the executive director’s discretion, and not later than sixty days from the date the notice of appeal is received, unless otherwise stated by the timely submission of an advance deposit hardship waiver, as indicated above.

        B.     Notice of Hearing. Notice of the administrative hearing shall be given to the appellant at least ten calendar days before the hearing. The notice may be delivered to the appellant or mailed by first class mail to the address listed in the notice of appeal. Neither personal service nor service by certified mail shall be required.

        C.     Hearing Officer. So long as the city of Waterford is a member of SASA, one of three hearing officers, appointed by the board of SASA, in a fixed rotational order, shall hear testimony presented by complaining or reporting party and the appellant appealing the issuance of the administrative citation. The appellant may challenge the hearing officer first assigned to the matter. If so challenged, the hearing may be continued until the next month to be held before the hearing officer next in order. The executive director, through SASA’s contracting process, will contract with administrative hearing officers to conduct administrative hearings. At such time as the city of Waterford is not a member of SASA, then the city manager shall serve as the hearing officer on all appeals.

        D.    Conduct of the Hearing.

        1.     The enforcement officer who issued the administrative citation shall not be required to participate in the administrative hearing. The contents of the enforcement officer’s case file shall be admitted as prima facie evidence of the facts stated therein. The hearing officer shall not be limited by the technical or formal rules of evidence. Complaining or reporting party shall bear the burden of proof at the administrative hearing to establish the existence of a violation of Chapter 6.04 and Section 6.04.050 by a preponderance of the evidence. The hearing officer shall have the discretion to exclude evidence if its probative value is substantially outweighed by the probability that its admission will cause an undue consumption of time. The enforcement officer establishing or confirming the occurrence or existence of a violation of Title 6 shall be deemed the complaining or reporting party.

        2.     Provided that proper notice of the administrative hearing has been served as required by this chapter, an appellant who fails to appear at the administrative hearing shall be deemed to have waived each of the following: the right to such hearing, the adjudication of issues presented at the hearing, and any and all rights afforded to the appellant under this chapter. The appellant shall also be deemed to have failed to exhaust their administrative remedies.

        3.     Notwithstanding subsection (D)(2), if the appellant fails to appear at the administrative hearing, the hearing officer shall make his or her determination based on the information contained in the enforcement officer’s case file and the appellant’s notice of appeal.

        4.     The only evidence that shall be permitted at the administrative hearing and considered by the administrative hearing officer in reaching a decision, is that evidence which is relevant to the proof or disproof of:

        a.     Ownership of the subject animal;

        b.     Whether a person noticed as a responsible party is, in fact, a responsible party;

        c.     Whether a violation of this title occurred and/or continues to occur on the date or dates specified in the administrative citation;

        d.     Whether the responsible party has committed, caused, maintained, or permitted a violation of this title on the date or dates specified on the administrative citation;

        e.     Administrative costs. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.12.090 Hearing officer’s ruling.
        A.    After considering all the testimony and evidence submitted at the hearing, the hearing officer shall take the matter under submission. The hearing officer shall, within ten days, issue a written administrative decision entitled “Administrative Citation Order” to uphold or cancel the administrative citation, as to each violation, and shall list in the ruling the reasons for that decision.

        B.     If the hearing officer determines that the administrative citation should be upheld, then the amount of the penalties set forth in the citation shall not be reduced or waived for any reason. As to an administrative citation listing multiple violations, the amount of penalties for the violations so upheld shall not be reduced or waived for any reason.

        C.     If the hearing officer cancels the administrative citation, then no penalty shall be assessed and any penalty otherwise deposited shall be promptly refunded to the appellant. When an administrative citation lists multiple violations, then no penalties shall be assessed for the specific violations so cancelled and the amounts of such penalties otherwise deposited shall be promptly refunded to the appellant.

        D.    The ruling shall contain instructions for obtaining judicial review of the decision pursuant to California Government Code Section 53069.4, as that section may be from time to time amended, or the successor provision thereto.

        E.     If the administrative citation is upheld, the hearing officer shall also award the complaining or reporting party its administrative costs. An itemized summary of these costs shall be presented at the hearing. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.12.100 Judicial review of administrative hearing officer’s ruling.
        A.    Notice of Appeal. Within twenty calendar days of the date of the mailing or serving of the ruling to the appellant, the appellant (hereinafter “contestant”) may contest that decision by filing an appeal to be heard by the Superior Court, and paying to the court clerk the filing fee set forth at Government Code Section 53069.4, or the successor provision thereto. The failure to file the written appeal and to pay the filing fee within this period shall constitute a waiver of the right to an appeal and the ruling shall be deemed confirmed. The contestant shall serve a copy of the notice of appeal to the court, in person or by first class mail upon SASA.

        B.     Conduct of the Superior Court Appeal Hearing. The conduct of the appeal before the Superior Court is a subordinate judicial duty and may be performed by traffic trial commissioners and other subordinate judicial officers at the direction of the presiding judge at the Superior Court. The appeal shall be heard de novo, except that the contents of complaining or reporting party’s file in the case shall be received in evidence. A copy of the document or instrument of complaining or reporting party providing notice of the violation and imposition of the administrative penalty (i.e., the administrative citation) shall be admitted into evidence as prima facie evidence of the facts stated therein. The Court shall request that complaining or reporting party’s file in the case be forwarded to the Court, to be received within fifteen calendar days of the request.

        C.     Judgment. The Court shall retain the filing fee regardless of the outcome of the appeal. If the Court finds in favor of the contestant, the amount of the fee shall be reimbursed to the contestant. Any deposit of the administrative penalty shall be refunded in accordance with the judgment of the Court. If the administrative penalty has not been deposited and the decision of the Court is against the contestant and in favor of complaining or reporting party, complaining or reporting party may proceed to collect the penalty and administrative costs, in any manner provided by law. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.12.110 Collection.
        An administrative citation order becomes a final administrative order when a timely administrative appeal is not filed, or when the hearing officer’s decision is not appealed to the Superior Court within twenty-five days of mailing the decision first class postage paid, as set forth in Government Code Section 53069.4(b)(1). The complaining or reporting party may then proceed to collect as follows:

        A.    Commence a civil action to collect the administrative fine specified in the final administrative order as well as any accrued interest and/or late pay charges. In the event a civil action is commenced to collect, the complaining or reporting party shall be entitled to recover all costs associated with the collection of the administrative fine and those costs set forth in the Code of Civil Procedure Section 1033.5; or

        B.     Collect any past due administrative citation penalty or late payment charge, including without limitation the amount of the costs, such as collection costs. Complaining or reporting party may transmit the final administrative order for administrative costs and administrative citation penalties, or notice of the judgment arising from a collection or other legal action, to the county of Stanislaus treasurer/tax collector revenue recovery division. A judgment or award/order of such costs, penalties or damages may also be enforced in any other manner provided by law, including enforcement of a civil judgment pursuant to Enforcement of Judgment Law, California Code of Civil Procedure Section 680.010 et seq. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

Chapter 6.16 ANIMAL CONTROL
6.16.010 Animal restraint.
        A.    No owner of any animal, wild or domestic, except the domestic cat, shall permit or suffer the animal to:

        1.     Be off a leash or to be restrained by a leash which is more than eight feet in length, except that an animal need not be on a leash while it is on the premises of its owner nor while on other private property with consent of that owner or lessee or tenant;

        2.     Enter upon private property without consent of the owner, lessee and/or tenant of the private property;

        3.     Habitually make loud noises;

        4.     Act in such other manner so as to constitute a public nuisance.

        B.     Nothing in this section shall prohibit the use of animals on school property for teaching, for the blind and/or other disabilities, or for other school purposes when permitted by school officials, or require a person to keep any animal in his or her possession on a leash if, at the time, the animal is restrained in a vehicle or cage. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.16.020 Loud noises—Prohibited acts defined.
        Keeping or maintaining, or permitting to be kept or maintained, upon any premises owned, occupied, or controlled by any person, any animal which, by any frequent or long continued noise, shall cause annoyance or discomfort to two or more reasonable persons of normal sensitiveness who reside in separate residences (including apartments and condominiums). However, the animal services authorized staff may proceed on the basis of a complaint of only one person if circumstances are determined to exist whereby a noise disturbance caused by an animal affects only one individual. Any noise, such as howling, yelping, whining, barking or otherwise, that is audible continuously for ten minutes or intermittently for thirty minutes shall be prima facie evidence of such annoyance or discomfort. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

Chapter 6.20 DOGS
6.20.010 License—Required.
        A.    Any person owning or having custody of any dog four months or older shall pay an annual license fee. The license fee for dogs shall be established by the board of supervisors and set forth in Chapter 6.48. The increased fees collected by the SASA for unaltered dogs, less administrative costs, shall be used to pay for vouchers to support spay/neuter programs.

        B.     Any owner of any unaltered dog who meets any of the following criteria shall pay a reduced unaltered annual license fee as set forth in the fee schedule in Chapter 6.48:

        1.     An owner who owns or operates an actual livestock working ranch or livestock farming operation of more than two acres; or

        2.     An owner who registers and participates in an American Kennel Club (AKC), United Kennel Club (UKC), or other state or nationally recognized organization and is a member of a parent club or organization for the purposes of showing, training, agility trials, or hunting and provides documentation to SASA of such membership and participation in the above animal activities.

        C.     If the owner fails to obtain and/or renew the dog license required in this title, upon the expiration of the thirty days after the day upon which the dog is four months old, or within thirty days after the day upon which the dog, if over the age of four months, is first acquired or brought into the county by a resident, SASA shall impose a late penalty on the owner of the dog. This late fee shall not be waived by SASA upon the transfer or abandonment of the dog by the non-compliant owner. This late penalty shall be imposed in addition to any other applicable civil or criminal penalties and all penalties shall be placed in the Stanislaus County Alternative to Euthanasia (SCATE) Program to be used for spaying or neutering of cats and dogs.

        D.    If the penalty mentioned in subsection C of this section is not paid, and the owner fails to obtain the license required under subdivision A of this section within fifteen days from the date when SASA first notified the dog owner of the imposition of the penalty mentioned in subsection C, the continuing violation of the license requirement of this section becomes an additional infraction and may be prosecuted as such. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.20.020 License—Tags.
        The licensing authority shall issue, upon proper application and payment of license fees, a serially numbered license tag stamped with the name of the county and the year of issuance. The owner shall provide a dog with a suitable collar or other device to which the license tag shall be attached. The animal services executive director shall keep an endorsed copy of the application or other records sufficient to establish the identity of the owner. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.20.030 License—Rabies vaccination certificate required.
        Each application for a dog license shall be on a form furnished by the licensing authority. An application for a license shall not be accepted unless a valid certificate of rabies vaccination by a licensed veterinarian covering the license period accompanies the application. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.20.040 Exemptions—Guide dogs, signal dogs and service dogs.
        Guide dogs, signal dogs, and service dogs as defined in Sections 6.04.140, 6.04.150 and 6.04.160 of this title, with current rabies vaccinations, shall be licensed without charges upon submission of signed assistance dog applications and affidavits. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.20.050 Exemption—Licensed under another jurisdiction.
        A dog brought into the county which has been licensed in another county or city within the state shall not be subject to licensing provisions of this chapter for so long as the license would be current and valid at its place of issuance or for one year, whichever is the lesser period. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.20.060 Exemption—Medical treatment.
        Dogs brought into the county for the exclusive purpose of receiving medical care and in the custody of a licensed veterinarian need not be licensed. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.20.070 Exemption—Government ownership.
        Dogs owned by the county, a city or other public agency shall be licensed without charge. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.20.080 Exemption—Temporary residence.
        This chapter shall not apply to any dog in the custody or care of a nonresident of the county, or temporarily therein, for a period not exceeding thirty days. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

Chapter 6.24 KENNELS
6.24.010 Kennel license—Required.
        A kennel is defined in Section 6.04.080. No person shall, without first obtaining a kennel license, keep, conduct or operate any dog kennel, cat kennel, pet shop, zoo, animal rental establishment, riding academy, livery stable, boarding stable, pony ride, livestock auction or market, rodeo, pet show, animal exhibition, or any other use of animals for a commercial or noncommercial purpose. No kennel license shall be required for an animal show or a use of animals, which is sponsored and controlled by an organization, which under the discretion of the animal services executive director has proper rules and procedures to prevent the abuse of animals. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.24.020 Kennel license—In lieu of individual licenses.
        In lieu of securing the license required by Chapter 6.20 for each of the dogs in a kennel, a person owning or operating a kennel may obtain a kennel license covering all dogs in the kennel. A kennel owner and/or operator shall adhere to provisions of Sections 6.36.050 and 6.36.060 regarding vaccination for rabies. Dogs owned or controlled by the kennel operator and/or owner, which are allowed outside the confines of the kennel, shall be individually licensed as required by Chapter 6.20. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.24.030 License—Application form.
        Each application for a kennel license or other animal establishment license shall be upon a form furnished by the licensing authority. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.24.040 License—Posting.
        All licenses issued under this chapter shall be kept posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.24.050 License—Operating requirements.
        Upon filing an application for an original, or a renewal kennel or animal establishment license, the licensing authority shall issue such license, only after certification by the animal services executive director that:

        A.    The keeping of animals, or the conduct or operation of business for which the license is requested and at the place set forth in the application will not violate any statute, law or any regulation adopted pursuant to Section 6.01.030;

        B.     The conduct or operation of the activity will not endanger the health, peace or safety of the community;

        C.     The premises where animals are to be kept are clean and sanitary and that animals will not be subjected to suffering, cruelty or abuse;

        D.    The applicant has not had a similar license revoked within one year prior to the application. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.24.060 License—Suspension or revocation.
        The licensing authority may revoke or suspend any license issued under this chapter upon recommendation of an animal services authorized staff, or county health officer, if it is found that the licensee, his or her agent or employee has been convicted of any offense involving a violation of Sections 596, 597, 597.1, 598 and 599 of the Penal Code, or other applicable law, or is in violation of ordinance of this code, or this title or of any regulation adopted pursuant to Section 6.01.030. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

Chapter 6.28 DANGEROUS ANIMALS
6.28.010 Investigation.
        Whenever an animal suspected of being potentially dangerous or vicious is reported, the animal services executive director shall investigate the circumstances; and if he or she finds that the animal shows a propensity to attack, bite, scratch, or harass people or other animals without provocation, he or she shall notify the owner, stating all the facts and circumstances. He or she may under state law refer the matter to animal court, Section 6.08.030(D). Animal court may order that the animal be immediately seized or kept within a substantial enclosure, securely leashed or otherwise controlled. If the owner cannot provide restraint, the animal shall be temporarily impounded at the expense of the owner. At any time after seven days’ impoundment for such purpose, the animal services executive director may, in his or her discretion, apply the provisions of Chapter 6.32. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.28.020 Impoundment authorized.
        If upon receiving written notification the owner fails to restrain or control a potentially dangerous or vicious animal, as ordered, the owner is in violation of this title. The animal services executive director is empowered to seize and impound or destroy the animal. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.28.030 Licensing of potentially dangerous non-domesticated and domesticated animals.
        A.    No person shall possess any animal not commonly kept or raised in the county as a domesticated animal and which is or may be, in the opinion of the animal services executive director, dangerous to the health and safety of any person, without first obtaining a license for the possession of the animal.

        B.     If the possession of the animal does not violate any federal or state law or zoning ordinance, a dangerous animal license may be issued.

        C.     Each application for a dangerous animal license shall be upon a form furnished by the licensing authority.

        D.    All licenses issued under this chapter shall be kept posted in a conspicuous place on the premises where the animal resides.

        E.     Upon filing an application for an original, or a renewal of a dangerous animal license, the licensing authority shall issue such license, only after certification by the animal services executive director that:

        1.     The keeping of a dangerous animal for which the license is requested, and at the place set forth in the application, will not violate any law or regulation;

        2.     The keeping of the dangerous animal will not endanger the health, peace, or safety of the community;

        3.     The premises where the dangerous animal or animals are to be kept are clean and sanitary and that the animals will not be subjected to suffering, cruelty, or abuse; and

        4.     The applicant has not had a similar license revoked within one year prior to the application.

        F.     Any license issued for a dangerous animal may be subject to such additional conditions as may be required by the animal services executive director.

        G.    A license shall not be issued, or if issued, shall be revoked, where, in the opinion of the animal services executive director, the possession of the dangerous animal will endanger the health and safety of one or more persons.

        H.    In the event that a license is denied or revoked, the owner shall, within the time designated and under the conditions required by the animal services executive director, dispose of the unlicensed animal. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

Chapter 6.32 IMPOUNDMENT
6.32.010 Authorized.
        Any animal that law enforcement or an animal services officer has reasonable cause to believe is engaged in activities, or existing in a condition, prohibited by this title, shall be impounded. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.32.020 Notice—Required.
        Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no animal impounded shall be disposed of until and after notice is given by SASA to the owner of the impounded animal, if he or she is known. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.32.030 Notice—Form.
        The notice to the owner shall be in writing and shall contain a description of the animal impounded and the date and place of impoundment and the license tag number, if available. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.32.040 Notice—Service.
        Notice to the owner may be served by delivering a copy to the owner of the animal personally, or by sending a copy by mail to the address provided on the application for license, or if the animal is unlicensed, then to the owner’s place of residence or last known address. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.32.050 Notice—Completion of service.
        Service of notice by mail is deemed complete on the day after such mailing. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.32.060 Duration—Unlicensed animal.
        If an impounded animal bears identification and the owner is unknown, the animal shall be held for seven days. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.32.070 Duration—Licensed dog.
        All impounded dogs found wearing a current license tag or bearing identification shall, unless sooner redeemed, be kept in the animal shelter for a period of not less than seven days after notification. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.32.090 Duration—Livestock.
        Any impounded animal, which is a kind referred to in Section 17003 of the Food and Agricultural Code (bovine animal, horse, mule or burro) shall be kept in the animal shelter for at least fourteen days, unless it is redeemed within that period. If the animal is a bovine animal and is not redeemed, the State Bureau of Livestock Identification shall be notified. The animal shall be sheltered at the direction of the Bureau of Livestock Identification for disposition by that office. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.32.100 Duration—Animals.
        Any impounded animal shall, unless sooner redeemed, be kept in the animal shelter for at least four days, unless the animal was seized pursuant to an illegal activity. In those cases where an animal is seized pursuant to an illegal activity, and where no owner is known or identified, animal services authorized staff shall dispose of the animal as required by law. In those cases where an animal is seized pursuant to an illegal activity, and where the owner is known or identified, the animal shall be disposed of as required by law. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.32.110 Voluntary surrender.
        Any animal that is voluntarily surrendered to or deposited with the animal shelter, or an animal services officer, by the owner, shall immediately thereafter become the property of SASA for the purposes of Sections 6.32.140 and 6.32.150. The owner shall pay an owner surrender fee.

        A fee shall be paid by the owner of any animal that is voluntarily surrendered to or deposited with the animal shelter, if that owner’s primary residence is not located within a jurisdiction served by SASA. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.32.120 Disposition of injured animal.
        A veterinarian who receives an injured animal under the provisions of Section 597(f) of the Penal Code shall promptly notify the executive director of animal services of his or her disposition of such animal, and if the animal is given care and treatment, the waiting period before destruction of the animal shall be the same as the duration of impoundment provided by this chapter. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.32.130 Owner redemption.
        The owner or person entitled to custody or control of any impounded animal may, at any time before the sale or adoption or disposition of the animal, redeem such animal upon complying with the conditions and paying the fees established by ordinance of the board of supervisors. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.32.140 Disposal authorized.
        Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, an impounded animal that is not redeemed within the specific holding period shall be considered to be abandoned by its owner and shall become the property of SASA. Such animal may be sold, adopted, euthanized or otherwise disposed of as authorized by resolution of the board of SASA. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.32.150 Sale of animal.
        Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, an impounded animal that is not redeemed within the applicable holding period specified in this chapter, or an animal voluntarily surrendered to SASA, or an animal that has been impounded for quarantine or is known to have bitten a human or to have demonstrated potentially dangerous or vicious propensities, at the discretion of the animal services executive director, may be sold or adopted for its fair market value as determined by the animal services executive director; and, upon reasonable conditions as the animal services executive director finds appropriate, may be euthanized. When an animal is sold/adopted, the receipt issued by SASA shall be valid title to the purchaser. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.32.160 Diseased or injured animal.
        Notwithstanding any provisions of this chapter, an impounded animal, which is determined by the health officer or a veterinarian to constitute a health or safety hazard, shall be euthanized or otherwise disposed of without delay by animal services authorized staff or the veterinarian. An impounded animal, which is determined by a veterinarian, to be suffering extreme pain due to disease or injury, and there is no reasonable probability that the animal will recover from its disease or injury, may be euthanized without delay by animal services authorized staff or the veterinarian. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.32.170 Adopted dogs and cats—Microchipping required.
        All dogs and cats adopted from the animal shelter shall be implanted, prior to the animal leaving the animal shelter, with a microchip provided by SASA. The microchip identification number shall be maintained on file at the animal shelter for identification purposes. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.32.180 Reclaimed dogs and cats—Microchipping required.
        Any dog or cat impounded under authority of this chapter, which has no current license or any other visible means of permanent identification shall be, upon identification and reclaim by its owner, implanted with a microchip provided by SASA.

        In addition, any dog or cat that has been identified by SASA as a “bite dog” or “bite cat” (a dog or cat which has previously bitten a person or another animal) will be implanted with a microchip provided by SASA, regardless of whether the dog or cat has been licensed or not.

        The cost of the microchip and the service to implant the microchip is to be determined by ordinance of the SASA, and shall be paid by the animal’s owner before the animal’s release. The microchip’s identification number shall be maintained on file at the animal shelter for identification purposes. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.32.190 Fine for impounded non-spayed or unneutered dog.
        The owner of a non-spayed or unneutered dog that is impounded by SASA shall be fined as set forth in Chapter 6.48. These fines are for unaltered impounded dogs only, and are not in lieu of any fines or impound fees imposed by SASA.

        An animal services officer, humane officer, police officer, peace officer or any agency authorized to enforce the Penal Code, may write citations with a civil penalty stated in an amount corresponding to the violation as provided above. The fines shall be paid to SASA and shall be collected at SASA. Any funds collected under this section shall be expended for the purpose of humane education, programs for low cost spaying and neutering of dogs, and any additional costs incurred by SASA or animal shelter in the administration of requirements of this section. The ordinance codified in this section was adopted pursuant to Section 30804.7 of the Food and Agricultural Code. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

Chapter 6.36 RABIES CONTROL
6.36.010 Quarantine.
        A.    The animal services executive director shall assure that all animals in the following categories are isolated or quarantined at the place and under the conditions prescribed by the county health officer and pertinent state laws and regulations:

        1.     Known rabid animals;

        2.     Suspected rabid animals;

        3.     Animals that have bitten or otherwise exposed a human to rabies;

        4.     Animals of a species subject to rabies, which have been bitten by a known rabid or suspected rabid animal or have come in close contact with a rabid or suspected rabid animal.

        B.     The owner of a quarantined animal shall pay a fee as set forth in the fee schedule under Section 6.48.010 for the animal services costs in providing and insuring that the animal is properly quarantined. If the person fails or refuses to obey the lawful order for isolation or quarantine of an animal for rabies observations by the county health officer, any animal services staff may impound the animal for such quarantine at additional expense to the owner at the rate as established in the fee schedule. The person may also be found guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.36.020 Carcass delivery.
        Upon the death of any rabid animal, clinically suspected rabid animal, or animal which has bitten or otherwise exposed a human to rabies, the animal services executive director shall obtain and turn over to the health officer the carcass of such animal or an adequate specimen thereof. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.36.030 Epidemic—Declaration.
        The county health officer may determine and declare that a rabies epidemic or other unusually dangerous health situation exists among dogs or other animals in the county, or in any part thereof. Upon making such a declaration, the health officer shall prepare and promulgate, with the approval of the SASA, such rules and regulations as may be necessary for the control of persons and animals within the area where the dangerous conditions exist. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.36.040 Epidemic—Rules enforcement.
        It shall be the duty of the animal services executive director to comply with all directives of the county health officer in the enforcement of the rules and regulations. The rules and regulations, when adopted, shall become and thereafter be a part of this chapter. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.36.050 Vaccination—Required.
        Every dog shall have a medically current vaccination with an anti-rabies vaccine approved by the California Department of Public Health. The vaccination shall be administered by a veterinarian or as provided through county recognized clinics, and a certificate of vaccination shall be issued to the owner. The certificate of rabies vaccination which accompanies the license application shall be valid if in compliance with the following immunization schedule:

        A.    Primary Immunization. Primary immunization shall be defined as the initial inoculation of an approved canine rabies vaccine administered to young dogs between the ages of four to twelve months.

        B.     Revaccination Intervals. The interval for revaccination of dogs administered primary immunization between the ages of four to twelve months will be twelve months. The interval for primary or revaccination of dogs administered rabies vaccine over the age of twelve months shall be at least once every three years. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.36.060 Vaccination—Exemption.
        Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 6.36.050, no dog need be vaccinated for rabies where a licensed veterinarian has certified that the vaccination would endanger the dog’s health. The certificate must bear the date of issuance and must be renewed each year. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.36.070 Vaccination—Public clinic.
        The animal services executive director shall establish public dog vaccination clinics at least once each calendar year. The charge for the rabies vaccination at such clinics shall not exceed the actual cost involved. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.36.080 Animal bite report.
        A.    Any person, or parent or guardian of such person, or an owner of an animal, bitten or scratched by an animal of a species subject to rabies shall immediately report such incident to the county health officer or the animal services executive director. Additionally the owner or other person having custody or control of any animal, who bites a human, shall immediately notify the county health officer or the animal services executive director of such bite, giving the name and address of the person bitten, if known.

        B.     Willfully concealing the location or ownership of an animal subject to rabies, that has bitten or otherwise exposed a person to rabies, with intent to prevent the quarantine or isolation of that animal by the county health officer may be found guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.36.090 Animal bite—Medical report.
        Every veterinarian and every person providing professional medical treatment for animal bite by an animal of a species subject to rabies shall immediately notify the health department whenever rabies is suspected. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

Chapter 6.40 DEAD OR ABANDONED ANIMALS
6.40.010 Abandonment unlawful.
        It is unlawful for any person to abandon any animal whether dead or alive. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.40.020 Dead animal disposal.
        The owner of a dead animal shall provide, within a reasonable time period, for the burial, incineration in a manner approved by SASA or other disposition of the carcass in a safe and sanitary manner. The owner may request SASA to dispose of the animal at a fee fixed by ordinance by the SASA. The animal services executive director shall be responsible for disposal of all dead animals whose ownership cannot be established. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.40.030 Disposition of stray cats.
        A.    It is unlawful for any person who contains a stray cat found at large on their property, to abandon the cat. Such act of abandonment is a violation of this code and will constitute an infraction.

        For the purposes of this section only the following definitions shall apply:

        1.     “Contains” shall mean traps, corners, confines or in some manner restricts the cat’s freedom from continuing to roam.

        2.     “Stray cat” means a cat that is running loose and at large with no owner present, and/or a cat that is trespassing on another’s property.

        3.     “Abandon” means once the cat is contained, the person transports the cat to a location that is not within close proximity to where the cat was originally contained and releases the cat to freely roam.

        B.     Upon containing a stray cat, the person shall treat the cat humanely and:

        1.     As soon as possible shall release the cat or return the cat to the owner, if known; or

        2.     If the owner is not known, then not later than the next business day, shall transport the cat to the animal shelter and provide the date, time and location of when and where the cat was contained upon surrendering the cat to SASA.

        C.     It is recommended, but not required, that a person who sets a trap take all reasonable measures to notify neighbors of the trap(s) being set, and/or attempt to locate the owner of the contained cat before transporting the cat to the animal shelter. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

Chapter 6.44 VIOLATION—PENALTY
6.44.010 Infractions.
        Any person violating any provision of Chapters 6.01 through 6.32, Chapter 6.36, Sections 6.36.050 and 6.36.060, Chapter 6.40 and/or Chapter 6.52 is guilty of an infraction and upon conviction thereof is punishable as set forth in Section 1.36.020; provided, however, the maximum fine shall not exceed three hundred dollars. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.44.020 Misdemeanors.
        Any person violating Section 6.36.010 and/or Section 6.36.080 of Chapter 6.36, is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof is punishable as set forth in Section 1.36.010. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.44.030 Each day a separate offense.
        Every person violating any provision of this title shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each day, or portion thereof, during which such violation continues. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

Chapter 6.48 ANIMAL SERVICE FEES
6.48.010 County of Stanislaus animal services fees schedule.
        The animal services fees and fines referred to and applied in this title and its chapters, except as otherwise stated in this title, are set forth in the current Stanislaus County animal services fee schedule, which is periodically reviewed and amended by ordinance. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.48.020 Animal court fines and fees.
        Violations of this title and its chapters, except as otherwise stated in this title, will have the animal court fines and fees applied as set forth in the current Stanislaus County services fee schedule, which is periodically reviewed and amended by ordinance. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

Chapter 6.52 BREEDING AND TRANSFERRING OF DOGS AND CATS, AND LICENSING OF CATS
6.52.010 Purpose of regulations.
        The SASA finds and declares that there exists a pet overpopulation problem in the county of Stanislaus that has resulted in a threat to public safety and health, inhumane treatment of animals, mass euthanasia of dogs and cats at the local animal shelters and escalating costs for animal care and control. The SASA further finds that uncontrolled breeding is a contributing cause to this problem. The SASA further finds that part of the solution is for all dogs four months or older to be licensed and spayed or neutered, unless the owners purchase the appropriate licenses/permits for the privilege of maintaining the animal intact and allowing it to breed. The SASA also finds that an increase in the license fee for unaltered dogs will encourage dog owners to spay/neuter their dog(s) in order to qualify for the lower altered dog license fee. Further, the SASA finds that regulating the breeding and transfer of dogs and cats will help alleviate the county’s pet overpopulation problem. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.52.030 Litter permit.
        A.    No person shall cause or allow any dog or cat owned, harbored or kept within the county of Stanislaus to breed without first obtaining a litter permit. The term “litter permit” means a written authorization, issued annually by the animal services executive director, or the director’s designee, giving its lawful holder permission to breed a dog or a cat.

        B.     Each litter permit shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance, and may be renewed annually before its expiration date. Each applicant for a litter permit shall pay an annual fee as prescribed by the SASA and set forth in the fee schedule section of this title.

        C.     SASA shall administer an animal litter permit program to allow the breeding of unaltered dogs and cats consistent with criteria and according to procedures established by the animal services executive director. Under no circumstances shall such a litter permit be issued to a person who has been convicted of animal cruelty or neglect.

        D.    In addition to the criteria and procedures established by the animal services executive director, litter permits shall contain the following terms and conditions:

        1.     The owner of an unaltered female dog or cat shall not allow the whelping of more than one litter per animal in any household within the permit year. Notwithstanding this provision, the animal services executive director, or the director’s designee, is hereby authorized, upon application of a permittee, to allow on a one-time basis the whelping of up to two dog or cat litters per breeding animal within any domestic household within a permit year, if the permittee established, according to regulations promulgated by the animal services executive director, including a veterinarian verification of health status that such breeding is required due to the health of the animal. In the event that a permittee is forced to euthanize a litter of dogs or cats, the animal services executive director, or the director’s designee, may authorize the whelping of one additional litter of dogs or cats within the same permit year by the permittee;

        2.     No offspring may be sold, adopted, bartered, or otherwise transferred, whether for compensation or otherwise, until it has reached the age of at least seven weeks and the offspring have received its first immunizations against common diseases;

        3.     Any holder of a litter permit who advertises to the public the availability of any dog or cat for sale, adoption, or transfer, whether for compensation or otherwise, must prominently display the litter permit number in any such advertisement. Further, the litter permit holder must provide the permit number to any person who purchases, adopts or receives any animal from the permit holder and include the permit number on any receipt of sale or transfer document;

        4.     Commercial establishments selling locally bred dogs or cats shall prominently display the litter permit number(s) of the breeder(s) whose dogs and cats are sold in such establishments and any other pertinent information required by the animal services executive director, or the director’s designee;

        5.     Any litter permit holder selling or otherwise transferring a dog or cat, whether for compensation or otherwise, shall maintain records for a period of three years containing the name, address, and telephone number of the animal’s new owner on SASA’s approved form;

        6.     Any litter permit holder or commercial establishment which sells or otherwise transfers a dog or cat, whether for compensation or otherwise, shall provide to the new animal owner written information regarding the license and permit requirements of the county of Stanislaus applicable to such animal; and

        7.     Any litter permit holder shall have his or her dog or cat licensed and microchipped with SASA as set forth in this title.

        E.     The following animals are exempt from the litter permit requirements:

        1.     Dogs documented as having been appropriately trained and actively used by law enforcement agencies for law enforcement and rescue activities;

        2.     Dogs documented as guide, signal, or service dogs pursuant to Section 365.5(d), (e) and (f) and successor sections of the Penal Code;

        3.     Dogs and cats under the care of governmental animal control agencies; animal rescue organizations which have demonstrated to SASA that they have implemented an ongoing spay/neuter plan, as well as an adoption plan; or humane societies or societies for the prevention of cruelty to animals, if such societies are incorporated under the provisions of Section 10400 of the Corporations Code and the Nonprofit Public Benefit Corporation Law in Part 2 of the Corporations Code, beginning at Section 5110, and successor sections; and

        4.     Dogs documented as enrolled in a guide, signal or service dog breeding program administered by a person licensed under Chapter 9.5 (commencing with Section 7200) Division 3 of the Business and Professions Code. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.52.040 Litter permit—Penalties.
        A.    Any cat or dog owner found by SASA to be in violation of the litter permit provisions of this section may correct the violation(s) by obtaining the necessary permit(s) mentioned in this section, no later than thirty days from the date when SASA had first notified (issued a written citation to) the owner of the violation(s). Should the owner fail to correct the violation(s) in the manner described above, SASA shall impose a five hundred dollar penalty on the dog or cat owner. Written notice of this penalty shall be served by SASA on the dog or cat owner by mail. The penalty shall not be waived by SASA upon the transfer or abandonment of the dog or cat by the non-compliant owner. This penalty shall be imposed in addition to any other applicable civil or criminal penalties.

        If the penalty mentioned in this section is not paid and the owner does not comply with the identification laws established by ordinance, spay or neuter his or her dog(s) or cat(s) or obtain the litter permit(s) within twenty days from the mailing date, when SASA first notified the owner of the imposition of a penalty, the continuing violation of the litter permit requirement of this section becomes an additional infraction and may be prosecuted as such.

        B.     Any litter permit issued pursuant to Section 6.52.030 may be revoked if the animal services executive director, or the director’s designee, has reasonable cause to believe any of the following to be true:

        1.     The permit holder has violated any county ordinances relating to the keeping, care or use of any animal;

        2.     The permit holder is in violation of any state health or safety law or regulation regarding animal care or control;

        3.     The permit holder has failed to comply with any condition or requirement of the permit or has failed to pay any fee imposed under this code;

        4.     The permit holder refused to allow inspection, upon forty-eight hours written notice, of any animal covered by the permit or the premises on which the animal is kept; or

        5.     The permit holder has transferred, sold or otherwise disposed of the animal for which the permit was originally issued.

        C.     If, after inspection, the animal services executive director, or the director’s designee, concludes that it is probable that one or more of the above grounds for revocation has occurred; he or she shall cause written notice thereof to be transmitted by mail to the address of the litter permit holder. The notice shall specify the grounds of possible revocation of the litter permit and shall specify a date and time for an informal hearing to be held before the animal services executive director, or the director’s designee. The date shall be not set less than six days after the date the notice is mailed. After the informal hearing, the animal services executive director may modify the terms of the litter permit or revoke the litter permit.

        D.    The litter permit holder may appeal the decision of the animal services executive director, or the director’s designee, to the animal court if the permit holder gives written notice of such appeal within five business days of the date of the animal services executive director’s written decision.

        E.     Failure to comply with any of the requirements mentioned in Sections 6.04.100, 6.20.010, 6.52.030, 6.52.040, and 6.52.050 of this chapter is an infraction punishable by a one hundred dollar fine for the first occurrence, two hundred dollars for the second occurrence and three hundred dollars for each subsequent occurrence. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.52.050 Sale, adoption and other transfers of dogs and cats.
        A.    Any person who offers or provides, whether for compensation or otherwise, any dog or cat for sale or other type of transfer, shall disclose to the transferee information regarding the dog license and permit requirements of the county of Stanislaus applicable to the transferred animal.

        B.     No person shall present any unaltered dog or cat under six months of age for sale, barter, exchange, or adoption, whether for compensation or otherwise, in any public place, without first obtaining a litter permit pursuant to Section 6.52.030. The term public place shall include, but not be limited to, streets, highways, sidewalks, parks, carnivals, shopping malls, flea markets, boardwalks, and areas in front of commercial establishments. This prohibition shall not apply to:

        1.     Government agencies, non-profit animal rescue organizations exempt from taxation under Internal Revenue Code Section 501(c)(3), or humane societies or societies for the prevention of cruelty to animals if such societies are incorporated under the provisions of Section 10400 of the Corporations Code and the Nonprofit Public Benefit Corporation Law in Part 2 of the California Corporations Code, beginning at Section 5110;

        2.     Show dogs or show cats; or

        3.     Permitted pet stores which sell or otherwise transfer dogs or cats, whether for compensation or otherwise, within the store.

        C.     No person shall give away any dog or cat as a prize or as an inducement to enter into any contest, lottery, drawing, game or competition.

        D.    No person shall give away any dog or cat as an inducement to enter a place of business, or to enter into a business arrangement.

        E.     No person shall sell, barter, exchange or offer for adoption, whether for compensation or otherwise, any dog or cat to any minor under the age of eighteen years without the written permission of one of the minor’s parents or legal guardians.

        F.     Commercial establishments selling dogs and cats which were not bred within the county of Stanislaus shall prominently display the name and address of the breeder(s) of such dogs and cats and any other pertinent information required by the animal services executive director or designee.

        G.    Failure to display the litter permit number or include it in any advertisement for sale, adoption or other transfer of dogs and cats is an infraction punishable by a one hundred dollar fine for the first occurrence, two hundred dollars for the second occurrence and three hundred dollars for each subsequent occurrence. Each day a violation occurs is a separate violation.

        H.    Possession of a valid permit under this chapter does not entitle the litter permit holder to engage in an activity which is otherwise prohibited by law. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

 

6.52.070 Licensing of cats.
        A cat owner may voluntarily obtain a license for their cat. If the cat owner voluntarily purchases a cat license, then the cat owner shall be eligible to receive a voucher for the spay/neuter identification program operated by SASA. (Ord. 2014-05 §4).

Title 7 SANITATION AND HEALTH
Chapter 7.04 SEWER
Chapter 7.12 FATS, OIL AND GREASE MANAGEMENT AND DISCHARGE CONTROL

Chapter 7.04 SEWER
7.04.010 Purpose and intent.
        The purpose of this chapter is to set forth uniform requirements for direct and indirect discharges of pollutants into the wastewater collection and treatment system for the city of Waterford which will enable the city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws.

        The intent of this chapter is:

        A.    To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the city sewage system, which potentially could interfere with the operation of the collection system, treatment processes, or contaminate the resulting sludge;

        B.     To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the city sewage system which will pass through said system, inadequately treated, into receiving waters or the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible with the sewage system;

        C.     To protect municipal personnel who may come into contact with sewage, sludge and effluent in the course of their employment as well as protecting the general public;

        D.    To improve the opportunity to recycle wastewater sludge from the system;

        E.     To provide for equitable distribution of the cost of operation, maintenance and improvement of the municipal sewage system;

        F.     To preserve the hydraulic capacity of the municipal sewage system;

        G.    To require users of the sewage system to comply with federal and state law; and

        H.    To establish and provide a mechanism for enforcing performance standards and requirements for the treatment system and private sewer laterals that connect or are connected to the city sanitary sewer collection system. (Ord. 2014-06 §1; Ord. 93-09 §2, 1993).

 

7.04.012 Authority.
        The city is regulated by various agencies of the United States Government and the state of California, pursuant to the provisions of federal and state law. Under 40 CFR 403.8(f)(1) and the Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act Chapter 5.5, the city is granted the authority to regulate and/or prohibit, by the adoption of an ordinance, and by issuance of discharge permits, the discharge of any waste, directly or indirectly, to the city sewer facilities. Said authority includes the right to establish limits, conditions, and prohibitions; to establish flow rates or prohibit flows discharged to the city’s sewer facilities; to require the development of compliance schedules for the installation of equipment systems and materials by all users; and to take all actions necessary to enforce its authority, whether within or outside the city’s boundaries, including those users that are tributary to the city or within areas for which the city has contracted to provide sewerage services.

        The city has the authority pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Sections 5471 and 5474 to prescribe, revise, and collect all fees and charges for services and facilities furnished by the city either within or without its territorial limits. (Ord. 2014-06 §1).

 

7.04.015 Definitions.
        Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms and phrases shall be defined herein. Words and phrases used in this chapter and not otherwise defined shall be interpreted, as defined in the Code of Federal Regulation, Standard Methods for the Analysis of Wastewater, or as established by state regulatory agencies.

        The following terms shall have these meaning(s) in this chapter:

        1.     “Substantial industrial user” shall mean any waste contributor identified in the Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Manual in any of Divisions A, B, D, E, and I that:

        a.     Has a discharge flow of twenty-five thousand gallons or more per average workday or, if seasonal, the average shall be computed on the period of use; or

        b.     Has a flow or pollutant loading greater than five percent of the design capacity of the city’s sewage system; or

        c.     Has in its wastes toxic pollutants in toxic amounts as defined in the standards issued under subsection (a) of Section 307 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, or amendments thereto; or

        d.     Is found by the city’s authorized representatives to have significant impact, either singly or in combination with other contributing industries, on the treatment works or upon the quality of effluent from the treatment works.

        2.     “Person” shall mean any individual, firm, company, partnership, association, or private, public, or municipal corporation’s responsible corporate officer, the United States of America, the state, all districts and all political subdivisions, governmental agencies, and mandataries thereof, except the city.

        3.     “Lot” or parcel of land shall mean a parcel of land consisting of one or more contiguous lots of record in one ownership to which service is provided for any purpose.

        4.     “User classification” shall mean a classification of a user based on the Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Manual. The classification of users as determined in this chapter shall be:

        a.     Substantial industrial user: as defined in subsection (1) of this section;

        b.     Industrial user: any user engaged in the business of processing or manufacturing agricultural products, animals, poultry, goods, wares, or other products or materials who processes or manufactures the same for the purposes of sale, resale, or redelivery in processed or manufactured form;

        c.     Residential user: domestic users, schools, churches, and those structures exclusively domiciliary in nature, including nursing homes, convalescent hospitals, homes, flats, apartments, and boardinghouses (but excluding transient rooms, hotels, motels, and all other quarters primarily offered to the transient trade); and

        d.     Commercial user: any user not defined as a residential or industrial user.

        5.     “Act” means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 USC Section 1251, et seq.

        6.     “Biochemical oxygen demand” or “BOD” means the quantity of oxygen expressed in parts per million by weight utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory conditions for five days at a temperature of twenty degrees Celsius as described in “Standard methods.”

        7.     “Building” means a structure built, erected, and framed of component structural parts designed for the housing, shelter, enclosure, or support of persons, animals, or property of any kind.

        8.     “Building permit” means a permit issued by the building official of the city.

        9.     “Cease and desist order” means an order by the director requiring immediate termination of an activity or situation which threatens to create or does create a significant safety hazard noncompliance with the provisions of this chapter, or noncompliance with state and/or federal law.

        10.   “CFR” means the Code of Federal Regulations.

        11.   “City” means the city of Waterford in the state of California.

        12.   “City manager” means and includes the city manager of the city and authorized representatives.

        13.   “Cleanout” means the cast iron or approved plastic riser fitted with an approved cleanout plug installed at the point where the building sewer connects to the public sewer.

        14.   “Compliance directive” means an enforcement document which directs an industrial user to implement corrective or remedial measures.

        15.   “Compliance schedule” means an enforcement document which directs a user to create or imposes upon a user, a time schedule for meeting any provision of the sewer ordinance.

        16.   “Correction notice” means a notice to a user or users orally or in writing, to correct its noncompliance with the sewer ordinance.

        17.   “Director” means the public works director of the city or such other persons as may be designated by the public works director to perform the services or make the determinations permitted or required in this chapter to be made by the public works director of the city.

        18.   “Domestic wastewater/sanitary sewage” means the liquid and solid waterborne wastes derived from the ordinary living processes of humans of such character as to permit satisfactory disposal, without special pretreatment, into the public sewer or into a private wastewater disposal system.

        19.   “Drainage system” means and includes all the piping within public or private premises which conveys sewage or other liquid wastes to the public sewer, but does not include the public sewer.

        20.   “Effluent” means the liquid outflow of any facilities designed to treat, convey, or retain wastewater.

        21.   “Environmental Protection Agency” or “EPA” means the United States Environmental Protection Agency. Where appropriate, the term may also be used to designate the administrator or other duly authorized official of that agency.

        22.   “Food service establishment (FSE)” means facilities defined in California Uniform Retail Food Facility Law (CURFFL) Health and Safety Code Section 113785, and any commercial or public entity within the boundaries of the city, operating in a permanently constructed structure such as a room, building, or place, or portion thereof, maintained, used, or operated for the purpose of storing, preparing, serving, or manufacturing, packaging, or otherwise handling food for sale to other entities, or for consumption by the public, its members or employees, and which has any process or device that uses or produces FOG, or grease vapors, steam, fumes, smoke or odors that are required to be removed by a Type I or Type II hood, as defined in CURFFL. A limited food preparation establishment is not considered a FSE when engaged only in reheating, hot holding or assembly of ready to eat food products and as a result, there is no wastewater discharge containing a significant amount of FOG. A limited food preparation establishment does not include any operation that changes the form, flavor, or consistency of food. All FSEs are governed by Chapter 7.04 as well as the provisions of Chapter 7.12.

        23.   “Garbage” means solid wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of foods, and from the handling, storage, and sale of produce.

        24.   “Grease” means grease, oil, fat, or other ether-soluble matter, and includes each of the following two types:

        a.     Dispersed grease, which means grease which is not floatable grease;

        b.     Floatable grease, which means grease which floats on the surface of quiescent sewage water or other liquid or which floats upon dilution of the liquid with water.

        25.   “Grease interceptor” for the purposes of this chapter shall mean a grease trap device specifically approved by the city engineer and used either singly or in combination with an existing grease trap as determined necessary by the director of public works in order to achieve sufficient removal of sand, oils and greases or other objectionable waste.

        26.   “Grease trap” means any suitable device designed to separate sand, oil and grease in order to prevent their discharge into the city sewer system.

        27.   “Industrial user” means:

        a.     Any nongovernmental, nonresidential user of the sanitary sewer system which discharges more than the equivalent of twenty-five thousand gallons per day of sanitary sewage and which is identified in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972, Office of Management and Budget, as amended and supplemented under one of the following divisions:

        i.      Division A, agriculture, forestry, and fishing;

        ii.     Division B, mining;

        iii.    Division D, manufacturing;

        iv.    Division E, transportation, communications, electric, gas, and sanitary services;

        v.     Division I, services.

        A user in the divisions listed may be excluded if it is determined that the user will introduce primarily segregated sanitary sewage from sanitary conveniences.

        b.     Any nongovernmental user of the sanitary sewer system which discharges wastewater into the system which contains toxic pollutants or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to contaminate the sludge of the system, or to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, or which constitutes a hazard to humans or animals, creates a public nuisance, or creates any hazard in or has an adverse effect on the waters receiving any discharge from the system.

        c.     Any source of indirect discharge into the sanitary sewer system which does not constitute a “discharge of pollutants” under regulations issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act.

        d.     Any user of the sanitary sewer system that has been determined to require pretreatment including physical separation of wastes.

        e.     Any user who discharges or causes a discharge of industrial wastewater directly or indirectly to the city sewage system which requires a permit under the provisions of this chapter.

        28.   “Industrial wastewater/industrial waste” means all water-carried wastes and wastewater of the community, excluding domestic wastewater, and including all wastewater from any commercial or industrial production, manufacturing, processing, agricultural or other operation. These may also include wastes of human origin similar to domestic wastewater.

        29.   “Industrial wastewater discharge” means liquid and/or solids contained within a liquid, other than sanitary sewage, and discharged into the sewage system by an industrial user.

        30.   “Inspector” means a person authorized by the director to inspect any development discharging or anticipating discharge to the wastewater collection system and/or the POTW.

        31.   “Land development approval” means any pre-zoning, zoning, or rezoning, or any discretionary permit, which for purposes of this chapter shall be limited to site development permits, exceptions, conditional use permits, and approvals of tentative subdivision maps.

        32.   “National pollution discharge elimination system permit” or “NPDES permit” means a permit issued to the city for the sanitary sewer system by the approval authority pursuant to the Act.

        33.   “Notice of violation” means a notice issued by the director or inspector to the industrial user, hand delivered or mailed, informing the industrial user that a violation has occurred.

        34.   “Nuisance” means anything which is injurious to health or is indecent or offensive to the senses or an obstruction to the free use of property so as to interfere with the comfort or enjoyment of life or property or which affects at the same time an entire community or neighborhood or sewer collection system or POTW or any considerable number of persons, although the extent of the annoyance or damage inflicted upon individuals may be unequal.

        35.   “Owner” means the owner of any premises.

        36.   “Permit” means either a sewer connection permit or a wastewater discharge permit.

        37.   “Permittee” means the person, firm, or organization to whom a sewer connection permit or a wastewater discharge permit or both have been issued.

        38.   “Person” means any individual, partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity, their legal representatives, agents, or assigns.

        39.   “pH” means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution.

        40.   “Premises” means a separate lot or parcel of land, improved or unimproved, which is connected directly or indirectly to the sanitary sewer system or any portion thereof, or from which any sewage is discharged or conducted, directly or indirectly, into the system.

        41.   “Pretreatment” means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into the sanitary sewer system. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes, process changes, or by other means, except as hereinafter prohibited. “Pretreatment,” except where expressly authorized to do so by an express standard in this chapter, shall never include an increase in the use of process water, other non-waste waters, or in any other way attempting to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the provisions of this chapter or any order issued pursuant to the authority herein contained.

        42.   “Private sewage disposal system” means a septic tank with the effluent discharging into a subsurface disposal field, into one or more seepage pits, or into a combination of subsurface disposal field and seepage pit or of such other facilities as may be permitted under the Uniform Plumbing Code.

        43.   “Private sewer” means a building sewer which receives the discharge from more than one building drain and conveys it to a public sewer.

        44.   “Public owned treatment works (POTW)” means a treatment works as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1292) which is owned in this instance by the city. This definition includes any sewers that convey wastewater to the POTW treatment plant, but does not include pipes, sewers, or other conveyances not connected to the facility providing treatment. For the purposes of this chapter, “POTW” shall also include any sewers that convey wastewater from persons outside the city, who are, by contract or agreement users of the city treatment plant.

        45.   “Radioactive material” means any material containing chemical elements which spontaneously change their atomic structure with the emission of atomic energy.

        46.   “Sanitary sewage” means water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, excluding industrial waste and also excluding ground, surface, and storm waters.

        47.   “Sewage” means and includes sanitary sewage or industrial waste or both.

        48.   “Sewage system” shall mean the city’s facilities for the collection, storage, treatment, and disposal of industrial wastes or domestic wastes, or both, and shall include monitoring, sampling, metering, and other devices and appurtenances.

        49.   “Sewer” means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.

        50.   “Sewer lateral” shall mean a sewer line eight inches or smaller in diameter which discharges into a sewer main and/or receives sewage from a sewer connection.

        51.   “Sewer main” shall mean a sewer line ten inches or larger in diameter receiving sewage from one or more sewer laterals or sewer connections.

        52.   “Sewer connection charge” means a fee or charge levied on users of the sanitary sewer system at the time of their connection to the system for the privilege of connecting to the system.

        53.   “Sewer service” shall mean the discharge or authority to discharge into the sewage system.

        54.   “Sewer service charge” means a fee or charge levied on users of the sanitary sewer system for the user’s proportionate share of the cost of operation and maintenance (including replacement) of the system.

        55.   “Standard methods” means the examination and analytical procedures for industrial waste set forth in the most recent edition of “Standard Methods for the Examination of Water, Sewage, and Industrial Wastes,” published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Water Pollution Control Federation. All analytical measurements made pursuant to this chapter shall be in conformity with “Standard Methods” or EPA-recommended procedures and shall be performed by a laboratory certified by the California Department of Health Services.

        56.   “Storm drainage system” means all conduits, pumping plants, collection facilities and other appurtenances owned and operated by the city for carrying, collecting, pumping and disposing of storm water, surface water, ground water, roof runoff or other unpolluted water.

        57.   “Storm water” means water to which no pollutant has been added, either intentionally or accidentally, other than street wash, surface water, rainwater runoff, or drainage, but excludes sewage. One pass cooling water may be considered as storm water.

        58.   “Suspended solids” means solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in, water, sewage, or other liquids and which are removable by laboratory filtering.

        59.   “System” means the sanitary sewer system.

        60.   “Unpolluted water” means water to which no pollutant has been added, either intentionally or accidentally, which would render such water unacceptable to the city for disposal to storm or natural drainages or directly to surface waters.

        61.   “User” means any person responsible for payment of sewer service charges for premises or any person who discharges, causes or allows the discharge of wastewater directly or indirectly to the sewage system. This includes residential, commercial, and industrial users as defined herein.

        62.   “Waste” means and includes sewage and any and all other waste substances, liquid, solid, gaseous, or radioactive, associated with human habitation, or of human or animal origin, or from any producing, manufacturing, or processing operation of whatever nature, including such waste placed within containers of whatever nature prior to, and for purposes of, disposal.

        63.   “Wastewater” means the liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed into or permitted to enter the city’s facilities.

        64.   “Wastewater constituents and characteristics” means the individual chemical, physical, bacteriological, radiological, and other parameters which serve to define, classify, or measure the content, quality, quantity, and strength of wastewater.

        65.   “Wastewater discharge permit” means a permit issued to an industrial user, or any person discharging to the sewage system that the director determines needs a permit, to regulate its discharge of toxic, organic, or hydraulic loading to the wastewater collection, conveyance, and treatment system as required by this code.

        66.   “Wastewater treatment plant” means any arrangement of devices and structures for treating sanitary sewage and industrial waste. (Ord. 2014-06 §1).

 

7.04.020 When city will furnish service.
        When mains and laterals are in place or within a reasonable distance from a particular parcel, as determined by the director, the city may furnish sewer service from such a line to the property upon the payment of the appropriate charges and costs. (Ord. 2014-06 §1; Ord. 93-09 §2, 1993).

 

7.04.025 Mandatory connection.
        A.    No owner or occupant of any premises within the city on which sewage is produced and on which premises the nearest building outlet of the plumbing system is located within a two hundred-foot radius of an existing sewer main to which a connection can be made shall use any means of sewage disposal other than through the sewer system. The owner of any premises so located and upon or in which any sewage is produced shall be required upon official notice from the city, to connect said premises to the sewer system within sixty days from the date when a main sewer located within the distance specified above is completed and available for connection to said premises. There shall be a separate connection to the sewer system for each building or structure served, except that pursuant to written permission from the director of public works any two or more buildings or structures on the same lot may be served by one sewer connection. Pursuant to Government Code Section 54352 the council hereby declares that further maintenance or use of septic systems or other local means of sewage disposal on any premises so located shall constitute a public nuisance and may invoke any legal means to abate same.

        B.     Notwithstanding the foregoing, no owner or occupant shall be required to connect premises to the sewer system as long as the premises are currently being served by a functioning septic system which, in the opinion of the director of public works, adequately serves the premises. In such cases, the director of public works may approve upon request of the applicable owner the deferral of the connection until such time as it is determined that the septic system no longer adequately serves the premises or cannot serve the premises without major repairs. Remodeling of existing premises served by a septic system may be allowed if no septic system improvements are required to serve such modifications.

        C.     Septic Tank Failure or Rendered Unserviceable. Any septic tank which shall become unserviceable from any cause shall be abandoned and the premises previously served by such septic tank shall, wherever sewers are available as outlined in this section, be connected with and drained into a public sewer within ten days from the time such septic tank becomes unserviceable. The property owner shall at his or her sole risk and expense remove from service and render harmless any and all septic tanks, cisterns, vessels, or similar underground vaults in accordance with city of Waterford and Stanislaus County regulations, the Uniform Plumbing Code and any state law, within thirty days following the date the dwelling is connected to the city sanitary sewer facilities. City verification and approval is required for all abandoned facilities outlined above.

        D.    Deferred Installment Agreements (Hardship). For customers who demonstrate a hardship in paying permit connection fees, a deferred installment agreement may be executed. The applicant must provide a notarized signature on the agreement and return it to the city for processing. The agreement will be forwarded to the city clerk, who will have the city manager sign and forward it to the county recorder’s office for recordation. When all fees have been paid, as stated in the deferred installment agreement, a “Release of Deferred Improvement Agreement” will be generated releasing any further obligations to the city. (Ord. 2014-06 §1; Ord. 95-11 §1, 1995).

 

7.04.030 Ownership of lines.
        Lines, laterals and appurtenants on private property shall belong to the property owner. All lines and appurtenant facilities constructed in or under streets, easements, or alleys shall become the property of the city upon the completion of the installation and upon the final inspection and approval of the lines by the city engineer. (Ord. 2014-06 §1; Ord. 93-09 §2, 1993).

 

7.04.040 Easements.
        When a main line is to be constructed across private property to serve more than one lot, an easement shall be granted to the city, and the easement line, size, and installation shall be approved by the city engineer. The owner of such lots shall be responsible for obtaining and paying for sewer service when service is to more than one lot or to more than one structure on one lot or more.

        When a lateral is to be constructed across private property to serve another lot, an easement must first be conveyed from one property owner to the other. The easement line, size and installation shall be approved by the city. (Ord. 2014-06 §1; Ord. 93-09 §2, 1993).

 

7.04.050 Maintenance of lines.
        Where premises are connected to the city sanitary sewer mains, it is the responsibility of the property owner, at the owner’s expense, to maintain the sewer service lateral from the premises to the city owned and operated main line. Such maintenance shall include the removal of tree roots and other blockages. The property owner is also responsible for repairs of the lateral line within the property boundaries. The city will repair damaged and deteriorated lateral lines in the city right-of-way at city expense, unless such damage was caused by the property owner.

        If the property owner believes that there is a lateral structural problem in the city right-of-way, the property owner shall have the lateral televised and provide a copy to the public works department. If there is a structural problem in the right-of-way and is not the result of negligence by the property owner, the city will make the repair at no cost to the property owner. (Ord. 2014-06 §1; Ord. 93-09 §2, 1993).

 

7.04.060 Connections.
        A.    One city sewer connection shall be provided to each occupied lot under separate ownership and to the premises of each project, unless otherwise approved by the city engineer. All on-site lines shall be constructed to city standards.

        B.     When separate buildings are constructed on a lot or parcel which can be sold as a separate lot or parcel, a sewer connection shall be provided for each lot capable of being sold separately.

        C.     For each project, individual shutoff valves, gate valves, and necessary onsite lines under private ownership shall be provided.

        D.    The building official shall test and inspect the mains and laterals for the general collection system within a project.

        E.     When separate buildings are constructed or trailers or mobile homes are lawfully placed on property which cannot be sold as a separate first or parcel, no hook up to the sewer connection shall be made without a conditional use permit. (Ord. 2014-06 §1; Ord. 93-09 §2, 1993).

 

7.04.070 Sewer service to territory outside the city.
        Before sewer service will be provided to territory outside the city, the city shall require pave-outs, curbs, gutters, and provisions for storm drainage facilities, or security and an agreement therefor, and shall require an agreement with the property owner and lessee which may provide the basis on which such service will be provided or on which mains and laterals will be constructed and financed. (Ord. 2014-06 §1; Ord. 93-09 §2, 1993).

 

7.04.080 Industry and governmental agency contracts.
        The provisions of this chapter shall not prohibit the city from entering into contracts with a business, industry, or governmental agency to supply sewer service and all things pertaining to sewer service. (Ord. 2014-06 §1; Ord. 93-09 §2, 1993).

 

7.04.090 Prohibited acts.
        A.    No person shall discharge a quantity or quality of wastewater directly or indirectly to sewer facilities owned by or tributary to the city’s sewage system which causes, or is capable of causing, either alone or by interaction with other substances:

        1.     A fire or explosion;

        2.     Obstruction to the flow in the sewage system resulting in interference or damage to the sewerage facilities;

        3.     Danger to life or safety of any person;

        4.     Impairment of the effective maintenance or operation of the sewerage system;

        5.     The release of toxic or malodorous gas-producing substances; including any material identified as hazardous according to 40 CFR Part 261 except as may be specifically authorized by the director;

        6.     Interference with the wastewater treatment process;

        7.     The city’s effluent or any other product of the treatment process, residues, sludges, or scums to be unsuitable for reclamation, reuse, or disposal;

        8.     Discoloration, pass through, or any other condition which affects the quality of the city’s treatment works effluent in such a manner that receiving water quality requirements established by regulatory agencies cannot be met;

        9.     Conditions which violate any statute, rule, regulation, or ordinance of any public agency or regulatory agency having jurisdiction over the discharge of wastewater through the sanitary sewage system;

        10.   Contamination of the collection system, soil, or groundwater by osmosis, chemical action, leakage, or any other means of conveyance from the sewage system.

        B.     No person shall discharge wastewater or any substance delivered by vehicular transport, rail car, or dedicated pipeline directly or indirectly to the city’s sewerage facilities that is defined as a hazardous waste by the control authority.

        C.     No person shall transport waste from one location or facility to another for the purpose of treating or discharging it directly or indirectly to a publicly owned sewer without written permission from the city.

        D.    No user shall increase the contribution of flow, pollutants, or change the nature of pollutants where such contribution or change does not meet applicable standards and requirements or where such contribution or change would cause the city to violate its NPDES permit.

        E.     Cease and Desist Orders—Emergency Orders.

        1.     The director may issue a cease and desist order to any premises found to be in violation of the provisions of this chapter or applicable state and federal regulations. The director may include a time schedule for compliance with any cease and desist order. The director may issue a cease and desist order in the event of a threatened violation.

        2.     The director may order the abatement of any discharge or any waste associated with human habitation, or of human or animal origin from any source when it is determined that the discharge causes or threatens to cause a condition which is immediately detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare. Any such situation shall be abated by service of a notice upon the person responsible for the discharge or the owner of the premises and if not abated within twenty-four hours after serving the notice the city may perform such work or cause to be performed such work as shall be necessary to obtain proper abatement.

        3.     It is unlawful for any person to fail to obey or correct such conditions within twenty-four hours after being ordered to do so. Any cost incidental to such work shall be an assessment upon the premises affected and shall be collected on the tax roll in the same manner, by the same persons, and at the same time as, together with and not separately from, the general taxes. (Ord. 2014-06 §1; Ord. 93-09 §2, 1993).

 

7.04.100 Prohibited discharges into the sewage system.
        No person shall discharge, or cause or permit to be discharged, directly or indirectly into the sewage system:

        A.    Stormwater, ground water, rainwater, street drainage, subsurface drainage, yard drainage, or pool or pond water;

        B.     Any holding tank waste, unless such discharges are made into a city-approved facility designed to receive such wastes;

        C.     Radioactive waters;

        D.    Waste containing in excess of:

        1.     0.1 mg/1 arsenic,

        2.     0.2 mg/1 cadmium,

        3.     0.2 mg/1 copper,

        4.     1.0 mg/1 cyanide,

        5.     1.0 mg/1 lead,

        6.     0.01 mg/1 mercury,

        7.     1.0 mg/1 nickel,

        8.     0.2 mg/1 silver,

        9.     0.5 mg/1 total chromium, or

        10.   3.0 mg/1 zinc;

        E.     Waste having a temperature higher than one hundred degrees Fahrenheit (sixty-five and one-half degrees Centigrade);

        F.     Waste containing any material or waste which cannot pass through a mesh screen having a minimum of thirty openings per square inch; and

        G.    Without prior authorization from the city:

        1.     Waste containing more than three hundred milligrams per liter of oil or grease of animal or vegetable origin,

        2.     Waste containing more than one hundred milligrams per liter of oil or grease of mineral or petroleum origin,

        3.     Waste having a pH lower than five and five-tenths or higher than eight and five-tenths (unless authorized by a permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter),

        4.     Waste containing in excess of two hundredths milligram per liter total identifiable chlorinated hydrocarbons which cannot be removed by the city’s usual waste treatment processes, and

        5.     Waste containing in excess of one milligram per liter phenolic compounds which cannot be removed by the city’s wastewater treatment process. (Ord. 2014-06 §1; Ord. 93-09 §2, 1993).

 

7.04.110 Discharges into manholes.
        No person shall discharge or throw any substance or material into a manhole or into other openings in the city sewage system other than through an approved sewer connection. (Ord. 2014-06 §1; Ord. 93-09 §2, 1993).

 

7.04.120 Septic tank connections and repairs.
        No person shall construct, repair, rehabilitate, or replace a septic tank where the lot is within a two hundred-foot radius of an existing sewer main to which a connection can be made, unless unusual circumstances exist and until a permit is obtained from the city.

        Septic Tank Sludge or Effluent. No person shall discharge, or cause, allow, or permit to be discharged into the sanitary sewer system or any part thereof, any septic tank sludge or effluent. (Ord. 2014-06 §1; Ord. 93-09 §2, 1993).

 

7.04.130 Obtaining permits.
        No person shall make a connection with the sewage system without first obtaining a permit from the city and maintain the premises on which such a connection has been made. In no case shall a person hook up to a connection with the sewage system for a separate building, trailer or mobile home without first obtaining a conditional use permit. (Ord. 2014-06 §1; Ord. 93-09 §2, 1993).

 

7.04.140 Interference with system.
        No unauthorized person shall interfere with the sewage system, or any portion thereof. (Ord. 2014-06 §1; Ord. 93-09 §2, 1993).

 

7.04.150 Supplying of unauthorized service.
        No person shall supply city sewer service to any premises without city authorization. The city shall have the right, upon five days’ written notice, to disconnect water and sewer service to the premises supplying the unauthorized service. (Ord. 2014-06 §1; Ord. 93-09 §2, 1993).

 

7.04.160 Discharges from cooling towers prohibited.
        No person shall discharge, or cause or permit to be discharged, directly into the sewage system water from cooling towers, evaporative coolers, or air-conditioning units. The provisions of this section shall not apply to facilities installed and in use on June 1, 1976; provided, however, such facilities shall not be changed, repaired, or modified if the cost exceeds twenty-five percent of the replacement value, and such facilities shall not be expanded or extended. (Ord. 2014-06 §1; Ord. 93-09 §2, 1993).

 

7.04.170 Refusal, discontinuance or termination of sanitary sewer service.
        A.    Sewer service may be refused, discontinued, or terminated to any premises upon written notice to the user and to the owner, if different, for any violation of the provisions of this chapter or applicable state and federal regulations. If any such violation creates an imminent danger to the public health or safety, or to public or private property, then the city manager may act immediately to refuse, discontinue, or terminate sewer service after notice thereof.

        B.     Notice of refusal, discontinuance, or termination of sewer service shall be in writing and shall set forth the reasons for the refusal, discontinuance, or termination of service. Such notice shall be sent to the user and to the owner of the premises, if different, by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the address shown on the bill for sewer service or as known to the director. (Ord. 2014-06 §1).

 

7.04.180 Connections and installations at owners’ expense.
        All on-site and off-site sewer lines, connections, plumbing, and appurtenant sewer facilities, and the construction and installation thereof, shall be constructed or installed at the consumer’s expense and shall be to city standards and approved by the city prior to providing sewer service. (Ord. 2014-06 §1; Ord. 93-09 §2, 1993).

 

7.04.190 Wastewater volume determination.
        When charges and fees are based upon water usage, the total amount of water used from all sources will be used to determine the charges and fees unless, in the opinion of the city, significant portions of water received are not discharged into the sewage system. The total amount of water used from public and private sources will be determined by means of a meter. The city may require the user install a sewer meter of a type and at a location approved by the city to measure the amount of sewage discharged if the city believes the user is discharging sewage in excess of the amounts indicated by the water meter. (Ord. 2014-06 §1; Ord. 93-09 §2, 1993).

 

7.04.200 Sewer lines responsibility.
        The city engineer shall be responsible for the location, size, and design approval of sewer lines and appurtenances, and the building official and/or wastewater treatment plan supervisors shall supervise and inspect the construction and installation thereof. (Ord. 2014-06 §1; Ord. 93-09 §2, 1993).

 

7.04.210 Construction of sanitary sewer lines.
        The owner of property, at the option of the city, shall construct or pay the cost of constructing sewer lines and appurtenances to serve his or her property, regardless of sewer line size. The owner of property, at the option of the city, shall also construct or pay the cost of constructing sanitary sewer lines and appurtenances to connect or tie in with the existing or proposed sanitary sewer lines of the city system adjacent to his or her property, regardless of distances or sanitary sewer line size. (Ord. 2014-06 §1; Ord. 93-09 §2, 1993).

 

7.04.220 Charges for sewer lines or sewer assessment fees.
        Any person who connects to a sewer line or develops property shall pay a charge for existing sewer lines which will serve the property at the time the building permits are obtained. The charge shall be established by resolution and shall be adjusted from time to time to reflect current construction costs. (Ord. 2014-06 §1; Ord. 93-09 §2, 1993).

 

7.04.230 Waste water treatment capitol fund.
        Sewer assessment fees shall be placed in the wastewater treatment capitol fund and shall be used solely to construct, or to reimburse the city for constructing, sanitary sewer lines and appurtenances, or to reimburse developers for constructing sanitary sewer lines and appurtenances, or for other sanitary sewer purposes established by ordinance. (Ord. 2014-06 §1; Ord. 93-09 §2, 1993).

 

7.04.240 Reimbursements.
        The amount paid to a developer or property owner for reimbursements for the construction of new sanitary sewer lines and appurtenances shall be established by written agreement. A developer or property owner shall be reimbursed the actual amount received by the city, which shall be determined in a manner consistent with the written agreement provided for herein. (Ord. 2014-06 §1; Ord. 93-09 §2, 1993).

 

7.04.250 Reimbursements formula.
        The city shall reimburse a proportionate share of the cost of the construction of regular and oversized sanitary sewer lines constructed around the perimeter of a development and for sewer lines extended to a development, at the time of collection, from charges collected from the owners of the land adjacent to such lines who connect to such lines within ten years after the date of the acceptance of such lines by the city. (Ord. 2014-06 §1; Ord. 93-09 §2, 1993).

 

7.04.260 Reimbursement for city property.
        The city shall reimburse the developer a proportionate share of the cost of the lines constructed in front of or adjacent to city property, except city water well sites, at the contract rate and within the ten-year period. (Ord. 2014-06 §1; Ord. 93-09 §2, 1993).

 

7.04.270 Lift stations.
        When a lift station is required by the city to serve a property or development, the property owner, at the option of the city, shall pay the cost or construct, install, make site improvements, and provide the land necessary for such lift station. (Ord. 2014-06 §1; Ord. 93-09 §2, 1993).

 

7.04.280 Oversized lines.
        For the purposes of this chapter, “oversized” lines shall mean all sanitary sewer lines in excess of eight inches in diameter. (Ord. 2014-06 §1; Ord. 93-09 §2, 1993).

 

7.04.290 Major extensions.
        Major extensions of oversized lines shall have prior council approval. The council may approve major extensions with reimbursement or without reimbursement and may enter into a written agreement with the developer and owner concerning major extensions. (Ord. 2014-06 §1; Ord. 93-09 §2, 1993).

 

7.04.300 Wastewater discharge permits.
        All substantial industrial users proposing to connect to or to discharge into a public sewer shall obtain a wastewater discharge permit from the city before connecting to or discharging into said public sewer. In addition, all FSEs shall comply in all respects with the provisions of Chapter 7.12. All existing substantial industrial users connected to or discharging into a public sewer shall obtain a wastewater discharge permit within ninety days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 2014-06 §1; Ord. 93-09 §2, 1993).

 

7.04.310 Permit application.
        Owners seeking a wastewater discharge permit shall complete and file with the city an application in the form prescribed by the city, and accompanied by the applicable fees. The applicant may be required to submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following information:

        A.    Name, address, and standard industrial classification number of applicant;

        B.     Volume of wastewater to be discharged;

        C.     Wastewater constituents and characteristics including but not limited to those mentioned in Section 7.04.100;

        D.    Time and duration of discharge;

        E.     Average and thirty-minute peak wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly, and seasonal variations, if any;

        F.     Site plans, floor plans, mechanical, and plumbing plans and details to show all sewers and appurtenances by size, location, and elevation;

        G.    Description of activities, facilities, and plant process on the premises including all materials, processes, and types of materials which are, or could be, discharged;

        H.    Each product produced by type, amount, and rate of production;

        I.      Number and type of employees, and hours of work;

        J.      Any other information as may be deemed by the city engineer to be necessary to evaluate the permit application. The city engineer will evaluate the data furnished by the applicant and may require additional information. After evaluation and approval of the application by the city engineer, the city engineer may issue a wastewater discharge permit subject to terms and conditions provided herein. (Ord. 2014-06 §1; Ord. 93-09 §2, 1993).

 

7.04.320 Permit conditions.
        Permits may contain, but not be limited to, the following:

        A.    The average and maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics;

 

        B.     Limits on rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow regulation and equalization;

        C.     Requirements for installation of inspection, flow metering, and sampling facilities;

        D.    Pretreatment requirements;

        E.     Specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling locations, frequency and method of sampling, number, types, and standards for tests, and reporting schedule;

        F.     Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports;

        G.    Requirements for maintaining plant records relating to wastewater discharge as specified by the city, and affording the city access thereto;

        H.    Mean and maximum mass emission rates, or other appropriate limits when incompatible pollutants (as defined by Section 7.04.100) are proposed or present in the owner’s wastewater discharge;

        I.      Compliance schedules;

        J.      Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the city engineer to insure compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 2014-06 §1; Ord. 93-09 §2, 1993).

 

7.04.330 Duration of permits.
        Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years. If the owner is not notified by the city thirty days prior to the expiration of the permit, the permit shall be extended one additional year. The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification and change by the city during the life of the permit as limitations or requirements are modified and changed. The owner shall be informed of any proposed changes in his or her permit at least thirty days prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a time schedule for compliance. (Ord. 2014-06 §1; Ord. 93-09 §2, 1993).

 

7.04.340 Transfer of a permit.
        A.    Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific owner for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, different premises, or a new or changed operation.

        B.     A situation of new owner, different premises, or new or changed operation will require the owner to apply for a new wastewater discharge permit. (Ord. 2014-06 §1; Ord. 93-09 §2, 1993).

 

7.04.350 Revocation or suspension of wastewater discharge permit.
        A.    A wastewater discharge permit may be suspended or revoked upon written notice to the permittee for any violation of the terms and conditions of the permit, the provisions of this chapter, or applicable state and federal regulations, or for any of the following:

        1.     Failure of the permittee to factually report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of the permittee’s discharge;

        2.     Failure of the permittee to report significant changes in operations or wastewater constituents and characteristics;

        3.     Failure of the permittee to correct objectionable conditions listed in a cease and desist order within the time stipulated in such order;

        4.     Refusal by the permittee to permit reasonable access to the permittee’s premises for the purpose of inspecting or monitoring, or verification of records; or

        5.     Failure or refusal by the permittee to pay sewer service charges or other charges when due.

        B.     Any permittee whose wastewater discharge permit has been suspended or revoked shall, immediately upon receipt of notice thereof, discontinue the deposit or discharge of industrial waste, sanitary sewage, or effluent into the sanitary sewer system until his or her permit has been reinstated or a new permit has been issued.

        C.     Notice of suspension or revocation of a wastewater discharge permit shall be in writing and set forth the reasons for the suspension or revocation. Such notice shall be sent to the permittee by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the address shown on the permit or as known to the director. (Ord. 2014-06 §1; Ord. 93-09 §2, 1993).

 

7.04.360 Permit denial.
        The city reserves the right to deny a permit to owners discharging or planning to discharge pollutants into a public sewer which may harm the wastewater collection and treatment system or may cause a nuisance. Denial of permit does not allow said owner to discharge without a permit. (Ord. 2014-06 §1; Ord. 93-09 §2, 1993).

 

7.04.370 Monitoring facilities.
        A.    The city may require the owner to construct, at his or her own expense, monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of the building sewer or internal drainage systems and may also require sampling or metering equipment to be provided, installed, and operated at the owner’s expense. The monitoring facility shall be situated on the owner’s premises unless exemption from this requirement is granted by the city.

        B.     The monitoring facility shall include accommodations to allow access by city personnel, such as a cover secured with a city lock. There shall be ample room in or near such monitoring facilities to allow accurate sampling, flow measuring, and compositing of samples for analysis. The monitoring facility, sampling, and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the owner.

        C.     The sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the city’s requirements and all applicable construction standards and specifications. Construction shall be completed within ninety days following written notification by the city, unless a time extension is otherwise granted by the city. (Ord. 2014-06 §1; Ord. 93-09 §2, 1993).

 

7.04.380 Inspection and sampling.
        The city may inspect the facilities of any owner to ascertain whether the provisions of this chapter are being met and all requirements are being complied with. The owner shall allow the city or their agents ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection or sampling in the performance of any of their duties. The city shall have the right to set up on the owner’s property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling or metering operations. Where the owner has security measures in force which would require proper identification and clearance before entry into their premises, the owner shall make necessary arrangements with their security guards so that upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the city will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities.

        In order for the city to determine the wastewater characteristics of the discharger for purposes of determining compliance with permit requirements, the user is required to make available for inspection and copying by the city all notices, self-monitoring reports, waste manifests, and records including, but not limited to, those required in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, without restriction but subject to the confidentiality provision set forth herein. All records are to be kept a minimum of three years. All samples shall be taken, preserved, and analyzed in accordance with the procedures presented in the Code of Federal Regulations, Title 40, Part 136 (Guidelines Establishing Test Procedures for the Analysis of Pollutants) or the most recent accepted edition of Standard Methods for the Analysis of Wastewater. Unless approved otherwise by the city, all analyses shall be performed by a laboratory(ies) certified by the state to perform analysis for the specific pollutant in wastewater. (Ord. 2014-06 §1; Ord. 93-09 §2, 1993).

 

7.04.390 Discharge reports.
        The director may require any person discharging wastewater into the sanitary sewer system to file periodic discharge reports. The discharge report may include, but need not be limited to, nature of process, volume, rates of flow, mass emission rate, hours of operation, number of employees, or other information relating to the generation of waste, including the wastewater constituents and characteristics of the wastewater discharges. Such reports may also include the chemical constituents and quantity of chemicals stored on-site, even though they may not normally be discharged. In addition to discharge reports, the director may require information in the form of wastewater discharge permit applications and self-monitoring reports.

        Industrial sewer service rates, fees and charges shall be set by resolution of the city council and may be adjusted to compensate the city for the effect the discharge may have on the system. Such factors as biological oxygen demand (BOD) and suspended solids (SS) may be used. (Ord. 2014-06 §1).

 

7.04.400 Falsification of information.
        It is unlawful for any person to knowingly make any false statement, representation, record, report, plant, or other document or to knowingly tamper with or render inaccurate any monitoring device or equipment installed or operated pursuant to this chapter or of any wastewater discharge permit issued hereunder. In addition to any punishment or remedy provided by law, any such falsification or tampering shall be grounds for revocation of any wastewater discharge permit issued hereunder. (Ord. 2014-06 §1).

 

7.04.410 Pretreatment.
        Owners shall make wastewater acceptable under the limitations established herein before discharging to any public sewer. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to meet the requirements of this chapter shall be provided and maintained at the owner’s expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating and maintenance procedures shall be submitted to the city for review, and must be acceptable to the city, before construction of the facility. The review of such plans and operation and maintenance procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility, as necessary, to produce and effluent acceptable to the city under the provisions of this chapter. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and be acceptable to the city. (Ord. 2014-06 §1; Ord. 93-09 §2, 1993).

 

7.04.420 Protection from accidental discharge.
        A.    Each owner shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes regulated by this chapter. Such facilities shall be provided and maintained at the owner’s expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the city for review and shall be acceptable to the city before construction of the facility.

        B.     The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the owner from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to provide the protection necessary to meet the requirements of this section. (Ord. 2014-06 §1; Ord. 93-09 §2, 1993).

 

7.04.430 Notification of discharge.
        Owners shall immediately notify the city upon accidentally discharging wastes in violation of this chapter to enable countermeasures to be taken by the city to minimize damage to the public sewer, treatment facility, treatment processes, and the receiving waters. This notification shall be followed, within fifteen days of the date of occurrence, by the submission to the city of a detailed written statement describing the causes of the accidental discharge and the measures being taken to prevent future occurrence. Such notification will not relieve owners of liability for any expense, loss, or damage to the public sewer, treatment plant, or treatment process, or for any fines imposed on the city on account thereof. (Ord. 2014-06 §1; Ord. 93-09 §2, 1993).

 

7.04.440 Notices to employees.
        To inform the employees of the owner of the city’s requirements, owners shall make available to their employees copies of this chapter and together with such other wastewater information and notices which may be furnished by the city from time to time directed toward more effective water pollution control. A notice shall be furnished and permanently posted on the owner’s bulletin board advising employees; whom to call in case of an accidental discharge in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 2014-06 §1; Ord. 93-09 §2, 1993).

 

7.04.450 Confidential information.
        A.    All information and data obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit application, permits and monitoring programs, and from inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental agencies without restriction unless the owner specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that the release of such information would divulge information, processes, or methods which would be detrimental to the owner’s competitive position.

        B.     When requested, and if agreed to by the city, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public but shall be made available to governmental agencies for use in making studies; provided, however, that such portions of a report, shall be available for use by the state or any state agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the owner furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information.

        C.     Information accepted by the city as confidential shall not be transmitted to any governmental agency or to the general public until and unless prior and adequate notification is given to the owner. (Ord. 2014-06 §1; Ord. 93-09 §2, 1993).

 

7.04.460 Special agreements.
        Special agreements and arrangements between the city and any owner may be established when in the opinion of the city unusual or extraordinary circumstances compel special terms and conditions. (Ord. 2014-06 §1; Ord. 93-09 §2, 1993).

 

7.04.470 Compliance schedule.
        When the city finds any user to be in or threatening violation of any provision of this chapter; the city may require that user to submit for approval, with such modifications as the city deems necessary, a detailed time schedule of specific corrective actions to be taken to comply with this chapter. The user shall abide by and implement the adopted schedule.

        The schedule shall contain milestones in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to compliance. The user shall submit a progress report to the city no later than fourteen days following the completion of each milestone set forth in the schedule. All compliance schedule progress reports must be signed by an authorized representative of the user.

        Compliance schedules may also contain such other and additional requirements as might be reasonable necessary and appropriate to address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring, and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. Furthermore, the director may continue to require such additional self-monitoring for at least ninety days after consistent compliance has been achieved, after which time the self-monitoring conditions in the discharge permit shall control. (Ord. 2014-06 §1).

 

7.04.480 Cease and desist order.
        The director may issue a cease and desist order to any user who shows significant noncompliance or creates situations in which a discharge may pose a threat to the safety of the operation of the publicly owned treatment works or the collection system. The order shall require immediate correction of the situation or may impose additional requirements. The order shall be enforceable in court. (Ord. 2014-06 §1).

 

7.04.490 Termination of service.
        The city, by order of the director, may physically terminate sewage service to any property as a term of any order of suspension or revocation of a permit. All costs for physical termination shall be paid by the permittee as well as all costs for reinstating service. Each charge levied by or pursuant to this chapter or any resolution adopted pursuant to this chapter is hereby made a lien upon the premises for which the charge was made, and any steps authorized by law may be taken by the city to enforce the payment of such lien. (Ord. 2014-06 §1).

 

7.04.500 Emergency suspension.
        The city may, by order of the director, suspend sewage service or waste hauler discharge service when such suspension is necessary, in order to stop an actual or impending discharge which presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment of the health, safety, and welfare of persons, or to the environment, or may cause interference with the city’s sewerage facilities, or may cause the city to violate any state or, federal law or regulation. An emergency suspension order is final and not appealable. (Ord. 2014-06 §1).

 

7.04.510 Injunction.
        Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, and in addition to and as an alternative to any other procedure prescribed herein, whenever a discharger of wastewater is in violation of or may potentially violate the provisions of this chapter, the discharger’s permit conditions, or any federal pretreatment standard or requirement for dischargers, or fails to submit required reports or refuses to allow the city entry to inspect the premises, the city may petition the Superior Court for the issuance of an injunction to restrain the continued violation or to prevent violations by the discharger and to seek such other or additional remedies and civil penalties as may be authorized by law. (Ord. 2014-06 §1).

 

7.04.520 Disconnection for violations.
        In the event of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, or any rule or regulation established under this chapter, or failure to pay utility bill, or any condition of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter by the director, the director shall notify in writing the person causing, allowing or permitting such violation, specify the violation and if applicable, the time after which (upon the failure of such person to prevent or rectify the violation) the director shall have authority to disconnect, or will disconnect, the user from the water system and/or the sewage system service; provided, that such time shall not be less than three days after the mailing of notice in writing to the user so in violation. The director may disconnect any user from the sewage system and/or water system who continues such violation after the time stated in the notice. Nothing in this section will prevent the director from discontinuing any user in case of emergency. (Ord. 2014-06 §1).

 

7.04.530 Public nuisance.
        Discharge of waste in violation of this chapter or of any order issued by the director is declared a public nuisance, including, but not limited to, the process and remedies set forth herein as well as those set forth in the municipal code including Chapters 8.12 and 15.42, and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the director. (Ord. 2014-06 §1).

 

7.04.540 Damage to facilities.
        When a discharge of waste causes an obstruction, damage, or any other impairment to city facilities, the city may assess a charge against the user, property owner, or person violating this chapter, for the work required to clean or repair the facility and add such charge to the user’s sewer service charge. (Ord. 2014-06 §1).

 

7.04.550 Tenant responsibility.
        Any person who shall occupy any premises as a tenant under any rental or lease agreement shall be jointly and severally responsible for compliance with the provisions of this chapter in the same manner as the owner. (Ord. 2014-06 §1).

 

7.04.560 Inspection and sampling conditions.
        The city may inspect and sample the wastewater generating and disposal facilities of any user to ascertain whether the intent of this chapter is being satisfied and the user is complying with all requirements. The city shall have the right to set up on the user’s property or any other locations as determined by the city, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling or metering operations. Where a user has security measures in force, the user shall make necessary arrangements so that personnel from the city will be permitted to enter without delay for the purpose of performing their specific responsibilities.

        In order for the city to determine the wastewater characteristics of the discharger for purposes of determining compliance with permit requirements, the user is required to make available for inspection and copying by the city all notices, self-monitoring reports, waste manifests, and records including, but not limited to, those required in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, without restriction but subject to the confidentiality provision set forth herein. All records are to be kept a minimum of three years.

        All samples shall be taken, preserved, and analyzed in accordance with the procedures presented in the Code of Federal Regulations, Title 40, Part 136 (Guidelines Establishing Test Procedures for the Analysis of Pollutants) or the most recent accepted edition of Standard Methods for the Analysis of Wastewater. Unless approved otherwise by the city, all analyses shall be performed by a laboratory(ies) certified by the state to perform analysis for the specific pollutant in wastewater. (Ord. 2014-06 §1).

 

7.04.570 Liability.
        In the event that a user does not comply with the conditions and wastes are discharged to the POTW or collection system that causes, or threaten to cause, the water quality control plant’s waste treatment facilities to malfunction or otherwise result in a violation of waste discharge requirements or limitations imposed by state or federal regulatory agencies (40 CFR 403.8), the user shall be liable for any and/or all of the following:

        A.    To pay any and all monetary penalties, charges, fees, and other costs that may be imposed on the city by state or federal regulatory agencies as a result of threatened or actual violation(s) or malfunction(s), including administrative and legal fees;

        B.     To pay any and all judgments and associated costs that may be awarded to individuals or entities as a result of threatened or actual violation(s) or malfunction(s);

        C.     To pay the total cost of any interim waste treatment measures that the director may deem necessary to abate threatened or actual violation(s) or malfunction(s), including consulting and administrative fees;

        D.    To pay the total cost of providing waste treatment facilities needed to remedy threatened or actual violation(s) or malfunction(s);

        E.     To pay the total cost of any damage to the collection system or POTW which results from the user’s noncompliance with this chapter. (Ord. 2014-06 §1).

 

7.04.590 Malicious damage to sanitary sewer system.
        Any unauthorized entering, breaking, damaging, destroying, uncovering, defacing, or tampering with any structure, equipment, or appurtenance which is part of the sanitary sewer system or required pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 2014-06 §1).

 

7.04.600 Appeals.
        Any user, permit applicant, permittee, or owner affected by a decision, action, or determination, including suspension, revocation, refusal, discontinuance, termination, cease and desist order, or emergency order issued by the director interpreting, implementing, or enforcing the provisions of this chapter or any wastewater discharge permit issued hereunder, may appeal such decision, action, or determination by following the administrative citation appeals process pursuant to WMC 1.40.010(C). (Ord. 2014-06 §1).

Chapter 7.12 FATS, OIL AND GREASE MANAGEMENT AND DISCHARGE CONTROL
7.12.010 Purpose, policy and findings.
        A.    The city of Waterford chooses to adopt chapters and implement procedures to reduce the amount of fats, oils and grease (FOG) discharged into the city’s sanitary sewer collection system.

        B.     In addition to the above requirement, the city has legal authority necessary to control discharges of FOG to and from those portions of the city’s sanitary sewer collection system over which it has jurisdiction, so as to comply with the sewer WDRs.

        C.     FSEs or “food facilities,” as defined in California Uniform Retail Food Facilities Law (“CURFFL”), Division 104 (Environmental Health), Part 7 (Retail Food), Chapter 4, Articles 1 through 20 of the California Health and Safety Code (“FSEs”), produce FOG as a by-product of their operations, which, if not properly managed and disposed, create the potential for blockage of sanitary sewer lines, and which can result in damage to both public and private property, and sewage overflows that cause health issues and have the potential to pollute water courses in the city.

 

        D.    The current edition of the Uniform Plumbing Code requires FSEs that have the potential to produce a significant amount of FOG to have grease control devices. Some FSEs, such as restaurants within the city do not have grease control devices. These commercial FSEs have the potential to require the city to perform additional preventive maintenance on sewer lines that service these facilities, as well as respond to and cleanup blockages and sewage overflows caused by improper FOG disposal practices and grease control device maintenance.

        E.     The purpose of this chapter is to facilitate the maximum beneficial public use of the city’s sanitary sewer collection system while preventing blockages of sewer lines resulting from discharges of FOG to the system, and to specify appropriate FOG discharge requirements for FSEs discharging into the city’s sewer system.

        F.     This chapter shall be interpreted in accordance with the definitions set forth in Section 7.12.020 of this chapter. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the direct or indirect discharge of all wastewater or waste containing FOG into the city’s sanitary sewer collection system.

        G.    In order to manage and control, in a cost-effective manner, the discharge of FOG into the city’s sanitary sewer collection system to the maximum extent practicable, the adoption of reasonable regulations, as set forth herein, is essential and it is the intent of this section to establish regulations for the disposal of FOG and other insoluble waste discharges from FSEs into the city’s sewer system.

        H.    To comply with federal, state, and local policies and to allow the city to meet applicable standards, provisions are made in this chapter for the regulation of wastewater or waste containing FOG discharges to the sewer facilities.

        I.      This chapter establishes quantity and quality standards on all wastewater and/or waste discharges containing FOG, which may alone or collectively cause or contribute to FOG accumulation in the sewer facilities causing or potentially causing or contributing to the occurrence of SSOs. (Ord. 09-04 §1, 2009).

 

7.12.020 Definitions.
        A.    Unless otherwise defined herein, terms related to water quality shall be as defined in the sewer WDRs and in the latest edition of Standard Methods for Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association and the Water Environment Federation. The testing procedures for waste constituents and characteristics shall be as provided in 40 CFR 136 (Code of Federal Regulations).

        B.     Other terms not herein defined are defined as being the same as set forth in the latest adopted applicable editions of the California Codes applicable to building construction adopted pursuant to the California Building Standards Law.

        C.     Subject to the foregoing provisions, the following words and phrases are defined as follows:

        1.     “Best management practices” mean the schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures and other management practice to prevent or reduce the introduction of FOG to the sewer facilities.

        2.     “Director” means the director of the department of public works.

        3.     “Discharger” means any person who discharges or causes a discharge of wastewater directly or indirectly to a public sewer. Discharger means the same as user.

        4.     “Fats, oils, and grease (“FOG”)” mean any substance, such as a vegetable or animal product that is used in, or is a by product of, the cooking or food preparation process, and that turns or may turn viscous or solidifies with a change in temperature or other conditions.

        5.     “FOG control program” means the FOG control program required by and developed pursuant to SWRCB Order No. 2006-0003 Statewide General Waste Discharge Requirements for Sanitary Sewer Systems.

        6.     “FOG Discharge Manual” means the “Fats, Oil and Grease Discharge Manual,” setting forth best management practices for FSEs, as approved by the director.

        7.     “FOG wastewater discharge permit” or “discharge permit” means a permit issued by the city subject to the requirements and conditions established by the city authorizing the permittee or discharger to discharge wastewater into the city’s facilities or into sewer facilities which ultimately discharge into a facility.

        8.     “Food grinder” means any device installed in the plumbing or sewage system for the purpose of grinding food waste or food preparation by products for the purpose of disposing it in the sewer system.

        9.     “Food service establishment (“FSE”)” means facilities defined in California Uniform Retail Food Facility Law (CURFFL) Health and Safety Code Section 113785, and any commercial or public entity within the boundaries of the city, operating in a permanently constructed structure such as a room, building, or place, or portion thereof, maintained, used, or operated for the purpose of storing, preparing, serving, or manufacturing, packaging, or otherwise handling food for sale to other entities, or for consumption by the public, its members or employees, and which has any process or device that uses or produces FOG, or grease vapors, steam, fumes, smoke or odors that are required to be removed by a Type I or Type II hood, as defined in CURFFL. A limited food preparation establishment is not considered a FSE when engaged only in reheating, hot holding or assembly of ready to eat food products and as a result, there is no wastewater discharge containing a significant amount of FOG. A limited food preparation establishment does not include any operation that changes the form, flavor, or consistency of food.

        10.   “Grab sample” means a sample taken from a waste stream on a one-time basis without regard to the flow in the waste stream and without consideration of time.

        11.   “Grease control device” means any grease interceptor, grease trap or other mechanism, device, or process, which attaches to, or is applied to, wastewater plumbing fixtures and lines, the purpose of which is to trap or collect or treat FOG prior to it being discharged into the sewer system. A grease control device may also include any other proven method to reduce FOG subject to the approval of the director.

        12.   “Grease disposal mitigation fee” means a fee charged to an owner/operator of a FSE, as provided in this chapter, when there are physical limitations to the property that make the installation of the usual and customary grease interceptor or grease control device for the FSE under consideration impossible.

        13.   “Grease interceptor” means a multicompartment device that is constructed in different sizes and is generally required to be located, according to the California Plumbing Code, underground between a FSE and the connection to the sewer system. These devices primarily use gravity to separate FOG from the wastewater as it moves from one compartment to the next.

        14.   “Grease trap” means a grease control device that is used to serve individual fixtures and have limited effect and should only be used in those cases where the use of a grease interceptor or other grease control device is determined to be impossible.

        15.   “Inspector” means a person authorized by the city to inspect any existing or proposed wastewater generation, conveyance, processing, and disposal facilities.

        16.   “Interference” means any discharge which, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the city’s sewer system, treatment processes or operations; or is a cause of violation of the city’s NPDES or waste discharge requirements.

        17.   “Major operational change” means a physical change or operational change causing generation of an amount of FOG that exceeds the current amount of FOG discharge to the sewer system by the food service establishment in an amount that alone or collectively causes or creates a potential for SSOs to occur.

        18.   “New construction” means any structure planned or under construction for which a sewer connection permit has not been issued.

        19.   “Permittee” means a person who has received a permit to discharge wastewater into the city’s sewer facilities subject to the requirements and conditions established by the city.

        20.   “Public agency” means the state of California and/or any city, county, special district, other local governmental authority or public body of or within this state.

        21.   “Public sewer” means a sewer owned and operated by the city, or other local public agency, which is tributary to the city’s sewer facilities.

        22.   “Regulatory agency” means regulatory agency or regulatory agencies shall mean those agencies having regulatory jurisdiction over the operations of the city, including, but not limited to:

        a.     United States Environmental Protection Agency, Region IX, San Francisco and Washington, DC (EPA);

        b.     California State Water Resources Control Board (SWRCB);

        c.     California Regional Water Quality Control Board;

        d.     California Department of Health Services (DOHS);

        e.     Any public agency.

        23.   “Sewage” means wastewater.

        24.   “Sewer facilities or system” means any and all facilities used for collecting, conveying, pumping, treating, and disposing of wastewater and sludge operated by the city.

        25.   “Sewer lateral” means a building sewer as defined in the latest edition of the California Plumbing Code. It is the wastewater connection between the building’s wastewater facilities and a public sewer system.

        26.   “Sewer WDRs” mean the general waste discharge requirements.

        27.   “Sludge” means any solid, semi-solid or liquid decant, subnate or supernate from a manufacturing process, utility service, or pretreatment facility.

        28.   “User” means any person who discharges or causes a discharge of wastewater directly or indirectly to a public sewer system. User means the same as discharger.

        29.   “Waste” means sewage and any and all other waste substances, liquid, solid, gaseous or radioactive, associated with human habitation or of human or animal nature, including such wastes placed within containers of whatever nature prior to and for the purpose of disposal.

        30.   “Wastewater” means the liquid and water-carried wastes of the community and all constituents thereof, whether treated or untreated, discharged into or permitted to enter a public sewer.

        31.   “Wastewater constituents and characteristics” mean the individual chemical, physical, bacteriological, and other parameters, including volume and flow rate and such other parameters that serve to define, classify or measure the quality and quantity of wastewater.

        32.   “Water minimization practices” mean plans or programs intended to reduce or eliminate discharges to the sewer system or to conserve water, including, but not limited to, product substitutions, housekeeping practices, inventory control, employee education, and other steps as necessary to minimize wastewater produced. (Ord. 09-04 §1, 2009).

 

7.12.030 FOG discharge requirement.
        No FSE (“FSE”) shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the sewer system FOG that exceeds a concentration level adopted by a regulatory agency or that may accumulate and/or cause or contribute to blockages in the sewer system or at the sewer system lateral which connects the FSE to the sewer system. (Ord. 09-04 §1, 2009).

 

7.12.040 Prohibitions.
        The following prohibitions shall apply to all FSEs:

        A.    No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged any wastewater from FSEs directly or indirectly into the sewer system without first obtaining a FOG wastewater discharge permit pursuant to this chapter.

        B.     Discharge of any waste, including FOG and solid materials removed from the grease control device to the sewer system, is prohibited.

        C.     The discharge of any waste or FOG to the sewer system which fails to comply with the FOG Discharge Manual is prohibited.

        D.    The discharge of any waste or FOG to the sewer system in a manner which either violates the sewer WDRs or causes or contributes to condition which fails to comply with any of the provisions of the sewer WDRs is prohibited. (Ord. 09-04 §1, 2009).

 

7.12.050 Food grinders prohibited.
        A.    No food grinder shall be installed in a plumbing system of new construction of an FSE.

        B.     All food grinders shall be removed from an existing FSE upon: (1) major operational change to the FSE; or (2) any construction requiring the issuance of a building permit for either remodeling or construction of the FSE valued at five hundred dollars or more. (Ord. 09-04 §1, 2009).

 

7.12.060 Best management practices required.
        A.    All FSEs shall implement best management practices in its operation to minimize the discharge of FOG to the sewer system.

        B.     All FSEs must implement and demonstrate compliance with best management practices (BMP) requirements as specified in the city’s FOG Discharge Manual. Detailed requirements for best management practices are specified in the FOG Discharge Manual and may include kitchen practices and employee training that is essential in minimizing FOG discharges. (Ord. 09-04 §1, 2009).

 

7.12.070 FOG pretreatment required.
        FSEs are required to install, operate and maintain an approved type and adequately sized grease interceptor necessary to maintain compliance with the objectives of this chapter in accordance with the FOG Discharge Manual and the requirements of 40 CFR Section 403.5. (Ord. 09-04 §1, 2009).

 

7.12.080 Variance and waiver of grease interceptor requirement.
        A.    Application for Waiver or Variance of Requirement for Grease Interceptor. An FSE may submit an application for waiver or variance from the grease interceptor requirement to the director. Terms and conditions for issuance of a variance to an FSE shall be set forth in the permit. A waiver or variance may be revoked at any time when any of the terms and conditions for its issuance is not satisfied or if the conditions upon which the waiver was based change so that the justification for the waiver no longer exists.

        B.     Waiver Due to Business Type. A conditional waiver from the grease interceptor requirements may be granted by the director, to a food handling facility determined to have no immediate adverse impact on the collection system because of business type. A waiver may be granted to a business that demonstrates that it qualifies under one or more of the following:

        1.     Business engages in serving only beverages;

        2.     Business engages in serving beverages and/or ready to eat, packaged or unpackaged items (with or without food warming);

        3.     Business is an ice cream parlor without any baking or other food preparation;

        4.     Business is a snack bar with no food preparation other than food warming;

        5.     Business is a bakery with no food preparation other than food warming;

        6.     Any other establishment serving only ready to eat foods with or without food warming.

        C.     Conditional Variance Due to Installation Restrictions. A food handling facility determined to have grease interceptor installation restrictions and that has no immediate adverse impact on the collection system may be granted a conditional variance from grease interceptor installation requirements if one or both of the following occur:

        1.     Adequate slope cannot be provided for gravity flow between plumbing fixtures and the grease interceptor or from the interceptor to the sewer; and/or

        2.     Adequate space cannot be provided, at the site, for installation and/or maintenance of a grease interceptor.

        D.    Conditional Variance Due to Grease Generating Capabilities. A grease interceptor may not be required if a facility can demonstrate that food preparation and service do not generate fats, oil and grease in a quantity sufficient to require a grease interceptor due to menu and number of meals served, or a combination of the two.

        E.     Conditional Variance for Pumping Frequency. The pumping frequency determined in the city of Waterford FOG control program may be decreased for a grease interceptor upon approval from the city of Waterford WWT Division. The following conditions must be met in order to apply for a conditional variance of pumping frequencies from permit requirements:

        1.     At no time can the discharge from the interceptor exceed one hundred milligrams per liter total oil and grease concentration; and

        2.     The interceptor continues to operate properly.

        F.     Waiver from Grease Interceptor Installation with a Grease Disposal Mitigation Fee. For FSEs where the installation of grease interceptor is not feasible or possible due to inadequate space or inadequate slope, and no equivalent alternative pretreatment can be installed, a waiver from the grease interceptor requirement may be granted with the imposition of a grease disposal mitigation fee as described in Section 7.12.100. The director’s determination to grant the waiver with a grease disposal mitigation fee will be based upon such considerations that the director determines to be appropriate and consistent with the sewer WDRs, the city’s FOG control program, the FOG Discharge Manual, and best construction, engineering, environmental and health and safety practices. Provided, however, that a grease interceptor will be installed when the FSE either: (1) applies for any discretionary permit, including but not limited to a conditional use permit; or (2) conducts any remodeling to a FSE which involves construction valued at fifty thousand dollars or more requiring a building permit and which involves any one or combination of the following: (a) under slab plumbing in the food processing area, (b) a thirty percent increase in the net public seating area, (c) a thirty percent increase in the size of the kitchen area, or (d) any change in the size or type of food preparation equipment. No discretionary permit, including, but not limited to, a conditional use permit, shall be issued to a FSE unless the applicant can demonstrate that a grease interceptor has been or will be installed at the FSE. (Ord. 09-04 §1, 2009).

 

7.12.090 Multiple FSEs at commercial properties.
        For properties at which multiple FSEs are operated on a single parcel, each FSE operator shall be individually and separately responsible for installation and maintenance of the grease interceptor serving its FSEs and for compliance with this chapter. Furthermore, owners of commercial properties at which multiple FSEs that are operated on a single parcel shall be responsible for ensuring compliance by each FSE on the parcel. Such operators and/or property owner can comply with this chapter by installing and maintaining a grease interceptor or grease interceptors serving multiple FSEs upon approval by the director on such terms and conditions that the director may establish in his or her sole discretion. (Ord. 09-04 §1, 2009).

 

7.12.100 Grease disposal mitigation fee.
        A.    FSEs that operate without a grease control interceptor may be required to pay an annual grease disposal mitigation fee to equitably cover the costs of increased maintenance and administration of the sewer system as a result of the FSE’s inability to adequately remove FOG from its wastewater discharge. This section shall not be interpreted to allow a new FSE, or existing FSEs undergoing remodeling or change in operations, to operate without an approved grease interceptor unless the director has determined that it is impossible to install or operate a grease control interceptor for the FSE under the provisions of this chapter.

        B.     The grease disposal mitigation fee shall be established by resolution of the city council, and shall be based on the estimated annual increased cost of maintaining the sewer system for inspection and removal of FOG and other viscous or solidifying agents attributable to the FSE resulting from the lack of a grease interceptor or grease control device and such other costs that the city council considers appropriate.

        C.     The grease disposal mitigation fee may not be waived or reduced when the FSE does not comply with the minimum requirements of this chapter and/or its discharge into the sewer system in the preceding twelve months has caused or potentially caused or contributed alone or collectively, in sewer blockage or a sanitary sewer overflow (“SSO”) in the sewer downstream, or surrounding the FSE prior to the waiver request. (Ord. 09-04 §1, 2009).

 

7.12.110 Sewer system overflows—Public nuisance—Abatement orders and cleanup costs.
        Notwithstanding any waiver of grease interceptor requirements under this chapter, FSEs determined by the director to have contributed to a sewer blockage, SSOs or any sewer system interferences resulting from the discharge of wastewater or waste containing FOG, may be ordered by the director to immediately install and maintain a grease interceptor, and may be subject to a plan determined by the director to abate the nuisance and prevent any future health hazards created by sewer line failures and blockages, SSOs or any other sewer system interferences. SSOs may cause threat and injury to public health, safety, and welfare of life and property and are hereby declared public nuisances. Furthermore, sewer lateral failures and SSOs caused by FSEs alone or collectively are the responsibility of the private property owner or FSE, and individual(s) as a responsible officer or owner of the FSE. If the city must act immediately to contain and clean up an SSO caused by blockage of a private or public sewer lateral or serving a FSE, or at the request of the property owner or operator of the FSE, or because of the failure of the property owner or FSE to abate the condition causing immediate threat of injury to the health, safety, welfare, or property of the public, the city’s costs for such abatement may be entirely borne by the property owner or operator of the FSE, and individual(s) as a responsible officer or owner of the FSE(s) and may constitute a debt to the city and become due and immediately payable upon the city’s request for reimbursement of such costs. (Ord. 09-04 §1, 2009).

 

7.12.120 FOG wastewater discharge permit required.
        A. FSEs proposing to discharge or currently discharging wastewater-containing FOG into the city’s sewer system shall obtain a FOG wastewater discharge permit from the city within either: (1) one hundred eighty days from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter; or (2) at the time any FSE applies for or renews its annual business license from the city. Compliance with this chapter must be demonstrated at the time any business license is issued, provided that the director may extend the compliance date for no more than ninety days after the date of the issuance of the license.

        B.     FOG wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this chapter and all other regulations, charges for use, and fees established by the city. The conditions of FOG wastewater discharge permits shall be enforced by the city in accordance with this chapter and applicable state and federal regulations.

        C.     The city shall not issue a certificate of occupancy for any new construction, or occupancy unless a FSE has fully complied with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 09-04 §1, 2009).

 

7.12.130 FOG wastewater discharge permit application.
        Any person required to obtain a FOG wastewater discharge permit shall complete and file with the city prior to commencing discharges, an application in a form prescribed by the director and shall provide the city such information and documents as the director determines is necessary and appropriate to properly evaluate the application. The applicable fees shall accompany this application. After evaluation of the data furnished, the director may issue a FOG wastewater discharge permit, subject to terms and conditions set forth in this chapter and as otherwise determined by the director to be appropriate to protect the city’s sewer system. (Ord. 09-04 §1, 2009).

 

7.12.140 FOG wastewater discharge permit condition.
        The issuance of a FOG wastewater discharge permit may contain any of the following conditions or limits as determined by the director:

        A.    Limits on discharge of FOG and other priority pollutants;

        B.     Requirements for proper operation and maintenance of grease interceptors and other grease control devices;

        C.     Grease interceptor maintenance frequency and schedule;

        D.    Requirements for implementation of best management practices and installation of adequate grease interceptor and/or grease control device;

        E.     Requirements for maintaining and reporting status of best management practices;

        F.     Requirements for maintaining and submitting logs and records, including waste hauling records and waste manifests;

        G.    Requirements to self-monitor;

        H.    Requirements for the FSE to construct, operate and maintain, at its own expense, FOG control device and sampling facilities;

        I.      Consent by the operator of the FSE for the city and other regulatory agencies to inspect the FSE to confirm compliance with this chapter and other applicable laws, rules and regulations, including any NPDES permit applicable to the city;

        J.      Additional requirements as otherwise determined to be reasonably appropriate by the director to protect the city’s system or as specified by other regulatory agencies;

        K.    Other terms and conditions, which may be reasonably applicable to ensure compliance with this chapter as determined by the director. (Ord. 09-04 §1, 2009).

 

7.12.150 FOG wastewater discharge permit fee.
        The FOG wastewater discharge permit fee shall be paid by the applicant in an amount adopted by resolution of the city council. Payment of permit fees must be received by the city prior to issuance of either a new permit or a renewed permit. A permittee shall also pay any delinquent invoices in full prior to permit renewal. (Ord. 09-04 §1, 2009).

 

7.12.160 FOG wastewater discharge permit modification of terms and conditions.
        The terms and conditions of an issued permit may be subject to modification and change by the sole determination of the director during the life of the permit based on:

        1.     The discharger’s current or anticipated operating data;

        2.     The city’s current or anticipated operating data;

        3.     Changes in the requirements of regulatory agencies which affect the city; or

        4.     A determination by the director that such modification is appropriate to further the objectives of this chapter.

        B.     The permittee may request a modification to the terms and conditions of an issued permit. The request shall be in writing stating the requested change, and the reasons for the change. The director shall review the request, make a determination on the request, and respond in writing.

        C.     The permittee shall be informed of any change in the permit limits, conditions, or requirements at least forty-five days prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance. (Ord. 09-04 §1, 2009).

 

7.12.170 FOG wastewater discharge permit duration and renewal.
        FOG wastewater discharge permits shall be issued for a period not to exceed two years. Upon expiration of the permit, the user shall apply for renewal of the permit in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 09-04 §1, 2009).

 

7.12.180 Exemption from FOG wastewater discharge permit.
        A limited food preparation establishment is not considered a FSE when engaged only in reheating, hot holding or assembly of ready to eat food products and as a result, there is no wastewater discharge containing a significant amount of FOG. A limited food preparation establishment does not include any operation that changes the form, flavor, or consistency of food.

        For the purposes of this chapter, a limited food preparation establishment is not considered a FSE and is exempt from obtaining a FOG wastewater discharge permit. (Ord. 09-04 §1, 2009).

 

7.12.190 Nontransferability of permits.
        A.    FOG wastewater discharge permits issued under this chapter are for a specific FSE, for a specific operation and create no vested rights.

        B.     No permit holder shall assign, transfer or sell any FOG wastewater discharge permit issued under this chapter nor use any such permit for or on any premises or for facilities or operations or discharges not expressly encompassed within the underlying permit.

        C.     Any permit, which is transferred to a new owner or operator or to a new facility, is void. (Ord. 09-04 §1, 2009).

 

7.12.200 FOG wastewater discharge permit charge for use.
        In addition to the discharge permit application fee, a charge to cover all costs of the city for providing the sewer service and monitoring shall be established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 09-04 §1, 2009).

 

7.12.210 Grease interceptor requirements.
        A.    Grease interceptors shall be maintained in efficient operating condition in accordance with the FOG Discharge Manual.

        B.     Grease interceptors must be cleaned, maintained, and FOG must be removed from grease interceptors at regular intervals.

        C.     FOG removed from grease interceptors shall be waste hauled periodically as part of the operation and maintenance requirements for grease interceptors and disposed of in a proper manner and at regular intervals. (Ord. 09-04 §1, 2009).

 

7.12.220 Monitoring and reporting conditions.
        A.    Monitoring for Compliance with FOG Wastewater Discharge Conditions and Reporting Requirements.

        1.     The director may require periodic reporting of the status of implementation of best management practices, in accordance with the FOG control program and the FOG Discharge Manual.

        2.     The director may require visual and other monitoring at the sole expense of the permittee to observe the actual conditions of the FSE’s sewer lateral and sewer lines downstream.

        3.     The director may require reports for self-monitoring of wastewater constituents and FOG characteristics of the permittee needed for determining compliance with any conditions or requirements as specified in the FOG wastewater discharge permit or this chapter. Monitoring reports of the analyses of wastewater constituents and FOG characteristics shall be in a manner and form approved by the director and shall be submitted upon request of the director.

        4.     Failure by the permittee to perform any required monitoring, or to submit monitoring reports required by the director constitutes a violation of this chapter and shall be cause for the city to initiate all necessary tasks and analyses to determine the wastewater constituents and FOG characteristics for compliance with any conditions and requirements specified in the FOG wastewater discharge permit or in this chapter.

        5.     The permittee shall be responsible for any and all expenses of the city in undertaking such monitoring analyses and preparation of reports.

        6.     Other reports may be required such as compliance schedule progress reports, FOG control monitoring reports, and any other reports deemed reasonably appropriate by the director to ensure compliance with this chapter.

        B.     Recordkeeping Requirements. The permittee shall be required to keep all documents identified by the director relating to its compliance with this chapter, including manifests, receipts and invoices of all cleaning, maintenance, grease removal of/from the grease control device, disposal carrier and disposal site location for no less than two years. The permittee shall, upon request, make the manifests, receipts and invoices available to any city representative, or inspector.

        C.     Falsifying Information or Tampering with Process. It is unlawful to make any false statement, representation, record, report, plan or other document that is filed with the city, or to tamper with or knowingly render inoperable any grease control device, monitoring device or method or access point required under this chapter. (Ord. 09-04 §1, 2009).

 

7.12.230 Inspection and sampling conditions.
        A.    The director may inspect or order the inspection and sample the wastewater discharges of any FSE to ascertain whether the intent of this chapter is being met and the permittee is complying with all requirements. The permittee shall allow the city access to the FSE premises, during normal business hours, for purposes of inspecting the FSE’s grease control devices or interceptor, reviewing the manifests, receipts and invoices relating to the cleaning, maintenance and inspection of the grease control devices or interceptor.

        B.     The director shall have the right to place or order the placement on the FSE’s property or other locations as determined by the director, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling or metering operations. Where an FSE has security measures in force, the permittee shall make necessary arrangements so that representatives of the city shall be permitted to enter without delay for the purpose of performing their specific responsibilities.

        C.     For the director to determine the wastewater characteristics of the discharger for purposes of determining the annual use charge and for compliance with permit requirements, the permittee shall make available for inspection and copying by the city all notices, monitoring reports, waste manifests, and records including, but not limited to, those related to wastewater generation, and wastewater disposal without restriction but subject to the confidentiality provision set forth in this chapter. All such records shall be kept by the permittee a minimum of two years. (Ord. 09-04 §1, 2009).

 

7.12.240 Right of entry.
        Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is created or discharged shall allow the director, or city representatives, reasonable access to all parts of the FSE and all wastewater generating and disposal facilities for the purposes of inspection and sampling during all times the discharger’s facility is open, operating, or any other reasonable time. No person shall interfere with, delay, resist or refuse entrance to city representatives attempting to inspect any FSE or facility involved directly or indirectly with a discharge of wastewater to the city’s sewer system. (Ord. 09-04 §1, 2009).

 

7.12.250 Notification of spill.
        A.    In the event a permittee is unable to comply with any permit condition due to a breakdown of equipment, accidents, or human error or the permittee has reasonable opportunity to know that his, her or its discharge will exceed the discharge provisions of the FOG wastewater discharge permit or this chapter, the discharger shall immediately notify the city by telephone at the number specified in the permit. If the material discharged to the sewer has the potential to cause or results in sewer blockages or SSOs, the discharger shall immediately notify the county health department and the city.

        B.     Confirmation of this notification shall be made in writing to the director at the address specified in the permit no later than five working days from the date of the incident. The written notification shall state the date of the incident, the reasons for the discharge or spill, what steps were taken to immediately correct the problem, and what steps are being taken to prevent the problem from recurring.

        C.     Such notification shall not relieve the permittee of any expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage or loss to the city or any other damage or loss to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the permittee of any fees or other liability which may be imposed by this chapter or other applicable law. (Ord. 09-04 §1, 2009).

 

7.12.270 Enforcement.
        A.    The city council finds that, in order for the city to comply with the laws, regulations, and rules imposed upon it by regulatory agencies and to ensure that the city’s sewer facilities are protected and are able to operate with the highest degree of efficiency, and to protect the public health and environment, specific enforcement provisions must be adopted to govern the discharges to the city’s sewer system by FSEs.

        B.     To ensure that all interested parties are afforded due process of law and that violations are resolved as soon as possible, a permittee, or applicant for a permit may appeal any determination made by the director, including, but not limited to, a denial of a discharge permit, a notice of violation; permit suspension or revocation; or a compliance schedule agreement (CSA), pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 7.12.380.

        C.     The city, at its discretion, may utilize any one, combination, or all enforcement remedies provided in this chapter in response to any FOG wastewater discharge permit or chapter violations. (Ord. 09-04 §1, 2009).

 

7.12.280 Violations.
        A.    The owner and operator of an FSE or permittee shall be in violation of this chapter if such owner or operator or permittee:

        1.     Fails to install an approved grease control device as required by this chapter; or

        2.     Makes any false statement, representation, record, report, plan or other document that is filed with the city; or

        3.     Tampers with or knowingly renders inoperable any grease control device required under this chapter; or

        4.     Fails to clean, maintain or remove grease from a grease control device within the required time for such cleaning, maintenance or grease removal; or

        5.     Fails to keep up-to-date and accurate records of all cleaning, maintenance, and grease removal and upon request to make those records available to any city authorized inspector, or designee; or

        6.     Refuses a city authorized inspector, or designee, reasonable access to the food facility for the purposes of inspecting, monitoring, or reviewing the grease control device manifests, receipts and invoices of all cleaning, maintenance, grease removal of/from the grease control device, and/or to inspect the grease control device; or

        7.     Disposes of, or knowingly allows or directs FOG to be disposed of, in an unlawful manner; or

        8.     Fails to remove all food grinders located in the food facility by the date specified by this chapter; or

        9.     Introduces additives into a wastewater system for the purposes of emulsifying FOG without the written, specific authorization from the sanitary sewer agency that has jurisdiction of the sanitary sewer system that services the food facility; or

        10.   Fails to pay the grease disposal mitigation fee as specified in this chapter when due; or

        11.   Fails to comply with the FOG Discharge Manual; or

        12.   Otherwise fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter or any permit issued by the city under this chapter.

        B.     Violations under this section shall be subject to the procedures, penalties and remedies set out in this chapter. All costs for the investigations, enforcement actions, and ultimate corrections of violations under this section, incurred by the city shall be reimbursed by the owner/operator of the FSE. (Ord. 09-04 §1, 2009).

 

7.12.290 Compliance schedule agreement (CSA).
        A.    Upon determination by the director that a permittee or other owner or operator of an FSE or owner of a property is in noncompliance with the terms and conditions specified in its permit or any provision of this chapter, or needs to construct and/or acquire and install a grease control device or grease interceptor, the director may require the permittee, owner or operator to enter into a CSA.

        B.     The issuance of a CSA may contain terms and conditions as determined appropriate by the director, including but not limited to requirements for installation of a grease control device, grease interceptor and facilities, submittal of drawings or reports, audit of waste hauling records, best management and waste minimization practices, payment of fees, or other provisions to ensure compliance with this chapter.

        C.     The director shall not enter into a CSA until such time as all amounts owed to the city, including user fees, noncompliance sampling fees, or, or other amounts due are paid in full, or an agreement for deferred payment secured by collateral or a third party, is approved by the director.

        D.    If compliance is not achieved in accordance with the terms and conditions of a CSA during its term, the director may issue an order suspending or revoking the discharge permit pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 09-04 §1, 2009).

 

7.12.300 Permit suspension.
        A.    The director may suspend any permit when it is determined that a permittee:

        1.     Fails to comply with the terms and conditions of a CSA order;

        2.     Knowingly provides a false statement, representation, record, report, or other document to the city;

        3.     Refuses to provide records, reports, plans, or other documents required by the city to determine permit terms or conditions, discharge compliance, or compliance with this chapter;

        4.     Falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or sample collection method;

        5.     Refuses reasonable access to the permittee’s premises for the purpose of inspection and monitoring;

        6.     Does not make timely payment of all amounts owed to the city for user charges, permit fees, or any other fees imposed pursuant to this chapter;

        7.     Causes interference, sewer blockages, or SSOs with the city’s collection, treatment, or disposal system;

        8.     Violates grease interceptor maintenance requirements, any condition or limit of its discharge permit or any provision of this chapter.

        B.     When the director has reason to believe that grounds exist for permit suspension, he/she shall give written notice thereof by certified mail to the permittee setting forth a statement of the facts and grounds deemed to exist.

        C.     Effect.

        1.     Upon an order of suspension by the director, the permittee shall immediately cease and desist its discharge and shall have no right to discharge any wastewater containing FOG directly or indirectly to the city’s system for the duration of the suspension. All costs for physically terminating and reinstating service shall be paid by the permittee.

        2.     Any owner or responsible management employee of the permittee shall be bound by the order of suspension. (Ord. 09-04 §1, 2009).

 

7.12.310 Permit revocation.
        A.    Revocation. The director may revoke any FOG wastewater discharge permit when it is determined that a permittee has failed to comply with this chapter.

        B.     Notice of Revocation. When the director has reason to believe that grounds exist for the revocation of a permit, he or she shall give written notice by certified mail thereof to the permittee setting forth a statement of the facts and grounds.

        C.     Effect of Revocation.

        1.     Upon an order of revocation by the director becoming final, the permittee shall permanently lose all rights to discharge any wastewater containing FOG directly or indirectly to the city’s system. All costs for physical termination shall be paid by the permittee.

        2.     Any owner or responsible management employee of the permittee shall be bound by the order of revocation.

        3.     Any future application for a discharge permit at any location within the city by any person associated with an order of revocation will be considered by the city after fully reviewing the records of the revoked permit, which records may be the basis for denial of a new permit.

        4.     An order of permit revocation issued by the director shall be final in all respects on the sixteenth day after it is mailed to the permittee. (Ord. 09-04 §1, 2009).

 

7.12.320 Damages to facilities or interruption of normal operations.
        A.    Any person who discharges any waste, including, but not limited to, those listed under 40 CFR Section 403.5, which causes or contributes to any sewer blockage, SSOs, obstruction, interference, damage, or any other impairment to the city’s sewer facilities or to the operation of those facilities shall be liable for all costs required to clean or repair the facilities together with expenses incurred by the city to resume normal operations. A service charge of twenty-five percent of city’s costs shall be added to the costs and charges to reimburse the city for miscellaneous overhead, including administrative personnel and recordkeeping. The total amount shall be payable within forty-five days of invoicing by the city.

        B.     Any person who discharges a waste which causes or contributes to the city violating its discharge requirements established by any regulatory agency incurring additional expenses or suffering losses or damage to the facilities, shall be liable for any costs or expenses incurred by the city, including regulatory fines, penalties, and assessments made by other agencies or a court. (Ord. 09-04 §1, 2009).

 

7.12.330 Public nuisance.
        Discharge of wastewater in any manner in violation of this chapter or of any order issued by the director, as authorized by this chapter, is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the director. Any person creating a public nuisance is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 09-04 §1, 2009).

 

7.12.340 Termination of service.
        A.    The city, by order of the director, may physically terminate sewer service to any FSE, as follows:

        1.     On a term of any order of suspension or revocation of a permit; or

        2.     Upon the failure of a person not holding a valid discharge permit to immediately cease the discharge, whether direct or indirect, to the city’s sewer facilities after the notice and process as provided herein.

        B.     All costs for physical termination shall be paid by the owner or operator of the FSE or permittee as well as all costs for reinstating service. (Ord. 09-04 §1, 2009).

 

7.12.350 Emergency suspension order.
        The city may, by order of the director, suspend sewer service when the director determines that such suspension is necessary in order to stop an actual or impending discharge which presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health and welfare of persons, or to the environment, or may cause SSOs, sewer blockages, interference to the city’s sewer facilities, or may cause the city to violate any state or federal law or regulation. Any discharger notified of and subject to an emergency suspension order shall immediately cease and desist the discharge of all wastewater containing FOG to the sewer system. (Ord. 09-04 §1, 2009).

 

7.12.360 Civil penalties.
        A.    In addition to criminal penalties and administrative penalties authorized by this Municipal Code, all users of the city’s system and facilities are subject to enforcement actions administratively or judicially by the city, U.S. EPA, state of California Regional Water Quality Control Board, or the county of Stanislaus and other regulatory agencies. Said actions may be taken pursuant to the authority and provisions of several laws, including, but not limited to: (1) Federal Water Pollution Control Act, commonly known as the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C.A. Section 1251 et seq.); (2) California Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act (California Water Code Section 13000 et seq.); (3) California Hazardous Waste Control Law (California Health and Safety Code Section 25100 et seq.); (4) Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (42 U.S.C.A. Section 6901 et seq.); and (5) California Government Code, Sections 54739 through 54740.

        B.     In the event the city is subject to the payment of fines or penalties pursuant to the legal authority and actions of other regulatory or enforcement agencies based on a violation of law or regulation or its permits, and said violation can be established by the city, as caused by the discharge of any user of the city’s system which is in violation of any provision of the city’s chapter or the user’s permit, the city shall be entitled to recover from the user all costs and expenses, including, but not limited to, the full amount of said fines or penalties to which it has been subjected.

        C.     Pursuant to the authority of California Government Code Sections 54739 through 54740, any person who violates any provision of this chapter; any permit condition, prohibition or effluent limit; or any suspension or revocation order shall be liable civilly for a sum not to exceed twenty-five thousand dollars per violation for each day in which such violation occurs. Pursuant to the authority of the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251 et seq., any person who violates any provision of this chapter, or any permit condition, prohibition, or effluent limit shall be liable civilly for a sum not to exceed twenty-five thousand dollars per violation for each day in which such violation occurs. The city attorney of the city, upon request of the director, shall petition the Superior Court to impose, assess, and recover such penalties, or such other penalties as the city may impose, assess, and recover pursuant to federal and/or state legislative authorization.

        D.    Administrative Civil Penalties. Pursuant to the authority of California Government Code Sections 54740.5 and 54740.6, the city may issue an administrative complaint to any person who violates:

        1.     Any provision of this chapter;

        2.     Any permit condition, prohibition, or effluent limit; or

        3.     Any suspension or revocation order. (Ord. 09-04 §1, 2009).

 

7.12.370 Criminal penalties.
        Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, which upon conviction is punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars, or imprisonment for not more than six months, or both. Each violation and each day in which a violation occurs may constitute a new and separate violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the penalties contained herein. (Ord. 09-04 §1, 2009).

 

7.12.380 Appeals to the city manager.
        Any FSE, permit applicant, or permittee adversely affected by a decision made by the director may appeal the decision by filing, within ten days, a written request for hearing before the city manager accompanied by an appeal fee in an amount established by resolution. The request for hearing shall set forth in detail all the issues in dispute all facts supporting appellant’s request. A hearing shall be held by the city manager within sixty days. If the matter is not heard within the required time, the order of director shall be deemed final. The appeal fee shall be refunded if the city manager reverses or modifies, in favor of the appellant, the order of the director. After the hearing, the city manager shall uphold, modify, or reverse the decision. The written decision shall be sent by certified mail to the appellant or its legal counsel/representative at the appellant’s business address. The city manager’s decision shall be final. (Ord. 09-04 §1, 2009).

 

7.12.390 Payment of charges.
        A.    Except as otherwise provided, all fees, charges and penalties established by this chapter are due and payable upon receipt of notice thereof. All such amounts are delinquent if unpaid thirty days after date of invoice.

        B.     Collection of delinquent accounts shall be in accordance with the city’s policy resolution establishing procedures for collection of delinquent obligations owed to the city, as amended from time to time by the city council. Any such action for collection may include an application for an injunction to prevent repeated and recurring violations of this chapter.

        C.     Any penalties charged shall not accrue to those invoices successfully appealed, provided the city receives written notification of said appeal prior to the payment due date.

        D.    Payment of disputed charges is still required by the due date during the city review of any appeal submitted by permittees.

        E.     Collection of delinquent accounts shall be in accordance with the city’s policy resolution establishing procedures for collection of delinquent obligations owed to the city, as amended from time to time by the city council. Any such action for collection may include an application for an injunction to prevent repeated and recurring violations of this chapter. (Ord. 09-04 §1, 2009).

 

7.12.400 Judicial review.
        A.    Pursuant to Section 1094.6 of the California Code of Civil Procedure, the city hereby enacts this part to limit to ninety days following final decisions in adjudicatory administrative hearings the time within which an action can be brought to review such decisions by means of administrative mandamus.

        B.     Notwithstanding the foregoing, and pursuant to Government Code Section 54740.6, judicial review of a final order of the city manager or the director imposing administrative civil penalties pursuant to this chapter may be made only if the petition for writ of mandate is filed not later than the thirtieth day following the day on which such order becomes final. (Ord. 09-04 §1, 2009).

Title 8 HEALTH AND SAFETY
Chapter 8.04 GARBAGE AND REFUSE
Chapter 8.08 SELF-SERVICE FUEL STATIONS
Chapter 8.12 NUISANCES
Chapter 8.18 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
Chapter 8.20 SIDEWALK OBSTRUCTIONS
Chapter 8.21 CAMPING ON PUBLIC LANDS
Chapter 8.22 NOISE CONTROL
Chapter 8.24 SMOKING REGULATIONS
Chapter 8.26 AREAS FOR COLLECTING AND LOADING RECYCLABLE MATERIALS IN DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS
Chapter 8.30 FIREWORKS SALE
Chapter 8.34 CANNABIS REGULATIONS

Chapter 8.04 GARBAGE AND REFUSE
8.04.010 Definitions.
        For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall be defined as follows:

        A.    “Garbage” includes and means all classes of kitchen and table refuse, house refuse, offal, swill, and also every accumulation of animal or vegetable matter that attends the preparation, consumption, decay, dealing in or storage of meats, fish, fowl, birds, fruit or vegetables, and other noxious and unwholesome substances, including unwholesome meat, fish, fowl, birds, fruit or vegetables.

        B.     “Garbage collector” includes and means the city or its duly authorized servants, officers or employees, or any person with whom the city has executed a written contract therefor, having the exclusive right to gather and collect garbage and rubbish within the city.

        C.     “Refuse” includes and means broken crockery, broken or discarded bottles, broken glass, tin vessels, tin cans, tin containers, pasteboard boxes, berry, fruit or other boxes, barrels, or containers, paper, rags, straw, feathers, sawdust, packing material, shavings, dirt and noncombustible waste, ashes, cinders, manure, and any and all other materials which cannot be defined as garbage, but which are rejected, abandoned or discharged by the owners or producers thereof as useless or no longer desired by the owners or producers. “Refuse” also includes leaves, trimmings from lawns, trees, or shrubbery, or rubbish, or waste matter produced by the tearing down, alteration or construction of buildings, or discarded metal or other mineral substances from garages, auto wrecking establishments or factories. (Ord. 09-05 §1, 2009; Ord. 95-10 §1, 1995; Ord. 76-1 §§2, 3, 1976).

 

8.04.020 Rules established.
        The following rules, as contained in this chapter, covering the handling of accumulation of garbage, rubbish and waste matter to be observed by the occupants of places of residence and places of business in the city are established. (Ord. 09-05 §1, 2009; Ord. 90-01 §1(part), 1990).

 

8.04.030 Receptacle—Required.
        It is unlawful for any person occupying or maintaining any premises within the city where refuse is created, produced or accumulated upon such premises, to fail to or neglect to provide a receptacle for the purpose of keeping all refuse accumulated on the premises therein, and it shall be the duty of each such person to place all refuse, as defined in this chapter, in such receptacle as provided for such purpose. (Ord. 09-05 §1, 2009; Ord. 76-1 §5, 1976).

 

8.04.040 Receptacle—Requirements.
        A. 1. It is unlawful for any person occupying or maintaining any property within the city where garbage or refuse is created, produced or accumulated upon such property to fail to or neglect to provide a sealable container with handles and a close-fitting cover and with the maximum capacity of thirty-three gallons, and not more than fifty pounds when filled, for receiving and holding, without leaking or escape of odors, all garbage and refuse which is produced, created or accumulated upon such property between the times for the removal or collection of garbage or refuse as hereinafter provided, and such persons shall deposit therein all such garbage and refuse which is produced, created or accumulated upon the property. Containers shall at all times be kept in a sanitary condition and shall be located in such places to be readily accessible for removing and emptying, but shall not be placed within the limits of any street or alley in the city or any other place so as to constitute a nuisance.

        2.     The requirement of subsection (A)(1) shall be fulfilled by vendor/franchise-supplied containers that may deviate from subsection (A)(1) in size and weight if this is available.

        B.     Owners or occupants of single-family residences, multiple dwellings of four or less units, commercial uses, and mixed residential/commercial uses shall provide not less than one sealable container, as described in subsection A of this section, for each residential unit or use. But if vendor/franchise-supplied containers are available these containers shall be used consistent with the provisions of subsection (A)(2).

        C.     Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the contents of such container or containers and the contents of any bin, box or receptacle used for the storage of garbage or refuse as provided in this chapter shall be made available for not less than once a week to the garbage and refuse collector for removal as provided in this chapter.

        D.    Occupants of property shall be responsible for placing garbage containers no earlier than twenty-four hours prior to the day of collection and shall remove the container not later than midnight on the day of collection to a place where they cannot be seen from the street. If automated truck pickup is utilized by the vendor/franchise, the container shall be placed for collection in an accessible location considering all aspects such as parked vehicles.

        E.     It is unlawful for any person to bury or burn any garbage within the city or spread or scatter the same therein; however, occupants of property may feed kitchen and table refuse meat, bones, vegetable and other matter fit for domestic animals belonging to such occupants on the premises where such matter is produced.

        F.     Multiple dwellings of five or more units may apply for garbage and refuse bins in accordance with Section 8.04.050(B). (Ord. 09-05 §1, 2009; Ord. 85-5 §1, 1985; Ord. 76-1 §4, 1976).

 

8.04.050 Temporary drop boxes and bins in permanent enclosures—Specifications—Availability.
        A.    Temporary Drop Boxes. Any person, firm, corporation or other entity may apply to the city manager for a permit to use a temporary drop box or receptacle to remove or cause to be removed refuse situated upon the property of such person or entity. Such a permit may be granted by the city manager if, in his or her opinion, the quantity of material to be removed is unusually large or other unusual circumstances indicate that such gathering and removal would be in the best interest of the city. Such a permit may be temporary for a term specified therein, and may be issued subject to any condition reasonably needed to protect the public health, safety and welfare. Drop boxes or receptacles so permitted shall be placed only in locations specified by the city manager. A fee shall be charged for such temporary permit as established by the city council from time to time by resolution.

        B.     Bins. All bins in permanent enclosures shall be set upon concrete pads with concrete roll-out aprons. In addition, bins and enclosures for all new building projects shall be consistent with the following requirements unless, in the opinion of the city manager, a requirement in a particular case is not practicable, in which case the city manager may waive that requirement.

        1.     Storage Requirements.

        a.     Storage areas are those portions of a building project devoted to placement of garbage and refuse bins.

        i.      Size. Storage areas shall be large enough to accommodate the needs of the building project, including anticipated future expansion of the project.

        ii.     Maneuverability. Adequate space shall be provided in the immediate storage area so that collection equipment can remove and empty garbage and refuse bins without damaging the bins, equipment or other property.

        b.     Storage enclosures are walls, fences or other structures designed to enclose garbage and refuse bins.

        i.      Design. The design of storage enclosures shall conform to city standard specifications and drawing.

        ii.     Screening. All garbage and refuse bins shall be screened from public view. Such screening shall be of wood or masonry block construction.

        iii.    Cleaning. Hot or cold water faucets and water drains shall be provided in order to ensure continued cleanliness of storage areas, enclosures, and garbage and refuse bins.

        c.     Garbage and Refuse Bins.

        i.      Special Containers. Building projects may install special purpose waste containers (e.g. compactors, debris boxes, etc.) in order to meet special handling needs.

        ii.     All garbage and refuse bins and special purpose waste containers shall be large enough to accommodate the needs of the building project.

        2.     Collection Requirements.

        a.     Access to Storage Areas.

        i.      Distance. Storage areas shall be located as near as practicable to public roads in order to minimize the distance traveled by collection vehicles through a building project.

        ii.     Roadway Width. Roadway widths along which collection vehicles must travel shall be at least twenty feet wide.

        iii.    Clearance Heights. Clearance heights above routes traveled by collection vehicles shall be at least fourteen feet.

        iv.    Roadway Obstructions. Areas adjacent to routes traveled by collection vehicles shall be free of over-hanging signs, wires or other structures in order to allow adequate clearance heights.

        v.     Turnarounds. Adequate turnaround areas for collection vehicles shall be provided where through exits are not available.

        b.     Access to Bins and Other Containers.

        i.      The air space above bins and special purpose containers shall be free of obstructions (structures, wires, etc.) in order to permit effective servicing of such bins and containers by front loaders and other specialized collection equipment.

        ii.     Parking spaces shall be laid out in a manner that will permit ready access to storage areas by collection vehicles.

        iii.    Bins and containers in unusual locations and storage areas that are sloped or at elevations higher or lower than the roadway providing access thereto shall be accessible to the waste hauler. (Ord. 09-05 §1, 2009; Ord. 85-5 §3, 1985).

 

8.04.060 Private collection of garbage and rubbish prohibited.
        The city, its duly authorized servants, officers or employees, or any person with whom the city has executed a written contract therefor, shall have the exclusive right to gather and collect garbage and rubbish within the city. It is unlawful for any other person to collect or remove or dispose of garbage or rubbish within the city. (Ord. 09-05 §1, 2009; Ord. 2001-02 §1(part), 2001; Ord. 90-01 §1(part), 1990; Ord. 85-5 §2(part), 1985; Ord. 76-1 §7, 1976).

 

8.04.062 Exceptions.
        The city of Waterford may issue special permits for the following reasons only: for a business, company, corporation, church, apartment or other nonresidential commercial enterprise to haul solid waste generated as a result of activities at their premises, provided that Section 8.04.064 of this chapter is followed. (Ord. 09-05 §1, 2009; Ord. 2001-02 §1(part), 2001).

 

8.04.064 Procedure for special permits.
        Applicant shall complete and file the form for the special permit at City Hall and shall not engage in the collection, removing or disposition of solid waste prior to a permit being issued. Applicant shall return to the city manager verification from the disposal site that such material was disposed of at the appropriate site. (Ord. 09-05 §1, 2009; Ord. 2001-02 §1(part), 2001).

 

8.04.070 Garbage collection contract.
        A.    A contract may be entered into for the collection and disposal of garbage and refuse in the city in accordance with and subject to the terms and conditions of this chapter, and in the event such contractor, or his, her or its agents, shall have the right to collect all garbage and refuse in the city. Such contract shall provide that the contractor shall and will collect and dispose of all garbage and refuse accumulated in the city during the term of the contract and in the manner provided in this chapter, and shall not charge an amount in excess of the rates specified in the contract. The vehicle in which garbage or refuse is transported through the city streets shall be of a design satisfactory to the city council.

        B.     Before entering into such a contract the city may, but shall not be required to, call for bids for such a contract. In the event the council elects to call for bids for such a contract, the form or proposals and the time and place for receiving bids shall be fixed by resolution of the city council. A notice thereof shall be published one time in a newspaper published in the city, which notice shall specify the time the contract is to run. The scheduled rates offered by each bidder shall be based upon the following classifications:

        1.     Private dwellings and residences;

        2.     Stores and business houses;

        3.     Mobile homes in mobile home parks;

        4.     Hotels, apartment houses and rooming houses; and the city council shall have the right to reject all bids. Where bids have been so solicited and received and where the council has not elected to reject all bids, the contract shall be awarded to the person, firm or corporation offering to collect and dispose of the garbage and refuse produced or accumulated within the city at the lowest rates and in accordance with the terms and conditions of this chapter.

        C.     No contract or bid for the collection of garbage and refuse shall be considered by the city council which proposes higher rates or charges than the rates to be fixed by the city council from time to time by resolution.

        D.    If such a contract has been awarded and entered into by the city, the garbage collector shall be entitled to payment in advance for the collection of garbage and refuse on the first day of each month from each householder or other person, firm or corporation from whom or from which payment is due. In the event service is discontinued as provided in this chapter, a copy of a written notice of discontinuance shall also be given to the owner of the premises. Garbage service to any property or place for which the charge for such service is delinquent for a period of thirty days may be discontinued by the garbage collector five days after giving written notice to the occupant of the premises, and to the owner of the premises, that the service will be discontinued for nonpayment of service charges. The garbage collector shall furnish a copy of the notice of discontinuance to the city clerk within twenty-four hours after notice has been given. The city clerk shall promptly refer the notice to the building official for enforcement of this chapter. If the service is discontinued for failure to pay charges, the service shall not be resumed until the delinquent charges are paid. The city may be designated by agreement with the collector to bill and collect the fees for garbage and refuse service. (Ord. 09-05 §1, 2009; Ord. 90-01 §1(part), 1990; Ord. 85-5 §2(part), 1985; Ord. 76-1 §8, 1976).

 

8.04.072 Residential owner liable.
        The owner of the real property upon which each residential unit is located shall be liable for payment of all charges for garbage or refuse service rendered for such premises, including the charges for garbage and refuse collection. Charges shall be a lien against all of the real properties served until paid. (Ord. 09-05 §1, 2009; Ord. 90-01 §1(part), 1990).

 

8.04.074 Owner/business owner liable.
        The owner, proprietor, partner, corporation, or other business entity of each business, industrial or mercantile establishment shall be jointly and severally liable for payment of all refuse collection charges billed to such establishment. (Ord. 09-05 §1, 2009; Ord. 95-06 §1, 1995; Ord. 90-01 §1(part), 1990).

 

8.04.076 Unpaid account constitutes lien against property.
        Unpaid charges shall be a lien against all of the real properties served until paid. (Ord. 09-05 §1, 2009; Ord. 95-06 §1, 1995).

 

8.04.080 Billing and collection of fees.
        The billing and collection of fees will be performed by the garbage collector. However, the city shall have the discretion to conduct the billing and collection of fees. If the city exercises this discretion, it shall bill and collect as follows: All such fees shall be included in the city utility bill, which utility bill shall also include waste water treatment plant charges charged and water charges to the same location and for which the same person(s) shall be liable. As indicated in Section 7.08.020 of this code, utility bills shall be deemed delinquent as to their unpaid portion if not paid in their entirety within thirty days of the date of the bill. Upon becoming delinquent, and every thirty days thereafter during which any portion of the utility bill (including any delinquency charges already imposed) shall be subject to a ten percent additional charge, which charge shall be incorporated into the utility bill. If the utility bill remains delinquent for thirty days or more, the director of finance shall cause a notice to be mailed or delivered to the owner and the user of the premises which notifies the owner and the user that each party is jointly and severally liable for such charges and that each party shall be subject to civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction for all sums owed to the city unless payment of the entire utility bill is remitted forthwith. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed as affecting the personal obligations of any person liable for the payment of charges described herein, nor as limiting the city’s right to commence or prosecute the civil action described above. If any such action to recover costs, fees, or charges is brought by the city under this section, such action shall include an award of attorneys’ fees in a reasonable amount, as demonstrated by evidence presented and as determined by the court in which such action is brought. (Ord. 09-05 §1, 2009; Ord. 95-10 §1, 1995; Ord. 92-13, 1992).

 

8.04.090 Agricultural industries—Responsibility for removing garbage, refuse and other wastes.
        The city shall not be responsible for removing garbage, refuse, and other waste materials produced by factories, canneries, fruit and vegetable shippers, and other businesses that produce large quantities of such materials shall be removed and disposed of by the industry or business producing the materials at least once a week, except when the public health, safety, and welfare dictates more frequent removal. (Ord. 09-05 §1, 2009; Ord. 90-01 §1(part), 1990; Ord. 85-5 §4, 1985).

 

8.04.100 Compost.
        Nothing herein shall prevent the occupant of the premises from placing organic materials in enclosed containers for the purpose of compost. Said compost shall be kept free of materials which cause fly or health and odor problems, and shall be subject to inspection by the county health officer, who shall enforce all health-related violations of this chapter. (Ord. 09-05 §1, 2009; Ord. 90-01 §1(part), 1990; Ord. 76-1 §6, 1976).

 

8.04.110 Enforcement of chapter—Right of entry.
        It shall be the duty of the city manager, the chief of police, the public works director, or any of their assistants, to enforce the provisions of this chapter, and they shall have the power and authority to enter all premises at and during reasonable hours for the purpose of determining whether or not the provisions of this chapter are being obeyed. (Ord. 09-05 §1, 2009; Ord. 90-01 §1(part), 1990).

 

8.04.120 Garbage accumulation prohibited.
        No person shall have or permit upon any premises owned, occupied or controlled by him or her, any nuisance detrimental to health or any accumulation of garbage, rubbish or waste material or manure or any carcass of any animal, contrary to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 09-05 §1, 2009; Ord. 90-01 §1(part), 1990).

 

8.04.130 Condemnation of receptacles—Notice.
        In the event any garbage, rubbish or waste matter can or receptacle is found by the enforcement officer, or officers specified in his chapter, not to be in compliance with the provisions as set forth in this chapter, or detrimental to the public health, after inspection by such enforcement officer, a notice shall be served upon the owner, resident or tenant on the premises on which such can or receptacle is located by the enforcement officer stating that the can or receptacle is condemned, it must be removed and replaced by one which complies with the provisions of this chapter within a period of five days. (Ord. 09-05 §1, 2009; Ord. 90-01 §1(part), 1990).

 

8.04.140 Condemnation of receptacles—Removal.
        The notice shall also state that if the can or receptacle is not removed and replaced within the same time, the enforcement officer shall remove the can or receptacle from the premises. The enforcement officer is empowered to condemn and remove from the premises such can or receptacle and upon such removal, the owner, resident or tenant shall be liable to the city for the sum of fifty dollars to defray the cost of removal thereof, which amount may be added to any fees otherwise provided for in this chapter. (Ord. 09-05 §1, 2009; Ord. 90-01 §1(part), 1990).

 

8.04.150 Condemnation of receptacles—Notice of destruction.
        In the event the can or receptacle is removed by the enforcement officer, a notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises stating that the can or receptacle shall be destroyed. If such can or receptacle shall be held for a period of thirty days after posting and, if no action is commenced to recover possession of such can or receptacle, the same shall be summarily destroyed. If such can or receptacle is held by a court in any action to be detrimental to the public health, the same shall be summarily destroyed immediately after the decision of the court has become final. (Ord. 09-05 §1, 2009; Ord. 90-01 §1(part), 1990).

 

8.04.160 Condemnation of receptacles—Not a bar.
        The exercise of any power under this section is not to be construed as an exclusive remedy or as an election to proceed under it only and shall not be a bar to any other procedure or prosecution under any section of this chapter, the Waterford Municipal Code or the laws of the state. (Ord. 09-05 §1, 2009; Ord. 90-01 §1(part), 1990).

 

8.04.170 Use of another’s receptacle.
        No person shall place any rubbish or waste matter or permit or allow any rubbish or waste matter to be placed in the city’s or any other person’s receptacles without the consent of the city or such other person. (Ord. 09-05 §1, 2009; Ord. 90-01 §1(part), 1990).

 

8.04.180 Appeals.
        Any person aggrieved by the interpretation and application of the requirements of the provisions of this chapter may appeal to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal with the city manager setting forth his or her objections. After hearing the objections of such person and giving due consideration thereto, the council shall make its decision on the matters contained in the appeal, and its decision shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 09-05 §1, 2009; Ord. 90-01 §1(part), 1990).

 

8.04.190 Violations declared infraction/misdemeanor.
        Any act declared by this chapter to be unlawful shall be an infraction, except as set forth below, and any such act shall be punishable by fine as prescribed by law for conviction of an infraction. Fines shall not, however, be less than one hundred dollars plus court assessment for the first offense, two hundred dollars for the second offense within a twelve-month period, and five hundred dollars for any additional offenses within a twelve-month period. Transporting of waste referred to in Sections 8.04.062 and 8.04.064 of this chapter outside of the city of Waterford without written approval from the city manager, for the city of Waterford, or any garbage hauling without a special permit shall be a misdemeanor. (Ord. 09-05 §1, 2009; Ord. 2001-02 §1(part), 2001; Ord. 90-01 §1(part), 1990; Ord. 85-5 §2(part), 1985; Ord. 80-7 §1, 1980; Ord. 76-1 §9, 1976).

 

8.04.200 Administrative remedies.
        When necessary to protect the health of its citizens the city may also abate violations of these codes. In the case of the abatement the violator shall not be relieved of the applicable judicial remedies. The city may recover the cost of abatement including any applicable administrative expenses by billing the property occupant or property owner. If the abatement expenses are not paid to the city these expenses may be added to the property tax bill. (Ord. 09-05 §1, 2009).

Chapter 8.08 SELF-SERVICE FUEL STATIONS
8.08.010 Regulations generally.
        A.    There shall be at least one competent attendant on duty during hours of operation whose sole duty, during the dispensing of gasoline, is to oversee and operate controls, handle spills and instruct persons in the proper use of equipment. “Competent” as used in this subsection means a person eighteen years of age or older, and who holds a valid state driver’s license.

        B.     The facility shall be so designed that the attendant has full, unrestricted view of all pumps and dispensing operations.

        C.     A control center shall be provided where all remote pump controls are operated by the attendant and fuel purchases made.

        D.    The pump controls shall be designed so that attendant can turn off any individual pump, or all pumps simultaneously, with a single switch.

        E.     Only approved automatic nozzles without latch-open devices shall be used.

        F.     There shall be an intercommunications system installed between the pumps and control center, so individuals can be instructed in the proper use of equipment or notified of incorrect actions.

        G.    The service station shall also provide air and water in view on the premises.

        H.    No containers other than vehicle fuel tanks or approved containers shall be filled.

        I.      Coin, token, bill, card, key or other similar types of self-service stations are specifically prohibited.

        J.      The dispensing or filling of portable liquid petroleum gases, tanks or containers is prohibited.

        K.    The number and type of portable fire extinguishers to be installed shall be determined by the inspection authority, but not less than one extinguisher per island. (Ord. 72-3 §6, 1972).

 

8.08.020 Activities conducted indoors.
        All other activities, such as lubrication, tire changing, motor tune-up and similar activities shall be conducted within the building, except that of a minor or emergency nature. (Ord. 72-3 §5, 1972).

 

8.08.030 Lot size.
        A.    The minimum lot frontage along a public street shall be one hundred twenty-five feet.

        B.     The minimum lot depth shall be one hundred feet. (Ord. 72-3 §1, 1972).

 

8.08.040 Curb cuts.
        A.    The minimum width of any curb cut shall be twenty-five feet.

        B.     The maximum width of any curb cut shall be thirty-five feet.

        C.     The total aggregate amount of curb cuts shall not exceed forty percent of the lot frontage. (Ord. 72-3 §2, 1972).

 

8.08.050 Landscaping.
        There shall be a minimum planter with a net width of five feet along all street frontages except at driveway openings. All planting areas shall be protected with six-inch-wide concrete curb. (Ord. 72-3 §3, 1972).

 

8.08.060 Service lanes.
        A.    The outside service lane or the lane closest to the street line shall have a minimum width of fifteen feet as measured from the face of the planter to the face of the pump island.

        B.     Service lanes between two pump islands shall have the minimum width of twenty feet as measured from the inside face of the first pump to face of the second pump island.

        C.     The service lane between the pump island and building shall have a minimum width of fifteen feet as measured from the face of the pump island to the face of the building sidewalk. (Ord. 72-3 §4, 1972).

 

8.08.070 Farm implement fuel service.
        Self-service fuel stations may be operated in the absence of an attendant between the hours of six p.m. and eight a.m. subject to the granting of a conditional use permit by the planning commission. Use permits for this purpose may be granted if the planning commission can make the following findings:

        A.    That the purpose and intent of the application is to provide a twenty-four-hour refueling service to be used primarily for farm implements;

        B.     That the applicant has devised an adequate plan for cardholder or keylock service;

        C.     That the applicant has devised an adequate plan for instructing customers in the safe use of refueling equipment. (Ord. 80-9, 1980).

 

8.08.080 Removal of tanks.
        It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to remove from the premises any fuel tanks not used for retail sales to the general public for a continuous period of six months. If the owner(s) fails to remove a tank discontinued from use, the city may cause the tank to be filled with sand, and may charge the property owner for any expenses incurred by the city. (Ord. 80-9, 1980).

 

8.08.090 Inspections and inspection fees.
        Installation and removal of fuel tanks shall be subject to inspection by the Stanislaus Consolidated Fire Protection District. Inspection fees shall be as established by resolution of the city council from time to time. Inspection fees collected by the city shall be surrendered to the fire district. (Ord. 2014-14 §1; Ord. 80-9, 1980).

Chapter 8.12 NUISANCES
8.12.010 Definitions.
        For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall be defined as follows:

        A.    “Parkings” means the area between the established concrete curbing and the private property line.

        B.     “Street” means a public or private thoroughfare which affords principal or secondary access by vehicles to abutting property including any street, avenue, place, way, drive, lane, boulevard, highway, road, alley and any other thoroughfare used by vehicles.

        C.     “Weeds” means all weeds growing upon roads, streets, sidewalks or private property as defined by Health and Safety Code, Section 14875.

        D.    “Board” means the appeals hearing board of the city of Waterford as set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 2014-09 §1; Ord. 72-10 §3, 1972).

 

8.12.020 Declaration of nuisance—Dirt and rubbish.
        All dirt, rubbish, weeds or other rank growths located upon any buildings, grounds or lots within the city which constitute a fire menace, or which is otherwise a menace to health and safety, is declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 72-10 §1, 1972).

 

8.12.030 Declaration of nuisance—Grass and weeds.
        All grass, weeds or other obstructions located upon any sidewalks, parkings, or streets within the city which constitute a fire menace or which is otherwise a menace to health and safety is declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 72-10 §2, 1972).

 

8.12.040 Removal duty—Dirt and rubbish.
        It is made the duty of every owner of buildings, grounds, or lots within the city to remove such dirt, rubbish, weeds or other rank growths from such property or adjacent sidewalks as are described in Section 8.12.020 from said buildings, grounds or lots. (Ord. 72-10 §4, 1972).

 

8.12.050 Removal duty—Grass and weeds.
        It is made the duty of every owner of buildings, grounds, or lots within the city to remove such grass, weeds, or other obstructions from the sidewalks and parkings and the half of the streets as abut his or her buildings, grounds or lots as are described in Section 8.12.030. (Ord. 72-10 §5, 1972).

 

8.12.060 Keeping property clear required—Dirt and rubbish.
        Every owner of buildings, grounds or lots in the city shall keep said buildings, grounds or lots free and clear of all dirt, rubbish, weeds or other rank growths, which from any cause whatever have accumulated upon said property. (Ord. 72-10 §6, 1972).

 

8.12.070 Keeping property clear required—Grass and weeds.
        Every owner of buildings, grounds or lots in the city shall keep the sidewalks and parkings and the half of the streets as abut his or her buildings, grounds or lots free and clear of all grass, weeds or other obstructions as are described in Section 8.12.030 which from any cause whatever have accumulated thereon. (Ord. 72-10 §7, 1972).

 

8.12.080 Abatement notice.
        Upon the failure of any owner to destroy or remove such dirt, rubbish, weeds, or other rank growths, grass or other obstructions as are described in Sections 8.12.020 and 8.12.030 in the manner described herein, the owner of the real property involved shall be notified by the city manager/code enforcement officer or the designee of either to remove the same within a period of seven days. The notice shall identify the property by its commonly known name, the street, road or highway upon which it is located, and shall describe the property by reference to the tract, block, lot, code area and parcel number as used in the records of the county assessor. The notice shall state that the grass, weeds, dirt, rubbish or other obstructions on the property or sidewalks, parkings and the half of the streets as abut the property, as the case may be, is a nuisance and hazard and that by the provisions of this chapter they must be abated by the owner; that otherwise they will be abated by city authorities, in which case the cost of such abatement shall be a special assessment on the property and will constitute a lien on the property until paid. The notice shall contain the name of the city manager/code enforcement officer or the designee of either and shall state that an appeal from the notice may be made in writing to the board through the office of the city clerk, and give his or her name, address, telephone number, and the date by which such appeal must be made. Such notice shall be in writing or printed and shall:

        A.    Be posted in a conspicuous place upon said property for a period of seven days; and

        B.     Be mailed to the property owner as shown on the assessment roll. (Ord. 2014-09 §1; Ord. 02-02 §1, 2002; Ord. 74-7 §1, 1974; Ord. 72-10 §8, 1972).

 

8.12.090 Appeal.
        If the property owner objects to the determination of the city manager/code enforcement officer or the designee of either that the condition of his or her property is such as is described in Sections 8.12.020 and 8.12.030, he or she may file his or her objection in writing with the board through the city clerk’s office within the seven days after the date of the notice, and such objection shall be heard as soon thereafter as the business of the board will permit. If the board upholds the determination of the city manager/code enforcement officer or the designee of either, the property owner shall be allowed seven days thereafter to comply after which the procedure in Sections 8.12.100 and 8.12.110 shall be employed. If the board does not uphold the determination of the city manager/code enforcement officer or the designee of either, such action may be taken as the board directs. (Ord. 2014-09 §1; Ord. 02-02 §1, 2002; Ord. 74-7 §1, 1974; Ord. 72-10 §9, 1972).

 

8.12.100 Abatement by city.
        If at the end of the period set forth in Sections 8.12.080 and 8.12.090, the owner has failed to comply with the notice, or has not successfully objected thereto, the city manager/code enforcement officer or the designee of either shall notify the director of public works who shall cause such nuisance as described to be removed and shall charge the expense of such work of removing the same to the owner of the property, and it shall become a lien on the property and shall constitute a special assessment against such property in accordance with Sections 38773 and 38773.5 of the Government Code. (Ord. 02-02 §1, 2002; Ord. 74-7 §1, 1974; Ord. 72-10 §10, 1972).

 

8.12.110 Lien on property.
        Upon completion of the work of removal of said nuisance, the city clerk shall notify the owner of such real property in writing of the expense of such work. If said owner fails or refuses to pay the amount of such expense within a period of thirty days from the date of mailing such notice, payment to be made to the city, the city clerk shall cause to be recorded notice of the lien on the property cleared or chargeable for the clearing, in the office of the county recorder for the amount due. On the first business day in September, the city clerk shall certify to the county auditor the names, and amount due, from the property owners whose obligation under this chapter remains unpaid, for entry upon the tax roll. After receipt of the amount due, the city clerk shall cause to be recorded a release of lien in the county recorder’s office. (Ord. 72-10 §11, 1972).

 

8.12.120 Exemptions.
        Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to require the removal from said property of any ornamental trees, plants, lawns or shrubs of a reasonable growth, provided the same are not in any manner obstructions to the free use of the sidewalk or streets in front of or along such property by pedestrians or vehicles. (Ord. 72-10 §12, 1972).

 

8.12.130 Violation declared infraction.
        Notwithstanding any provisions of this chapter for the abatement of nuisances, any act declared by this chapter to be a public nuisance, a fire menace, or which is otherwise a menace to public health or safety shall be an infraction, and shall be punishable by fine as prescribed by law, and as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 82-3 §A, 1982).

 

8.12.140 Penalty for infraction.
        Conviction of a first offense of an infraction, as prescribed in this chapter, shall be punishable by a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars nor more than fifty dollars per each acre of land, or fraction thereof, found to be in violation of this chapter, plus court assessment. Conviction of a second offense of an infraction within a twelve-month period shall be punishable by a fine of not less than seventy-five dollars nor more than one hundred dollars per each acre of land, or fraction thereof, found to be in violation of this chapter, plus court assessment. Conviction of a third offense of an infraction within a twelve-month period shall be punishable by a fine of not less than one hundred seventy-five dollars nor more than two hundred fifty dollars per each acre of land, or fraction thereof, found to be in violation of this chapter, plus court assessment. (Ord. 82-3 §B, 1982).

 

8.12.150 Enforcement—Right of entry.
        Any person whose duty it is to enforce the provisions of this chapter may, at any reasonable time, enter upon private property for such purpose including inspection and identification of nuisance as well as removal. It is unlawful for any person to interfere with, oppose, or resist any authorized person enforcing the provisions of this chapter including, but not limited to, removal of the nuisance. (Ord. 02-02 §2).

Chapter 8.18 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
8.18.010 Definitions.
        As used in this chapter, the following words, phrases and terms shall have the following meanings:

        A.    “Advertise” means to verbally, literally or pictorially display, publicize or tell of an item or a quantum of merchandise that is offered for sale.

        B.     “Business” means a fixed location, whether indoors or outdoors, at which merchandise is offered for sale.

        C.     “Controlled substance” means those controlled substances set forth in Sections 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057 and 11058 of the California Health and Safety Code, identified as Schedules I through V, inclusive, as said sections now exist or may hereafter be amended, renumbered or added to in any way.

        D.    “Display” means to show or have available for viewing.

        E.     “Drug paraphernalia” means all equipment, products and materials of any kind which are used, intended for use or designed for use in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repacking, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance in violation of any law of the state of California. “Drug paraphernalia” includes, but is not limited to, all of the following:

        1.     Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing controlled substances;

        2.     Isomerization devises used, intended for use or designed for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled substance;

        3.     Testing equipment used, intended for use or designed for use in identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of controlled substances;

        4.     Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose and lactose used, intended for use or designed for use in cutting controlled substances;

        5.     Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use or designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining marijuana;

        6.     Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used, intended for use or designed for use in compounding controlled substances;

        7.     Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used, intended for use or designed for use in packaging small quantities of controlled substances;

        8.     Containers and other objects used, intended for use or designed for use in storing or concealing controlled substances;

        9.     Objects used, intended for use or designed for use in injecting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish or hashish oil into the human body, such as:

        a.     Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads or punctured metal bowls,

        b.     Water pipes,

        c.     Carburetion tubes and devices,

        d.     Smoking and carburetion masks;

        10.   Roach clips, meaning objects to hold burning materials, such as marijuana cigarette that has become too small or too short to be held in the hand;

        11.   Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;

        12.   Chamber pipes;

        13.   Carburetor pipes;

        14.   Air-driven pipes;

        15.   Bongs.

        In determining whether an object is “drug paraphernalia”, a court or other authority may consider to the extent authorized by law, in addition to all other logically relevant factors, the following:

        1.     Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object concerning its use;

        2.     Prior convictions, if any, of an owner or of anyone if control of the object, under any state or federal law relating to any controlled substance;

        3.     The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct violation of this chapter;

        4.     The proximity of the object to controlled substances;

        5.     The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object;

        6.     Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner or of anyone in control of the object, to deliver to persons whom he or she knows intends to use the object to facilitate a violation of the laws of the state of California relating to controlled substances;

        7.     Descriptive materials or instructions, oral or written, accompanying the object which explain or depict its use;

        8.     National and local advertising concerning its use;

        9.     The manner in which the object is displayed for sale, including its proximity to other objects falling within the definition of drug paraphernalia;

        10.   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the object or objects to the total sales of the business enterprise;

        11.   The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the community; and

        12.   Expert testimony concerning its use.

        F.     “Enclosure” means floor space, the physical access to which is restricted and the interior of which is not subject to view by a patrol from the outside.

        G.    “Minor” means any person under eighteen years of age.

        H.    “Person” means a natural person or any firm, partnership, association, corporation or cooperative association.

        I.      “Sell” means any form of transfer of possession or delivery, whether with or without consideration. (Ord. 81-1, 1981).

 

8.18.020 Maintenance and display of drug paraphernalia.
        A.    No person shall maintain or operate any place of business in which drug paraphernalia is kept, displayed or offered in any manner, sold, furnished, transferred or given away unless such drug paraphernalia are completely and wholly kept, displayed or offered within a separate room or enclosure from which persons under the age of eighteen who are not accompanied by a parent or legal guardian, are excluded.

        B.     No owner, manager, proprietor or other person in charge of any room or enclosure within any place of business in which drug paraphernalia is kept, displayed or offered in any manner, sold, furnished, transferred or given away shall permit or allow any person under the age of eighteen years to enter, be in, remain in, or visit such room or enclosure unless such minor is accompanied by one of his or her parents or his or her legal guardian.

        C.     No person under the age of eighteen years shall enter, be in, remain in, or visit any room or enclosure in any place of business which has been signposted in the manner prescribed by subsection A of this section, unless accompanied by one of his or her parents or by his or her legal guardian. (Ord. 81-1, 1981).

 

8.18.030 Application of Section 8.18.020.
        The provisions of subsection A of Section 8.18.020 shall not apply to any person unless that person maintains or operates a place of business in which drug paraphernalia is kept, displayed or offered in any manner with intent to deliver, sell, furnish, transfer or give away, knowing or under circumstances where he or she should reasonably know that it will be used to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human system a controlled substance in violation of any law of the state of California. The provisions of subsection B of Section 8.18.020 shall not apply to any owner, manager, proprietor or other person in charge of any room or enclosure within any place of business in which drug paraphernalia is kept, unless the drug paraphernalia is required by the provisions of subsection A of Section 8.18.020 to be kept, displayed or offered within such separate room or enclosure. (Ord. 81-1, 1981).

 

8.18.040 Sale to minors prohibited.
        No person shall deliver, sell, furnish, transfer or give away to a minor any drug paraphernalia, knowing or under circumstances where he or she reasonably should know that it will be used to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of any law of the state of California. (Ord. 81-1, 1981).

 

8.18.050 Advertising prohibited.
        No person shall advertise in any newspaper, handbill or other publication produced within the county of Stanislaus, knowing or under circumstances where he or she reasonably should know that the purpose of the advertisement, in whole or in part, is to promote the sale of objects designed for use or intended for use as drug paraphernalia. (Ord. 81-1, 1981).

 

8.18.060 Exceptions.
        This chapter shall not apply to any of the following:

        A.    Any pharmacist or other authorized person who sells or furnishes drug paraphernalia upon the prescription of a physician, dentist, podiatrist or veterinarian;

        B.     Any physician, dentist, podiatrist or veterinarian who furnishes or prescribes drug paraphernalia to his or her patient;

        C.     Any manufacturer, wholesaler or retailer licensed by the California State Board of Pharmacy to sell or transfer drug paraphernalia;

        D.    No provision of this chapter shall be deemed, whether directly or indirectly, to authorize any use, possession or other act which is otherwise prohibited by any law of the state of California. (Ord. 81-1, 1981).

 

8.18.070 Enforcement.
        A.    Infraction. Violation of any provisions of this chapter is an infraction and shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding fifty dollars for a first violation; a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for a second violation within one year; a fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars for each additional violation within one year. A person who violates Section 8.18.020(A) shall be guilty of a separate offense for each day, or portion thereof, during which the violation continues.

        B.     Public Nuisance. A violation of any provision of this chapter is declared to be a public nuisance subject to abatement pursuant to Section 731 of the Code of Civil Procedure.

        C.     Business License. A violation of any provision of this chapter shall be sufficient ground for the city manager to revoke, suspend or to refuse to renew the business license of the person or entity violating this chapter. A criminal conviction or adverse judgment in a nuisance action shall not be required in order to establish a violation of this chapter for purposes of revocation, suspension or refusal to renew a business license pursuant to this subsection.

        Any person or entity aggrieved by the actions of the city manager in revoking, suspending or refusing to renew a business license pursuant to this subsection shall have the right to appeal to the city council by filing with the city clerk a written notice of appeal within ten days of receipt of written notice of the city council action. Upon receipt of the notice of appeal the city clerk shall transmit the notice to the city council. (Ord. 81-1, 1981).

 

8.18.080 Severability.
        The city council declares that it would have passed the ordinance codified in this chapter sentence by sentence, paragraph by paragraph, and section by section and does declare that the provisions of this chapter are severable and if for any reason any sentence, paragraph or section of this chapter shall be held invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining parts of this chapter. (Ord. 81-1, 1981).

Chapter 8.20 SIDEWALK OBSTRUCTIONS
8.20.010 Mailboxes—Location—Sidewalk obstruction prohibited.
        It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to place a mailbox or any other obstruction on the sidewalks in any residential area of Waterford. The mailboxes should be placed in the utility strip between the sidewalk and the property line. (Ord. 88-2 §1(A), 1988).

 

8.20.020 Mailboxes—Relocation—City to move when.
        Any person, firm or corporation who now has a mailbox sitting on the sidewalk, has fifteen days from May 2, 1988, the date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, to remove it. If after the expiration of fifteen days and the mailbox or obstruction has not been removed by the owner, the city shall remove the mailbox or obstruction. (Ord. 88-2 §1(B), 1988).

 

8.20.030 Violation—Penalty.
        Any persons violating the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars and no more than one year in jail. (Ord. 88-2 §1(C), 1988).

Chapter 8.21 CAMPING ON PUBLIC LANDS
8.21.010 Camping on public lands.
        It is unlawful for any person to camp, or to place, erect, or maintain any tents, house trailers, mobile homes, campers, or any other camping facilities of any kind whatsoever on any public property of this city. It is unlawful for any person to sleep outdoors on any public property, including, but not limited to, city parks, the banks of Tuolumne River and under bridges between the hours of sunset and sunrise unless the person(s) can demonstrate they have no option of sleeping indoors available. (Ord. 2018-05 §1; Ord. 04-04 §1, 2004).

Chapter 8.22 NOISE CONTROL
Article 1. Purpose
8.22.010 Declaration of policy.
        In order to control unnecessary, excessive, and annoying noise and vibration in the city, it is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to prohibit such noise and vibration generated from or by all sources as specified in this chapter. It shall be the policy of the city to maintain quiet in those areas which exhibit low noise levels and to implement programs aimed at reducing noise in those areas within the city where noise levels are above acceptable values.

        It is determined that certain noise levels and vibrations are detrimental to the public health, welfare, and safety and are contrary to the public interest. Therefore, the council does ordain and declare that creating, maintaining, or causing, or allowing to be created, caused, or maintained, any noise or vibration in a manner prohibited by, or not in conformity with, the provisions of this chapter is a public nuisance and shall be punishable as such. (Ord. 90-03 §1, 1990).

 

Article 2. Definitions
8.22.020 Scope of provisions.
        For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as set forth in Section 8.22.022 of this article. (Ord. 90-03 §1, 1990).

 

8.22.022 Definitions.
        A.    “A-weighted sound level” shall mean the sound level in decibels as measured on a sound level meter using the A-weighting network weighted to the range of human hearing. The level so read is designated dB(a) or dBA.

        B.     “Ambient noise” means all-encompassing noise associated with a given environment, being usually a composite of sounds from many sources near and far. For the purposes of this chapter, the ambient noise level is the level obtained when the noise level is averaged over a period of fifteen minutes without the inclusion of noise from isolated identifiable sources, at the location and time of day near that at which a comparison is to be made.

        C.     “Commercial area” means any commercial area as defined in the general plan and Zoning provisions and designated by a “C” or “P-C” or “H-1” prefix in the zoning provisions and on the zoning map.

        D.    “Construction” means any site preparation, assembly, erection, substantial repair, alteration, or similar action for or on public or private rights-of-way, structures, utilities, or similar property.

        E.     “Cumulative period” means any additive period of time composed of individual time segments which may be continuous or interrupted.

        F.     “Decibel” means a unit for measuring the amplitude of a sound, equal to twenty times the logarithm to the base ten of the ratio of the pressure of the sound measured to the reference pressure, which is twenty microPascals.

        G.    “Emergency work or action” means work or action made necessary to restore property to a safe condition after a public calamity, or work required to protect persons or property from imminent exposure to danger of damage, or work by public or private utilities to restore utility service.

        H.    “Fixed noise source” means a stationary device which creates sounds while fixed or motionless, including, but not limited to, residential, agricultural, industrial, and commercial machinery and equipment, pumps, fans, compressors, air-conditioners, and refrigeration equipment.

        I.      “Impulsive sound” means sound of short duration, usually less than one second, with an abrupt onset and rapid decay. Examples of sources of impulsive sound include explosions, drop forge impacts, and the discharge of firearms.

        J.      “Industrial area” means any industrial area as defined by the general plan and zoning provisions and designated by an “M” or “L-M” prefix in the zoning provisions and on the zoning map.

        K.    “Intrusive noise” means that noise which intrudes over and above the existing ambient noise at a given location. The relative intrusiveness of a sound depends upon its amplitude, duration, frequency and time of occurrence, and tonal or informational content, as well as the prevailing ambient noise level.

        L.     “Licensed” means the possession of a formal license or a permit issued by the appropriate jurisdictional authority or, where no permits or licenses are issued, the sanctioning of the activity by the jurisdiction as noted in public records.

        M.    “Mobile noise source” means any noise source other than a fixed noise source.

        N.    “Motor vehicle” means and include any and all self-propelled vehicles as defined in the Vehicle Code of the state, including all on-highway type motor vehicles subject to registration under said Code and all off-highway type motor vehicles subject to identification under said Code.

        O.    “Muffler or sound dissipative device” means a device consisting of a series of chambers or baffle plates, or other mechanical design, for the purpose of receiving exhaust gas from an internal combustion engine and effective in reducing noise.

        P.     “Noise control officer” means the city manager or his or her representative. The noise control officer shall be empowered to enforce the provisions of this chapter.

        Q.    “Noise disturbance” means any sound which:

        1.     Endangers or injures the safety or health of human beings or animals; or

        2.     Annoys or disturbs a reasonable person or normal sensitivities; or

        3.     Endangers or injures personal or real property.

        R.     “Noise level” means A-weighted sound pressure level in decibels obtained by using a sound level meter at slow response with a reference pressure of twenty microPascals. The unit of measurement shall be designated as dBA.

        S.     “Noise sensitive zone” means any area so designated for the purpose of ensuring exceptional quiet, for example, a hospital zone, nursing home, or family care home when specifically designated as such.

        T.     “Noise zone” means any defined area or region of a generally consistent land use wherein the ambient noise levels are within a range of five dBA.

        U.    “Person” means a person, firm, association, partnership, joint venture, corporation, or any entity, public or private in nature.

        V.    “Public right-of-way” means any street, avenue, boulevard, highway, sidewalk, alley, or similar place which is owned or controlled by a governmental entity.

        W.    “Public space” means any real property, or structure thereon, which is owned or controlled by a governmental entity.

        X.    “Pure tone” means any sound which can be judged as audible by the noise control officer as a single pitch or a set of single pitches.

        Y.    “Real property boundary” means an imaginary line along the ground surface, and its vertical extension, which separates the real property owned by one person from that owned by another person, but not including intra-building real property divisions.

        Z.     “Residential area” means any residential area as defined in the General Plan and Zoning provisions and designated by an “R” or “P-C” when the use is residential or “T” prefix in the Zoning provisions and on the Zoning map.

        AA.  “Sound amplifying equipment” means any device for the amplification of the human voice, music, or any other sound, excluding standard automobile radios when used and heard only by the occupants of the vehicle in which the radio is installed, and, as used in this chapter, warning devices on authorized emergency vehicles or horns or other warning devices on any vehicle used only for traffic safety purposes.

        AB.  “Sound level meter” means an instrument, including a microphone, an amplifier, an output meter, and frequency weighting networks for the measurement of sound levels, which meets or exceeds the requirements pertinent for type S1A meters in the American National Standards Institute Specifications for sound level meters, S1.4-1971, or the most recent revision thereof.

        AC.  “Sound truck” means any motor vehicle, regardless of motive power, whether in motion or stationary, having mounted thereon or attached thereto any sound amplifying equipment.

        AD.  “Vibration perception threshold” means the minimum ground- or structure-borne vibrational motion necessary to cause a normal person to be aware of the vibration by such direct means as, but not limited to, sensation by touch or the visual observation of moving objects. The perception threshold shall be presumed to be a motion velocity of .005 in/sec over the range of one to one hundred Hertz.

        AE.  “Zone” means any of the zones specified in this code as such zones are presently identified there and as they may be subsequently modified or altered. (Ord. 90-03 §1, 1990).

 

Article 3. General Noise Regulations, Noise Measurement Procedures, Noise Limits, and Maximum Permissible Sound Levels
8.22.030 General noise regulations.
        Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, and in addition thereto, it shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or negligently make or continue, or cause to be made or continued, any loud, unnecessary, or unusual noise which disturbs the peace and quiet of any neighborhood or which causes any discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable person of normal sensitiveness residing in the area. Noncommercial public speaking and public assembly activities conducted on any public space or public right-of-way shall be exempt from the operation of this section. (Ord. 90-03 §1, 1990).

 

8.22.032 Preliminary action.
        If it is determined by the responding agency that a sound level in excess of the levels prescribed by this chapter exists, the following procedures shall be followed:

        A.    A written warning shall be issued by the Noise Control Officer or his or her agent to the person responsible for the event causing the disturbance.

        B.     If the disturbance persists for more than fifteen minutes following the notice, or recurs within an eight-hour period, then the person responsible for the event causing the disturbance shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter. Any such violation shall be an infraction. (Ord. 90-03 §1, 1990).

 

8.22.034 Factors of determination.
        The factors which will be considered in determining whether a violation of the provisions of this chapter exists shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

        A.    The sound level of the alleged objectionable noise;

        B.     The sound level of the ambient noise;

        C.     The proximity of the noise to residential sleeping facilities;

        D.    The nature of zoning of the area within which the noise emanates;

        E.     The number of persons affected by the noise source;

        F.     The time of day or night the noise occurs;

        G.    The duration of the noise and its tonal, musical, or informational content; and

        H.    Whether the noise is continuous, recurrent, or intermittent. (Ord. 90-03 §1, 1990).

 

8.22.036 Noise measurement procedure.
        Upon the receipt of a complaint from a citizen, the noise control officer or his or her agent, equipped with a sound level meter, shall investigate the complaint. The investigation shall consist of a measurement taken according to the Enforcement Manual and the gathering of data to adequately define the noise problem and shall include the following:

        A.    Non-Acoustic Data.

        1.     The type of the noise source;

        2.     The location of the noise source relative to the complainant’s property;

        3.     The time period during which the noise source is considered by the complainant to be intrusive;

        4.     The total duration of the noise produced by the noise source; and

        5.     The date and time of the noise measurement survey.

        B.     Acoustic Data. Utilizing the A-weighting scale of the sound level meter and the “slow” meter response, the noise control officer or his or her agent shall measure the sound level at any point on the receiver’s property. (Ord. 90-03 §1, 1990).

 

8.22.037 Noise limits.
        The provisions of this section address noise intrusions over and above the noise normally associated with a given location (intrusions over the ambient level). The ambient noise varies throughout the community, depending upon proximity to highways, population density, and land use. Different standards are set for various segments of the community which reflect the existing day and nighttime ambient noise levels. The ambient noise level is defined in terms of statistical parameters which describe the total noise occurring over any hourly time period.

        A noise intrusion is judged by comparing such noise statistics with the noise source on versus such statistics with the noise source off (the ambient). Violations of the provisions of this chapter may be cited in terms of particular levels exceeded or in terms of the length of time the intrusive noise exceeded such standards. Compliance with the noise emission standards as set forth in this section shall constitute the elimination of a noise disturbance.

        A.    Exterior Noise Standards.

 

Exterior Noise Limits (Levels Not to be Exceeded More Than Thirty Minutes in any Hour).

 

Noise Level (dBA)

Noise Zone Classification

 

Receiving Land Use Category

Time Period

Rural/ Suburban

Suburban

Urban

One- and Two-Family

10:00p.m.—7:00a.m.

40

45

50

Residential

7:00a.m.—10:00p.m.

50

55

60

Multiple Dwelling

Residential

10:00p.m.—7:00a.m.

45

50

55

Public Space

7:00a.m.—10:00p.m.

50

55

60

Limited Commercial

Some Multiple Dwellings

10:00p.m.—7:00a.m.

 

55

 

7:00a.m.—10:00p.m.

 

60

 

Commercial

10:00p.m.—7:00a.m.

 

60

 

7:00a.m.—10:00p.m.

 

65

 

Light Industrial

Any time

 

70

 

Heavy Industrial

Any time

 

75

 

 

        The classification of different areas of the community in terms of environmental noise zones shall be determined by the noise control officer, based upon the assessment of the community noise survey data and noise contours established by the noise element of the general plan. Additional area classifications should be used as appropriate to reflect both lower and higher existing ambient levels than those shown.

        Industrial noise limits are intended primarily for use at the boundaries of industrial zones rather than for noise reduction within the zone.

        B.     Interior Noise Standards.

 

Maximum Permissible Dwelling
Interior Sound Levels

 

Noise Zone

Type of Land Use

Time Interval

Allowable Interior Noise Level (dBA)

All

Multifamily

10:00p.m.—7:00a.m.

35

Residential

7:00a.m.—10:00p.m.

45

 

        1.     The interior noise standards for multi-family residential dwellings as set forth in this section shall apply, unless otherwise specifically indicated, within all such dwellings with windows in their normal seasonal configuration.

        2.     No person shall operate, or cause to be operated, within a dwelling unit any source of sound or allow the creation of any noise which causes the noise level when measured inside a neighboring receiving dwelling unit to exceed:

        i.      The noise standard as specified in this section for a cumulative period of more than five minutes in any hour; or

        ii.     The noise standard plus five dB for a cumulative period of more than one minute in any hour; or

        iii.    The noise standard plus ten dB or the maximum measured ambient for any period of time. (Ord. 90-03 §1, 1990).

 

8.22.038 Maximum permissible sound levels by receiving land uses.
        The maximum sound levels shall be determined as follows:

        A.    The noise standards for the various categories of land use identified by the noise control officer as set forth in Section 8.22.037 of this article, unless otherwise specifically indicated, shall apply to all such property within a designated zone.

        B.     No person shall operate, or cause to be operated, any source of sound at any location within the incorporated city, or allow the creation of any noise on property owned, leased, occupied, or otherwise controlled by such person, which causes the noise level, when measured on any other property, either incorporated or unincorporated, to exceed:

        1.     The noise standard for that land use as specified in Section 8.22.037 of this article for a cumulative period of more than thirty minutes in any hour; or

        2.     The noise standard plus five dB for a cumulative period of more than fifteen minutes in any hour; or

        3.     The noise standard plus ten dB for a cumulative period of more than five minutes in any hour; or

        4.     The noise standard plus fifteen dB for a cumulative period of more than one minute in any hour; or

        5.     The noise standard plus twenty dB or the maximum measured ambient level for any period of time.

        C.     If the measured ambient level differs from that permissible within any of the first four noise limit categories set forth in subsection B of this section, the allowable noise exposure standard shall be adjusted in five dB increments in each category as appropriate to encompass or reflect such ambient noise level.

        In the event the ambient noise level exceeds the fifth noise limit category, the maximum allowable noise level under such category shall be increased to reflect the maximum ambient noise level.

        D.    If the measurement location is on a boundary between two different zones, the noise level limit applicable to the lower noise zone, plus five dB, shall apply.

        E.     If possible, the ambient noise shall be measured at the same location along the property line utilized in subsection B of this section, with the alleged offending noise source inoperative. If for any reason the alleged offending noise source cannot be shut down, the ambient noise shall be estimated by performing a measurement in the same general area of the source but at a sufficient distance such that the noise from the source is at least ten dB below the ambient in order that only the ambient level be measured. If the difference between the ambient and the noise source is five to ten dB, then the level of the ambient itself can be reasonably determined by subtracting a one decibel correction to account for the contribution of the source.

        F.     In noise sensitive zones the maximum permissible sound level shall not be exceeded by:

        1.     Creating or causing the creation of any sound within any noise sensitive zone so as to exceed the specified land use noise standards set forth in Section 8.22.037 of this article provided conspicuous signs are displayed indicating the presence of the zone; or

        2.     Creating or causing the creation of any sound within or adjacent to any noise sensitive zone containing a hospital, nursing home, school, court, or other designated area so as to interfere with the functions of such activity or annoy the occupancy in the activity provided conspicuous signs are displayed indicating the presence of the zone. (Ord. 90-03 §1, 1990).

 

Article 4. General Provisions
8.22.040 Prohibited acts.
        The following acts are hereby prohibited:

        A.    Radios, Television Sets, Musical Instruments, and Similar Devices. Operating, playing, or permitting the operation or playing of any radio, television set, phonograph, drum, musical instrument, or similar device which produces or reproduces sound in such a manner as to create a noise disturbance, except for activities for which a variance has been issued by the noise control officer;

        B.     Loudspeakers (Amplified Sound). Using or operating for any purpose any loudspeaker, loudspeaker system, or similar device such that the sound therefrom creates a noise disturbance, except for any activity for which a variance or permit has been issued by the noise control officer;

        C.     Yelling and Shouting. Loud or raucous yelling, shouting, whistling, or singing so as to cause a noise disturbance;

        D.    Street Sales. The solicitation, sale, or advertising of any product or service by shouting or outcry within any residential or commercial area or noise sensitive zone of the city, except by variance issued by the noise control officer;

        E.     Animals. Keeping or maintaining, or permitting to be kept or maintained, upon any premises owned, occupied, or controlled by any person any animal which, by any frequent or long continued noise, shall cause annoyance or discomfort to two or more reasonable persons of normal sensitiveness who reside in separate residences (including apartments and condominiums). However, the noise control officer or his or her agent may proceed on the basis of a complaint of only one person if circumstances are determined to exist whereby a noise disturbance caused by an animal affects only one individual. Any noise which is audible continuously for ten minutes or intermittently for thirty minutes shall be prima facie evidence of such annoyance or discomfort.

        Factors which can be used to evaluate excessive animal noise include, but are not limited to: (1) the time of day; (2) the pitch; (3) the pattern; (4) the duration; and (5) the frequency of occurrence;

        F.     Loading and Unloading. Loading, unloading, opening, closing, or other handling of boxes, crates, containers, building materials, or similar objects between the hours of ten p.m. and seven a.m. in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance across a residential real property line;

        G.    Construction or Demolition.

        1.     Hours of Operation. Operating or causing the operation of any tools or equipment used in construction, drilling, repair, alteration, or demolition work between weekday hours of seven p.m. and seven a.m. (or eight p.m. and nine a.m. on weekends or holidays) such that the sound therefrom creates a noise disturbance across a residential or commercial real property line, except for emergency work or public service utilities or by variance issued by the noise control officer; and

        2.     Noise Restrictions at Affected Properties. Where technically and economically feasible, construction activities shall be conducted in such a manner that the maximum sound levels at affected properties will not exceed those listed in the following schedule:

        i.      Mobile Equipment. Maximum sound levels for nonscheduled, intermittent, short-term operation (less than ten days per month) of mobile equipment:

 

 

 

R-1 and R-2 Residential

R-3 and above Multifamily Residential

Commercial and Industrial

Daily 7:00a.m. to 7:00p.m.

75 dBA

80 dBA

85 dBA

Weekends 9:00a.m. to 8:00p.m. and legal holidays

60

65

70

 

        ii.     Stationary Equipment. Maximum sound levels for repetitively scheduled and relatively long-term operation (periods of ten days or more per month) of stationary equipment:

 

 

 

R-1 and R-2 Residential

R-3 and above Multifamily Residential

Commercial and Industrial

Daily 7:00a.m. to 7:00p.m.

60 dBA

65 dBA

70 dBA

Weekends 9:00a.m. to 8:00p.m. and legal holidays

50

55

60

 

        H.    Vibration. Operating or permitting the operation of any device which creates a vibration which annoys or disturbs at least two or more reasonable persons of normal sensitivity who reside in separate residences (including apartments and condominiums) at or beyond the property boundary of the source if on private property or at least one hundred fifty feet (forty-six meters) from the source if on a public space or public right-of-way;

        I.      Motor Vehicle Noise Limits.

        1.     Motor Vehicles. It shall be the policy of the city to enforce those sections of the Vehicle Code of the state regarding motor vehicle noise limits and equipment violations which create noise problems, motor vehicle horns, sound levels emitted from off-highway vehicles operating off the public right-of-way, and successors thereof.

        Commercial maintenance equipment and machinery shall be equipped with proper mufflers and air intake silencers in good working order.

        2.     Refuse Collection Vehicles. No person shall collect refuse with a refuse collection vehicle between the hours of six p.m. and five a.m. of the following day in a residential area.

        3.     Vehicle, Motorboat, and Aircraft Repairs and Testing. No person shall repair, rebuild, modify, or test any motor vehicle, motorboat, or aircraft in such a manner as to create a noise disturbance across a residential real property line or at any time to violate the provisions of this chapter;

        J.      Emergency Signaling Devices.

        1.     The intentional sounding or permitting the sounding outdoors of any fire, burglar, or civil defense alarm, siren, whistle, or similar stationary emergency signaling device, except for emergency purposes or for testing as provided in subsection 2 of this subsection;

        2. a.  Testing of a stationary emergency signaling device shall not occur before seven a.m. or after seven p.m. Any such testing shall use only the minimum cycle test time. In no case shall such test time exceed sixty seconds; and

        2. b. Testing of the complete emergency signaling system, including the functioning of the signaling device, and the personnel response to the signaling device, shall not occur more than once in each calendar month. Such testing shall not occur before seven a.m. or after ten p.m. The time limit specified in subsection (2)(a) of this subsection shall not apply to such complete system testing; and

        3.     Sounding or permitting the sounding of any exterior burglar or fire alarm or any motor vehicle burglar alarm unless such alarm is terminated within fifteen minutes after any single security violation or false alarm;

        K.    Domestic power tools, machinery, heating, venting, or air-conditioning (HVAC) equipment.

        1.     Operating or permitting the operation of any mechanically powered saw, sander, drill, grinder, lawn or garden tool, or similar tool between ten p.m. and seven a.m. on weekdays (or eight p.m. and nine a.m. on weekends and legal holidays) so as to create a noise disturbance across a residential or commercial real property line; and

        2.     Any motor, machinery, or pump, such as swimming pool or HVAC equipment and the like, installed or replaced after October 11, 1984, shall be sufficiently enclosed or muffled and maintained so as not to create a noise disturbance across a residential or commercial real property line;

        L.     Places of Entertainment. Operating or permitting the operation or playing of any loudspeaker, musical instrument, motorized racing vehicle, or other source of sound which exceeds ninety-five dBA as read on the scale of a sound level meter in any place of public entertainment at any point normally occupied by a customer without a conspicuous and legible sign stating “Warning! Sound Levels Within May Cause Hearing Impairment”; and

        M.    Tampering. The removal or rendering inoperative, other than for purposes of maintenance, repair, or replacement of any noise control device, or element thereof, of any product required to meet specified noise emission limits under federal, state, or local laws and the use of such product after its noise control device has been removed or rendered inoperative, other than for purposes of maintenance, repair, or replacement. (Ord. 90-03 §1, 1990).

 

8.22.042 Emergency exemptions.
        A.    The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency; or

        B.     The emission of sound in the performance of emergency work. (Ord. 90-03 §1, 1990).

 

8.22.044 Miscellaneous exemptions.
        A.    Warning Devices. Warning devices necessary for the protection of the public safety, as, for example, police, fire, and ambulance sirens, shall be exempted from the provisions of this chapter.

        B.     Outdoor Activities. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to occasional outdoor gatherings, public dances, shows, and sporting and entertainment events provided such events are conducted pursuant to a permit or license issued by the city relative to the staging of such events.

        C.     Agricultural Operations. All mechanical devices, apparatus, or equipment associated with acceptable agricultural operations or practices conducted on agricultural property shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter. If, however, the operation is in the vicinity of residential land uses, and/or in operation for less than one year, a variance permit shall be required to operate noise producing devices, with the following conditions:

        1.     That operations do not take place between eight p.m. and five a.m.; or

        2.     That such operations and equipment are utilized for the protection or salvage of agricultural crops during periods of potential or actual frost damage or other adverse weather conditions; or

        3.     That such operations and equipment are associated with agricultural pest control through pesticide applications provided the applications are made in accordance with permits issued by or regulations enforced by the county agricultural commission; and

        4.     That such devices utilized for pest control which incorporate stationary or mobile noise sources (electromechanical bird scare devices and the like) are operated only by a permit issued by the noise control officer. The allowable hours and days for the operation of such devices will be specified in the permit; and

        5.     That all equipment and machinery powered by internal combustion engines shall be equipped with a proper muffler and air intake silencer in good working order. (Ord. 90-03 §1, 1990).

 

8.22.046 Federal and state preempted activities.
        Any other activity shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter to the extent regulation thereof has been pre-empted by state or federal laws. (Ord. 90-03 §1, 1990).

 

Article 5. Variances and Appeals
8.22.050 Special variances.
        A.    The planning commission is authorized to grant variances for exceptions from any provision of this chapter, subject to limitations as to area, noise levels, time limits, and other terms and conditions as the planning commission determines are appropriate to protect the public health, safety, and welfare from the noise emanating therefrom. This section shall in no way affect the duty to obtain any permit or license required by law for such activities.

        B.     Any person seeking a variance pursuant to this section shall file an application with the planning commission. The application shall contain information which demonstrates that bringing the source of sound or activity for which the variance is sought into compliance with this chapter would constitute an unreasonable hardship on the applicant, on the community, or on other persons. The application shall be accompanied by a fee in an amount determined by the city council by resolution. A separate application shall be filed for each noise source; provided, however, several mobile sources under common ownership, or several fixed sources on a single property, may be combined into one application. Notice of an application for a variance shall be published according to this code. Any individual who claims to be adversely affected by the allowance of the variance may file a statement with the planning commission containing any information to support his or her claim. If at any time the planning commission finds that a sufficient controversy exists regarding an application, a public hearing will be held.

        C.     In determining whether to grant or deny the application, the planning commission shall balance the hardship of not granting the variance on the applicant, the community, and other persons against the adverse impact on the health, safety, and welfare of persons affected, the adverse impact on property affected, and any other adverse impacts of granting the variance. Applicants for variances and persons contesting variances may be required to submit such information as the planning commission may reasonably require. In granting or denying an application, the planning commission shall keep on public file a copy of the decision and the reasons for denying or granting the variance.

        D.    Variances shall be granted by notice to the applicant containing all necessary conditions, including a time limit on the permitted activity. The variance shall not become effective until all conditions are agreed to by the applicant. Noncompliance with any condition of the variance shall terminate the variance and subject the person holding it to those provisions of this chapter for which the variance was granted.

        E.     A variance shall not exceed three hundred sixty-five days after the date on which it was granted. Applications for the extension of time limits specified in variances or for the modification of other substantial conditions shall be treated like applications for initial variances under subsection B of this section.

        F.     The planning commission shall issue guidelines defining the procedures to be followed in applying for a variance and the criteria to be considered in deciding whether to grant a variance. (Ord. 90-03 §1, 1990).

 

8.22.052 Variances from time to comply.
        On or before November 30, 1990, the owner of any commercial or industrial source of sound may apply to the planning commission for a variance in time to comply with the provisions of this chapter. The planning commission shall have the authority, consistent with this section, to grant a variance (not to exceed five years from the effective date of this chapter). The same procedures and considerations by the planning commission as followed under Section 8.22.048 of this article shall likewise apply. (Ord. 90-03 §1, 1990).

 

8.22.054 Appeals.
        Appeals of an adverse decision of the planning commission shall be made to the council. Reviews by the council shall be as specified in this code. (Ord. 90-03 §1, 1990).

Chapter 8.24 SMOKING REGULATIONS
8.24.010 Purpose and findings.
        The council of the city of Waterford hereby finds:

        A.    Numerous studies have found that tobacco smoke is a major contributor to indoor air pollution; and

        B.     Reliable studies have shown that breathing sidestream or secondhand smoke is a significant health hazard for certain population groups, including elderly people, those with cardiovascular disease, and those with impaired respiratory function, including asthmatics and those with obstructive airway disease; and

        C.     Health hazards induced by breathing sidestream or secondhand smoke include lung cancer, respiratory infection, decreased exercise tolerance, decreased respiratory function, bronchoconstriction, and bronchospasa; and

        D.    The smoking of tobacco, or any other plant, is a proven danger to health. (Ord. 93-07 §1, 1993; Ord. 91-04 §1(part), 1991).

 

8.24.020 Definitions.
        In this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires:

        A.    “Bar” means an establishment or separate room which is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages and in which the service of food is only incidental to the consumption of such beverages.

        B.     “Employee” means a person who is employed by an employer in consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit.

        C.     “Employer” means a person, partnership, corporation, including municipal corporation or public entity, who employs the services of more than three persons.

        D.    “Enclosed” means closed in by roof and four walls with appropriate openings for ingress and egress.

        E.     “Place of employment” means an enclosed area under the control of a public or private employer which employees normally frequent during the course of employment including but not limited to work areas, employee lounges, conference rooms, and employee cafeterias. A private residence is not a place of employment.

        F.     “Restaurant” means any restaurant, cafeteria, luncheonette, tavern, cocktail lounge, sandwich stand, soda fountain, private and public school cafeteria, dining area, service line, or eating establishment and any other eating establishment, organization, club, including veterans club, boardinghouse, or guest house, which gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests, patrons, or employees, as well as kitchens in which food is prepared on the premises for serving elsewhere, including catering functions except the term “restaurant” shall not include a cocktail lounge or tavern if the cocktail lounge or tavern is a bar as defined in this section.

        G.    “Smoking” means the carrying or holding of a lighted pipe, cigar, or cigarette of any kind, or any other lighted smoking equipment or the lighting or emitting or exhaling the smoke of a pipe, cigar, cigarette, or smoking material of any kind. (Ord. 93-07 §1, 1993; Ord. 91-04 §1(part), 1991).

 

8.24.030 Prohibition of smoking in designated enclosed places.
        Smoking shall be prohibited in the following places within the city:

        A.    Within public buildings in areas available to and customarily used by the general public.

        B.     Public areas of all buildings used for recreational purposes; provided, that this prohibition shall not apply when such an area is rented for a private, closed function.

        C.     Except as allowed by state law, waiting rooms, hallways, wards and semiprivate rooms of health facilities, including, but not limited to, hospital clinics, physical therapy facilities and medical offices.

        D.    Elevators, public restrooms, indoor service lines, buses, taxicabs and other means of public transit under the authority of the city.

        E.     Enclosed theaters, auditoriums, and halls which are used for motion pictures, stage dramas, and musical performances, ballets or other exhibitions, except when smoking is part of any such production.

        F.     Except as allowed by state law, retail food marketing establishments, including grocery stores and supermarkets.

        G.    Public schools and other public facilities under the control of another public agency, which are available to and are customarily used by the general public, to the extent that the same are subject to the jurisdiction of the city.

        H.    Retail stores, except areas in said stores not open to the public.

        I.      Areas available to and customarily used by the general public in all businesses and nonprofit establishments patronized by the public including but not limited to offices, banks, hotels and motels.

        J.      Within a restaurant. (Ord. 93-07 §1, 1993; Ord. 91-04 §1(part), 1991).

 

8.24.040 Non-smoking establishments.
        Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, an owner, operator, manager or other person who controls an establishment described in this section may declare that entire establishment as a nonsmoking establishment. (Ord. 93-07 §1, 1993; Ord. 91-04 §1(part), 1991).

 

8.24.050 Regulation of smoking in places of employment.
        A.    It is the responsibility of an employer to provide smoke free areas for nonsmokers within existing facilities to the maximum extent possible, but an employer is not required to incur any expense to make structural or other physical modifications in providing these areas.

        B.     Within ninety days of the effective date of this chapter, each employer and each place of employment located within the city shall adopt, implement, make known and maintain a written smoking policy, which shall contain at a minimum the following requirements:

        1.     Prohibition of smoking in conference and meeting rooms, classrooms, auditoriums, restrooms, medical facilities, hallways, and elevators.

        2.     An employee in a place of employment may designate his or her immediate work area as a nonsmoking area and post that area with an appropriate sign or signs, to be provided by the employer. The policy adopted by the employer shall include a reasonable definition of the term “immediate work area.”

        3.     In any dispute arising under a smoking policy, the rights of the nonsmoker shall be given precedence.

        4.     Provision and maintenance of a separate and contiguous nonsmoking area of not less than 50% of the seating capacity and floor space in cafeterias, lunchrooms, and employee lounges.

        C.     The smoking policy shall be communicated to all employees within three weeks of its adoption, and at least annually thereafter.

        D.    Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this section, an employer may designate any place of employment, or portion thereof, as a nonsmoking area. (Ord. 93-07 §1, 1993; Ord. 91-04 §1(part), 1991).

 

8.24.060 Optional smoking area.
        Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter to the contrary, the following areas are not subject to the smoking restrictions of this chapter:

        A.    A private residence.

        B.     A bar, as defined in Section 8.24.020(A).

        C.     A hotel or motel room rented to guests.

        D.    A retail store that deals exclusively in the sale of tobacco and smoking paraphernalia.

        E.     A restaurant, hotel or motel conference or meeting room, and public and private assembly room while these places are being used for private functions.

        F.     A private residence which may serve as a place of employment.

        G.    A private enclosed place occupied exclusively by smokers even though such a place may be visited by nonsmokers, and a private enclosed office (excepting places in which smoking is prohibited by the fire department or by any other law, ordinance or regulation) unless designated as a nonsmoking area by the occupant or the employer. (Ord. 93-07 §1, 1993; Ord. 91-04 §1(part), 1991).

 

8.24.070 Posting requirement.
        “No smoking” signs, with letters of not less than one inch in height, or in the international “no smoking” symbol shall be clearly and conspicuously posted in every building or other place where smoking is prohibited by this chapter. (Ord. 93-07 §1, 1993; Ord. 91-04 §1(part), 1991).

 

8.24.080 Enforcement.
        A.    Enforcement of this chapter shall be implemented by the county health officer or the chief of police or designee.

        B.     Anyone who desires to register a complaint hereunder may initiate enforcement with the county health officer or the chief of police or designee.

        C.     Any owner, manager, operator or employee of any establishment controlled by this chapter shall have the right to inform persons violating this chapter of the appropriate provisions hereof. (Ord. 93-07 §1, 1993; Ord. 91-04 §1(part), 1991).

 

8.24.090 Penalties.
        A.    It is unlawful for a person who owns, manages, operates or otherwise controls the use of any premises subject to the restrictions of this chapter to fail to properly post signs required hereunder; provide signs for the use of employees in designating their areas; properly set aside “No Smoking” areas; adopt a smoking restriction policy; or comply with any other requirement of this chapter.

        B.     It is unlawful for any person to smoke in an area restricted by the provisions of this chapter.

        C.     A person or business who violates this chapter is guilty of an infraction punishable by:

        1.     A written warning for the first violation.

        2.     A fine, not exceeding one hundred dollars, for second violation.

        3.     A fine, not exceeding two hundred dollars, for a third violation of this chapter within one year.

        4.     A fine, not exceeding five hundred dollars, for each additional violation of this chapter within one year. (Ord. 93-07 §1, 1993; Ord. 91-04 §1(part), 1991).

 

8.24.100 Nonretaliation.
        No person or employer may discharge, refuse to hire, or in any manner retaliate against an employee or applicant for employment because the employee or applicant exercises any rights afforded by this chapter. (Ord. 93-07 §1, 1993; Ord. 91-04 §1(part), 1991).

 

8.24.110 Other applicable laws.
        This chapter shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws. (Ord. 93-07 §1, 1993; Ord. 91-04 §1(part), 1991).

Chapter 8.26 AREAS FOR COLLECTING AND LOADING RECYCLABLE MATERIALS IN DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS
8.26.010 Purpose.
        The council of the city of Waterford hereby finds:

        A.    Cities and counties must divert fifty percent of all solid waste by January 1, 2000, through source reduction, recycling, and composting activities; and

        B.     Diverting fifty percent of all solid waste requires the participation of the residential, commercial, industrial, and public sectors; and

        C.     The lack of adequate areas for collecting and loading recyclable materials that are compatible with surrounding land uses is a significant impediment to diverting solid waste and constitutes an urgent need for state and local agencies to address access to solid waste for source reduction, recycling, and composting activities. This chapter has been developed to meet that need. (Ord. 93-13 §1, 1993).

 

8.26.020 Definitions.
        In this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires:

        A.    “Development project” means any of the following:

        1.     A project for which a building permit is required for a commercial, industrial, or institutional building, marina, or residential building having five or more living units, where solid waste is collected and loaded and any residential project where solid waste is collected and loaded in a location serving five or more living units.

        2.     Any new public facility where solid waste is collected and loaded and any improvements for areas of a public facility used for collecting and loading solid waste.

        3.     The definition of development project only includes subdivisions or tracts of single-family detached homes if, within such subdivisions or tracts there is an area where solid waste is collected and loaded in a location which serves five or more living units. In such instances, recycling areas as specified in this ordinance are only required to serve the needs of the living units which utilize the solid waste collection and loading area.

        B.     “Improvement” means if it adds to the value of a facility, prolongs its useful life, or adapts it to new uses. Improvements should be distinguished from repairs. Repairs keep facilities in good operating condition, do not materially add to the value of the facility, and do not substantially extend the life of the facility.

        C.     “Floor area of a marina” means the space dedicated to the docking or mooring of marine vessels.

        D.    “Public facility” means and includes, but is not limited to buildings, structures, marinas, and outdoor recreation areas owned by a local agency.

        E.     “Recycling area (areas for recycling)” means space allocated for collecting and loading of recyclable materials. Such areas shall have the ability to accommodate receptacles for recyclable materials. Recycling areas shall be accessible and convenient for those who deposit as well as those who collect and load any recyclable materials placed therein. (Ord. 93-13 §1, 1993).

 

8.26.030 General requirements.
        A.    Any new development project for which an application for a building permit is submitted on or after September 1, 1993, shall include adequate, accessible, and convenient areas for collecting and loading recyclable materials.

        B.     Any improvements for areas of a public facility used for collecting and loading solid waste shall include adequate, accessible, and convenient areas for collecting and loading recyclable materials.

        C.     Any existing development project for which an application for a building permit is submitted on or after September 1, 1993, for a single alteration which is subsequently performed that adds thirty percent or more to the existing floor area of the development project shall provide adequate, accessible, and convenient areas for collecting and loading recyclable materials.

        D.    Any existing development project for which an application for a building permit is submitted on or after September 1, 1993, for multiple alterations which are conducted within a twelvemonth period which collectively add thirty percent or more to the existing floor area of the development project shall provide adequate, accessible, and convenient areas for collecting and loading recyclable materials.

        E.     Any existing development project for which multiple applications for building permits are submitted within a twelve-month period beginning on or after September 1, 1993, for multiple alterations which are subsequently performed that collectively add thirty percent or more to the existing floor area of the development project shall provide adequate, accessible, and convenient areas for collecting and loading recyclable materials.

        F.     Any existing development project occupied by multiple tenants, one of which submits on or after September 1, 1993, an application for a building permit for a single alteration which is subsequently performed that adds thirty percent or more to the existing floor area of that portion of the development project which said tenant leases shall provide adequate, accessible, and convenient areas for collecting and loading recyclable materials. Such recycling areas shall, at a minimum be sufficient in capacity, number, and distribution to serve that portion of the development project which said tenant leases.

        G.    Any existing development project occupied by multiple tenants, one of which submits on or after September 1, 1993, an application for a building permit for multiple alterations which are conducted within a twelve-month period which collectively add thirty percent or more to the existing floor area of that portion of the development project which said tenant leases shall provide adequate, accessible, and convenient areas for collecting and loading recyclable materials. Such recycling areas shall, at a minimum be sufficient in capacity, number, and distribution to serve that portion of the development project which said tenant leases.

        H.    Any existing development project occupied by multiple tenants, one of which submits within a twelve-month period beginning on or after September 1, 1993, multiple applications for building permits for multiple alterations which are subsequently performed that collectively add thirty percent or more to the existing floor area of that portion of the development project which said tenant leases shall provide adequate, accessible, and convenient areas for collecting and loading recyclable materials. Such recycling areas shall, at a minimum be sufficient in capacity, number, and distribution to serve that portion of the development project which said tenant leases.

        I.      Any costs associated with adding recycling space to existing development projects shall be the responsibility of the party or parties who are responsible for financing the alterations. (Ord. 93-13 §1, 1993).

 

8.26.040 Guidelines for all development projects.
        A.    Where local standards exist, recycling areas should be designed to be architecturally compatible with nearby structures and with the existing topography and vegetation, in accordance with such standards.

        B.     The design and construction of recycling areas shall not prevent security of any recyclable materials placed therein.

        C.     The design, construction, and location of recycling areas shall not be in conflict with any applicable federal, state, or local laws relating to fire, building, access, transportation, circulation, or safety.

        D.    Recycling areas or the bins or containers placed therein must provide protection against adverse environmental conditions, such as rain, which might render the collected materials unmarketable.

        E.     Driveways and/or travel aisles shall, at a minimum, conform to local building-code requirements for garbage collection access and clearance. In the absence of such building-code requirements, driveways and/or travel aisles should provide unobstructed access for collection vehicles and personnel.

        F.     A sign clearly identifying all recycling and solid waste collection and loading areas and the materials accepted therein shall be posted adjacent to all points of direct access to the recycling areas.

        G.    Developments and transportation corridors adjacent to recycling areas shall be adequately protected for any adverse impacts such as noise, odor, vectors, or glare through measures including, but not limited to maintaining adequate separation, fencing, and landscaping. (Ord. 93-13 §1, 1993).

 

8.26.050 Additional guidelines for single tenant development projects.
        A.    Area for recycling shall be adequate in capacity, number, and distribution to serve the development project.

        B.     Dimensions of the recycling area shall accommodate receptacles sufficient to meet the recycling needs of the development project.

        C.     An adequate number of bins or containers to allow for the collection and loading of recyclable materials generated by the development project should be located within the recycling area. (Ord. 93-13 §1, 1993).

 

8.26.060 Additional guidelines for multiple tenant development projects.
        A.    Recycling areas shall, at a minimum be sufficient in capacity, number, and distribution to serve that portion of the development project leased by the tenant(s) who submitted an application or applications resulting in the need to provide recycling area(s) pursuant to Section 8.26.030 of this chapter.

        B.     Dimensions of recycling areas shall accommodate receptacles sufficient to meet the recycling needs of that portion of the development project leased by the tenant who submitted an application or applications resulting in the need to provide recycling area(s) pursuant to Section 8.26.030 of this chapter.

        C.     An adequate number of bins or containers to allow for the collection and loading of recyclable materials generated by that portion of the development project leased by the tenant(s) who submitted an application or applications resulting in the need to provide recycling area pursuant to Section 8.26.030 of this chapter should be located within the recycling area. (Ord. 93-13 §1, 1993).

 

8.26.070 Location.
        A.    Recycling areas shall not be located in any area required to be constructed or maintained as unencumbered, according to any applicable federal, state, or local laws relating to fire, access, building, transportation, circulation, or safety.

        B.     Any and all recycling area(s) shall be located so they are at least as convenient for those persons who deposit, collect, and load the recyclable materials placed therein as the location(s) where solid waste is collected and loaded. Whenever feasible, areas for collecting and loading recyclable materials shall be adjacent to the solid waste collection areas. (Ord. 93-13 §1, 1993).

 

8.26.080 Declaration of severability.
        All provisions of this chapter are severable and, if for any reason any sentence, paragraph, or section of this chapter shall be held invalid, such decision shall 

Chapter 8.30 FIREWORKS SALE
8.30.010 Definitions.
        For the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this chapter, the following words and/or phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them as provided in this section:

        “Applicant” means the person, business or organization who files an application for a permit.

        “Enforcement officer.” The enforcement officer is the city planning director and/or designee.

        “Fireworks sales booth” means the booth, stand or other approved structure used for the purposes of selling fireworks.

        “Local nonprofit organization” means “nonprofit organizations” as defined herein, which have a primary meeting place within the geographical boundaries of the city of Waterford and which must have been organized and established within the city’s boundaries for a minimum of one continuous year preceding the filing of the application for a permit, and must have a bona fide membership of at least five members who reside in the city of Waterford.

        “Nonprofit organization” means any nonprofit association or corporation organized primarily for veteran, patriotic, welfare, religious, civic betterment or charitable purposes, which has been issued a tax exempt certificate as required under the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state of California or a group which is an integral part of a recognized national organization having such a tax exempt status.

        “Person” means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, concern, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, limited liability company or any other group or combination acting as a unit. (Ord. 2013-02 §1; Ord. 99-03 §1).

 

8.30.020 Permit required.
        It is unlawful for any person to engage in the sale or distribution of fireworks within the corporate boundaries of the city without first having secured a permit to do so from the city of Waterford. (Ord. 2013-02 §1; Ord. 99-03 §1).

 

8.30.030 Permits limited to local nonprofit organizations.
        Permits for the sale of fireworks under the provisions of this chapter shall be issued only to “local nonprofit organizations” as defined in Section 8.30.060 of this chapter. (Ord. 2013-02 §1; Ord. 99-03 §1).

 

8.30.040 Permit applications.
        The city of Waterford requires a temporary use permit for a permit to sell fireworks. The temporary use permit application form shall require the proper identification (name, address and phone number of contact person for the nonprofit organization, the applicant) and signature of the permit applicant, the proposed location of the fireworks sales booth, a site plan for the sales booth, the written consent of the owner of the property upon which the proposed sales booth will be located and such other information as the planning director may deem necessary to properly implement and administer the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2013-02 §1; Ord. 99-03 §1).

 

8.30.050 Submittal and review of applications.
        A.    All applications shall be submitted to the planning director on or before June 1st of each year. Each application must be complete and contain all required information. Any application which is not properly completed and submitted to the office of the planning director by June 1st may not be considered due to time constraints in coordinating with other agencies involved in the approval process.

        B.     The planning director, or designee, shall review all such applications, and shall consult with the planning department to insure that the proposed location meets existing zoning regulations and does not create pedestrian or vehicular traffic hazards. (Ord. 2013-02 §1; Ord. 99-03 §1).

 

8.30.060 Issuance of temporary use permits.
        The planning director, or designee, shall issue a temporary use permit to each qualified applicant who has submitted a timely completed application. Each permittee shall comply with all of the provisions of this chapter and such rules and regulations as may be established by the planning director pursuant to the authority granted in Section 8.30.070 of this chapter. (Ord. 2013-02 §1; Ord. 99-03 §1).

 

8.30.070 Rules and regulations.
        The planning director shall have authority to adopt and implement such administrative rules and regulations as may be required to: (1) provide for the orderly administration of this chapter; (2) insure compliance with all rules and regulations required by state law and the rules and regulations of the state fire marshal and Stanislaus consolidated fire protection district; and (3) insure the safety of the booth structure and the sales operations.

        In addition, the following rules and regulations shall apply:

        A.    Each proposed fireworks sales booth for which a temporary use permit is issued shall be required to meet and comply with all regulations and site location requirements established by the state fire marshal and the Stanislaus consolidated fire protection district.

        B.     All such fireworks sales booths shall be located only upon property that is zoned for commercial or industrial uses.

        C.     Each applicant shall be limited to one booth, which permit shall authorize the sale of fireworks at only the approved site location shown on the permit. (Ord. 2013-02 §1; Ord. 99-03 §1).

 

8.30.080 Operation of fireworks booth only by permit.
        A.    It is unlawful for the permittee organization to permit any person other than the permittee organization to operate the booth for which the permit is issued or to otherwise participate in the profits of the operation of such booth.

        B.     It is unlawful for the permittee organization to permit any person other than the individuals who are members of the permittee organization, their spouses or adult children or volunteers to whom no compensation is paid, to sell or otherwise participate in the sale of fireworks at such booth.

        C.     It is unlawful for the permittee organization to pay any consideration to any person for selling or otherwise participating in the sale of fireworks at such booth, except the hiring of a night watchperson or security officer. (Ord. 2013-02 §1; Ord. 99-03 §1).

 

8.30.090 Nontransferability of permit—Posting of permit.
        A.    Permits for fireworks sales booths issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter are not transferable by the holder of the permit to any person or other nonprofit organization. The permit may be used only by the nonprofit organization to whom it is issued for the purpose of operating a single fireworks sales booth at the approved location as indicated on the permit.

        B.     A copy of the permit shall be posted in a conspicuous location within the interior portion of the fireworks sales booth at all times.

        C.     A sign shall be affixed to the front exterior portion of the fireworks booth, in letters at least six inches in height, identifying the name of the nonprofit organization to whom the permit was issued. (Ord. 2013-02 §1; Ord. 99-03 §1).

 

8.30.100 Enforcement officer—Remedies.
        The planning director, or designee, shall serve as the enforcement officer, and shall be responsible for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. In addition to the penalties set forth in Section 8.30.110, the enforcement officer shall have the authority to immediately suspend or revoke the permit of any fireworks sales booth which has conducted its operations in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, state law, the rules and regulations of the state fire marshal and the Stanislaus consolidated fire protection district, or the rules and regulations of the planning director promulgated pursuant to Section 8.30.070. Upon suspension or revocation of a permit, all sales activity shall immediately cease. (Ord. 2013-02 §1; Ord. 99-03 §1).

 

8.30.110 Penalties.
        Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of Section 1.12.020 of this code. (Ord. 2013-02 §1; Ord. 99-03 §1).

 

8.30.120 Fees.
        Applicants for a permit under this chapter, and holders of permits issued pursuant to this chapter, shall pay such application fees and inspection fees as may be established by resolution of the city council, and shall pay the business license fees established pursuant to Title 5 of this code. (Ord. 2013-02 §1; Ord. 99-03 §1).

 

8.30.130 This chapter shall be paramount.
        It is the intention of the city council that the provisions of this chapter shall govern the sale of fireworks within the city, and that such provisions shall be paramount to any other provisions of this code that are inconsistent with the provisions contained in this chapter. (Ord. 2013-02 §1; Ord. 99-03 §1).

Chapter 8.34 CANNABIS REGULATIONS
Article 1. Cannabis Business Pilot Program
8.34.010 Legislative intent.
        It is the intent of the city to establish a cannabis business pilot program to regulate commercial cannabis activities pursuant to state law and to discourage violations of related state law, especially those laws that prohibit the sale, use, or distribution of cannabis and cannabis products to minors. It is not the intent of the city to expand, reduce, or alter the penalties for violations of state cannabis laws. (Ord. 2019-05 §1).

 

8.34.020 Definitions.
        “Bureau” means the Bureau of Cannabis Control within the Department of Consumer Affairs, formerly named the Bureau of Marijuana Control, the Bureau of Medical Cannabis Regulation, and the Bureau of Medical Marijuana Regulation.

        “Business” means a profession, trade, occupation, gainful activity, and all and every kind of calling whether or not carried on for profit.

        “Cannabis” means all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa Linnaeus, Cannabis indica, or Cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin. “Cannabis” also means the separated resin, whether crude or purified, obtained from cannabis. “Cannabis” does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination. “Cannabis” does not mean “industrial hemp” as defined by Section 11018.5 of the Health and Safety Code.

        “Cannabis business” means any business engaged in commercial cannabis activity. “Cannabis business” does not include any of the following:

        1.     A clinic licensed pursuant to Chapter 1 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code.

        2.     A residential care facility for persons with chronic life-threatening illness licensed pursuant to Chapter 3.01 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code.

        3.     A residential care facility for the elderly licensed pursuant to Chapter 3.2 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code.

        4.     A residential hospice or a home health agency licensed pursuant to Chapter 8 and Chapter 8.5 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code.

        5.     The cultivation, delivery, gift, or furnishing of cannabis by a qualified patient, a primary caregiver, or other person with an identification card as defined by Section 11362.7 of Health and Safety Code provided such activity complies strictly with all applicable state law, including, but not limited to, Sections 11362.5 and 11362.765 of the Health and Safety Code.

        “Cannabis cultivation business” means any cannabis business that, pursuant to a Type 1, Type 1A, Type 1B, Type 1C, Type 2, Type 2A, Type 2B, Type 3, Type 3A, Type 3B, Type 4, Type 5, Type 5A, Type 5B, or Type 12 state cannabis license, or their successors, cultivates cannabis or cannabis products.

        “Cannabis delivery” means the commercial transfer of cannabis or cannabis products to a customer. “Cannabis delivery” also includes the use by a retailer of any technology platform.

        “Cannabis delivery business” means any cannabis business that, pursuant to a Type 10 state cannabis license, or its successors, delivers, makes available, or distributes cannabis and cannabis products to a consumer.

        “Cannabis dispensary” means any cannabis business where medicinal or adult-use cannabis or cannabis products are sold at retail, pursuant to a Type 10 state cannabis license, or its successors. A cannabis dispensary includes a cannabis business that provides cannabis deliveries.

        “Cannabis distribution business” means any cannabis business that, pursuant to a Type 11 or Type 13 state cannabis license, or their successors, procures, sells, or transports cannabis and cannabis products between cannabis businesses.

        “Cannabis manufacturing business” means any cannabis business that, pursuant to a Type 6, Type 7, or Type 12 state cannabis license, or their successors, manufactures cannabis or cannabis products.

        “Cannabis product” means cannabis that has undergone a process whereby the plant material has been transformed into a concentrate, including, but not limited to, concentrated cannabis, or an edible or topical product containing cannabis or concentrated cannabis and other ingredients.

        “Cannabis testing laboratory” means a cannabis business that tests cannabis or cannabis products pursuant to a Type 8 state cannabis license, or its successors.

        “City” means the city of Waterford, a municipal corporation of the state of California, in its present incorporated form or in any later reorganized, consolidated, enlarged, or reincorporated form.

        “Commercial cannabis activity” includes the cultivation, manufacture, distribution, processing, storing, laboratory testing, packaging, labeling, transportation, delivery, or sale of cannabis or cannabis products that requires a state license.

        “Commercial cannabis waste” means cannabis plants and plant materials that are discarded by a cannabis business, including, but not limited to, extra vegetative plants, failed clones, and harvest waste.

        “Cultivation” means any activity involving the planting, growing, harvesting, processing, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of cannabis.

        “Day care center” means any licensed child day care facility other than a small or large day care home, including infant centers and preschools.

        “Employee permit” means the permit required by this chapter for every employee or independent contractor employed by a cannabis business.

        “Juvenile” means any natural person who is under the age of eighteen years.

        “License” means a state license issued pursuant to Business and Professions Code Section 26000.

        “Manufacture” means to compound, blend, extract, infuse, or otherwise make or prepare a cannabis product.

        “Person” means an individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, limited liability company, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit and includes the plural as well as the singular number.

        “Primary caregiver” has the same meaning as that term is defined by Section 11362.7 of the Health and Safety Code.

        “Qualified patient” has the same meaning as that term is defined by Section 11362.7 of the Health and Safety Code.

        “School” means any public or private school providing instruction in kindergarten or grades 1-12, inclusive, but does not include any private school where education is primarily conducted in private homes. (Ord. 2019-05 §1).

 

8.34.030 State and local requirements.
        A.    Any cannabis business that does not have the applicable state license is prohibited within the city.

        B.     Any cannabis business allowed in the city shall obtain all of the following:

        1.     A development agreement; and

        2.     A city business license; and

        3.     A conditional use permit.

        C.     All cannabis businesses shall maintain compliance with Title 17 of the Waterford Municipal Code.

        D.    At the time of application to the city, every cannabis business applicant shall submit a copy of its state license or state license application required for its operation.

        E.     A cannabis businesses application may be denied by the city at its sole discretion if the business is located to near a city school, day care center or church in existence at the time a business submits an application to operate a cannabis business. (Ord. 2019-05 §1).

 

8.34.040 Cannabis dispensaries.
        A.    Up to two cannabis dispensaries may be permitted pursuant to a development agreement and a conditional use permit, subject to the requirements in Title 17 of the Waterford Municipal Code.

        B.     Cannabis dispensaries shall only be allowed within fully enclosed buildings.

        C.     Any commercial cannabis activity related to delivery shall maintain all applicable state licenses and locally required permits and licenses.

        D.    All cannabis dispensaries shall maintain all applicable state licenses and comply with all of the following:

        1.     Floor Plan. A scaled floor plan for each level of each building that makes up the business site, including the entrances, exits, walls, and operating areas.

        2.     Site Plan. A scaled site plan of the business site, including all buildings, structures, driveways, parking lots, landscape areas, and boundaries.

        3.     Statement of Owner’s Consent. Written consent of the owner or landlord of the proposed site to operate a cannabis dispensary, specifying the street address and parcel number.

        4.     Security.

        a.     Security Surveillance Cameras. Security surveillance cameras and a video recording system shall be installed to monitor all doors into the buildings on the business site, the parking lot, loading areas, and all exterior sides of the property adjacent to the public rights of way. The cameras and recording system shall be of adequate quality, color rendition, and resolution to allow the identification of any individual present on the business site. The recording system shall be capable of exporting the recorded video in standard MPEG formats to another common medium, such as a DVD or USB drive.

        b.     Security Video Retention. Video from the security surveillance cameras shall be recording at all times (twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week) and the recording shall be maintained for at least ninety days. The video recordings shall be made available to the city upon request.

        c.     Alarm System. Professionally and centrally-monitored fire, robbery, and burglar alarm systems shall be installed and maintained in good working condition. The alarm system shall include a private security company that is required to respond to every alarm.

        5.     Odor Control. A detailed plan describing the air treatment system, or other methods that will be implemented to prevent cannabis odors from being detected outside the business site.

        6.     Tax Compliance. A cannabis dispensary shall maintain any applicable tax certificates and permits, and timely remit any taxes due to the appropriate government entity.

        7.     Insurance. A cannabis dispensary shall maintain certificates of commercial general liability insurance and endorsements and certificates of all other insurance related to the operation of the cannabis business.

        8.     Waste Management Plan. A cannabis dispensary shall submit and comply with an approved commercial cannabis waste management plan describing how commercial cannabis waste will be disposed. (Ord. 2019-05 §1).

 

8.34.050 Cannabis cultivation business.
        A.    Cannabis cultivation businesses may be permitted pursuant to a development agreement and a conditional use permit, subject to the requirements in Title 17 and Title 16 of the Waterford Municipal Code.

        B.     All commercial outdoor cultivation is prohibited within the city.

        C.     Cannabis cultivation businesses shall maintain all applicable state licenses and comply with all of the following:

        1.     Floor Plan. A scaled floor plan for each level of each building that makes up the business site, including the entrances, exits, walls, and operating areas. All cultivation and curing areas within a building on the cultivation site shall be separated from the main entrance and lobby and shall be secured by a lock accessible only to managers and staff of the cannabis cultivation business.

        2.     Site Plan. A scaled site plan of the business site, including all buildings, structures, driveways, parking lots, landscape areas, boundaries, lights, and canopy areas.

        3.     Statement of Owner’s Consent. Written consent of the owner or landlord of the proposed site to operate a cannabis cultivation business, specifying the street address and parcel number.

        4.     Security.

        a.     Security Surveillance Cameras. Security surveillance cameras and a video recording system shall be installed to monitor all doors into the buildings on the business site, the parking lot, loading areas, and all exterior sides of the property adjacent to the public rights-of-way. The cameras and recording system shall be of adequate quality, color rendition, and resolution to allow the identification of any individual present on the business site. The recording system shall be capable of exporting the recorded video in standard MPEG formats to another common medium, such as a DVD or USB drive.

        b.     Security Video Retention. Video from the security surveillance cameras shall be recording at all times (twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week) and the recording shall be maintained for at least ninety days. The video recordings shall be made available to the city upon request.

        c.     Alarm System. Professionally and centrally-monitored fire, robbery, and burglar alarm systems shall be installed and maintained in good working condition. The alarm system shall include a private security company that is required to respond to every alarm.

        5.     Odor Control. A detailed plan describing the air treatment system, or other methods that will be implemented to prevent cannabis odors from being detected outside the business site.

        6.     Cultivation Site Restricted. A cannabis cultivation business shall not open their cultivation site to the public. A cannabis business shall not allow anyone on the cultivation site, except for managers, staff, and other persons with a bona fide business or regulatory purpose for being there, such as contractors, inspectors, and cannabis transporters. A juvenile shall not be on the cultivation site or operate a cannabis cultivation business in any capacity, including, but not limited to, as a manager, staff, employee, contractor, or volunteer.

        7.     Tax Compliance. A cannabis cultivation business shall maintain any applicable tax certificates and permits, and timely remit any taxes due to the appropriate government entity.

        8.     Insurance. A cannabis cultivation business shall maintain certificates of commercial general liability insurance and endorsements and certificates of all other insurance related to the operation of the cannabis business.

        9.     Waste Management Plan. A cannabis cultivation business shall submit and comply with an approved commercial cannabis waste management plan describing how commercial cannabis waste will be disposed. (Ord. 2019-05 §1).

 

8.34.060 Cannabis testing laboratory.
        A.    Cannabis testing laboratories may be permitted pursuant to a development agreement and a conditional use permit, subject to the requirements in Title 17 and Title 16 of the Waterford Municipal Code.

        B.     Cannabis testing laboratories shall meet the accreditation criteria in the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) guidelines known as ISO 17025.

        C.     All cannabis testing laboratories shall maintain all applicable state licenses and maintain compliance with all of the following:

        1.     Floor Plan. A scaled floor plan for each level of each building that makes up the business site, including the entrances, exits, walls, and operating areas.

        2.     Site Plan. A scaled site plan of the business site, including all buildings, structures, driveways, parking lots, landscape areas, and boundaries. The site plan shall comply with all of the following:

        a.     Entrances. All entrances into the buildings on the laboratory site shall be locked at all times, with entry controlled by the cannabis testing laboratory business’ managers and staff.

        b.     Main Entrance and Lobby. The laboratory site shall have a building with a main entrance that is clearly visible from the public street or sidewalk. The main entrance shall be maintained clear of barriers, landscaping, and other obstructions. Inside of the main entrance, there shall be a lobby to receive persons into the site and to verify whether they are allowed in the testing areas.

        c.     Testing Area. All testing areas in any building on the laboratory site shall be separated from the main entrance and lobby and shall be secured by a lock accessible only to managers and staff, of the cannabis testing laboratory.

        d.     Transport Area. Each building with a testing area shall have an area designed for the secure transfer of cannabis from a vehicle to the testing area.

        e.     Storage Area. Each building with a testing area shall have adequate storage space for cannabis that has been tested or is waiting to be tested. The storage areas shall be separated from the main entrance and lobby and shall be secured by a lock accessible only to managers and staff, of the cannabis testing laboratory.

        3.     Statement of Owner’s Consent. Written consent of the owner or landlord of the proposed site to operate a cannabis manufacturing business, specifying the street address and parcel number.

        4.     Security.

        a.     Security Surveillance Cameras. Security surveillance cameras and a video recording system shall be installed to monitor all doors into the buildings on the laboratory site, the parking lot, loading areas, and all exterior sides of the property adjacent to the public rights-of-way. The cameras and recording system shall be of adequate quality, color rendition, and resolution to allow the identification of any individual present on the laboratory site. The recording system shall be capable of exporting the recorded video in standard MPEG formats to another common medium, such as a DVD or USB drive.

        b.     Security Video Retention. Video from the security surveillance cameras shall be recording at all times (twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week) and the recording shall be maintained for at least ninety days. The video recordings shall be made available to the city upon request.

        c.     Alarm System. Professionally and centrally-monitored fire, robbery, and burglar alarm systems shall be installed and maintained in good working condition. The alarm system shall include a private security company that is required to respond to every alarm.

        5.     Odor Control. A detailed plan describing the air treatment system, or other methods that will be implemented to prevent cannabis odors from being detected outside the business site.

        6.     Tax Compliance. A cannabis testing business shall maintain any applicable tax certificates and permits, and timely remit any taxes due to the appropriate government entity.

        7.     Laboratory Site Restricted. A cannabis testing laboratory shall not open their laboratory site to the public. A cannabis testing laboratory shall not allow anyone on the laboratory site, except for managers, staff, and other persons with a bona fide business or regulatory purpose for being there; such as contractors, inspectors, and cannabis transporters. A manager must be on the laboratory site at all times any other person, except for security guards, is on the site. A juvenile shall not be on the laboratory site or operate a cannabis testing laboratory in any capacity, including, but not limited to, as a manager, staff, employee, contractor, or volunteer.

        8.     Insurance. A cannabis testing laboratory shall maintain certificates of commercial general liability insurance and endorsements and certificates of all other insurance related to the operation of the cannabis business.

        9.     Waste Management Plan. A cannabis testing laboratory shall submit and comply with an approved commercial cannabis waste management plan describing how commercial cannabis waste will be disposed. (Ord. 2019-05 §1).

 

8.34.070 Cannabis manufacturing business.
        A.    Cannabis manufacturing businesses may be permitted pursuant to a development agreement and a conditional use permit, subject to the requirements in Title 17 and title 16 of the Waterford Municipal Code.

        B.     Cannabis manufacturing businesses shall obtain all applicable licenses and maintain compliance with all of the following:

        1.     Floor Plan. A scaled floor plan for each level of each building that makes up the business site, including the entrances, exits, walls, and operating areas. All manufacturing areas within a building on the manufacturing site shall be separated from the main entrance and lobby and shall be secured by a lock accessible only to managers and staff of the cannabis manufacturing business.

        2.     Site Plan. A scaled site plan of the business site, including all buildings, structures, driveways, parking lots, landscape areas, and boundaries.

        3.     Statement of Owner’s Consent. Written consent of the owner or landlord of the proposed site to operate a cannabis manufacturing business, specifying the street address and parcel number.

        4.     Security.

        a.     Security Surveillance Cameras. Security surveillance cameras and a video recording system shall be installed to monitor all doors into the buildings on the business site, the parking lot, loading areas, and all exterior sides of the property adjacent to the public rights-of-way. The cameras and recording system shall be of adequate quality, color rendition, and resolution to allow the identification of any individual present on the manufacturing site. The recording system shall be capable of exporting the recorded video in standard MPEG formats to another common medium, such as a DVD or USB drive.

        b.     Security Video Retention. Video from the security surveillance cameras shall be recording at all times (twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week) and the recording shall be maintained for at least ninety days. The video recordings shall be made available to the city upon request.

        c.     Alarm System. Professionally and centrally-monitored fire, robbery, and burglar alarm systems shall be installed and maintained in good working condition. The alarm system shall include a private security company that is required to respond to every alarm.

        5.     Odor Control. A detailed plan describing the air treatment system, or other methods that will be implemented to prevent cannabis odors from being detected outside the business site.

        6.     Manufacturing Site Restricted. A cannabis manufacturing business shall not open their manufacturing site to the public. A cannabis manufacturing business shall not allow anyone on the manufacturing site, except for managers, staff, and other persons with a bona fide business or regulatory purpose for being there, such as contractors, inspectors, and cannabis transporters. A manager must be on the manufacturing site at all times any other person, except for security guards, is on the site. A juvenile shall not be on the manufacturing site or operate a cannabis manufacturing business in any capacity, including, but not limited to, as a manager, staff, employee, contractor, or volunteer.

        7.     Tax Compliance. A cannabis manufacturing business shall maintain any applicable tax certificates and permits, and timely remit any taxes due to the appropriate government entity.

        8.     Insurance. A cannabis manufacturing business shall maintain certificates of commercial general liability insurance and endorsements and certificates of all other insurance related to the operation of the cannabis business.

        9.     Waste Management Plan. A cannabis manufacturing business shall submit and comply with an approved commercial cannabis waste management plan describing how commercial cannabis waste will be disposed. (Ord. 2019-05 §1).

 

8.34.080 Cannabis distribution business.
        A.    Cannabis distribution businesses may be permitted pursuant to a development agreement and a conditional use permit, subject to the requirements in Title 17 and Title 16 of the Waterford Municipal Code.

        B.     All cannabis distribution businesses shall obtain all applicable state licenses and maintain compliance with all of the following:

        1.     Floor Plan. A scaled floor plan for each level of each building that makes up the business site, including the entrances, exits, walls, and operating areas. All storage areas within a building on the distribution site shall be separated from the main entrance and lobby and shall be secured by a lock accessible only to managers and staff of the cannabis distribution business.

        2.     Site Plan. A scaled site plan of the business site, including all buildings, structures, driveways, parking lots, landscape areas, and boundaries.

        3.     Statement of Owner’s Consent. Written consent of the owner or landlord of the proposed site to operate a cannabis distribution business, specifying the street address and parcel number.

        4.     Security.

        a.     Security Surveillance Cameras. Security surveillance cameras and a video recording system shall be installed to monitor all doors into the buildings on the business site, the parking lot, loading areas, and all exterior sides of the property adjacent to the public rights of way. The cameras and recording system shall be of adequate quality, color rendition, and resolution to allow the identification of any individual present on the distribution site. The recording system shall be capable of exporting the recorded video in standard MPEG formats to another common medium, such as a DVD or USB drive.

        b.     Security Video Retention. Video from the security surveillance cameras shall be recording at all times (twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week) and the recording shall be maintained for at least ninety days. The video recordings shall be made available to the city upon request.

        c.     Alarm System. Professionally and centrally-monitored fire, robbery, and burglar alarm systems shall be installed and maintained in good working condition. The alarm system shall include a private security company that is required to respond to every alarm.

        5.     Odor Control. A detailed plan describing the air treatment system, or other methods that will be implemented to prevent cannabis odors from being detected outside the business site.

        6.     Distribution Site Restricted. A cannabis distribution business shall not open their distribution site to the public. A cannabis distribution business shall not allow anyone on the distribution site, except for managers, staff, and other persons with a bona fide business or regulatory purpose for being there, such as contractors, inspectors, and cannabis transporters. A juvenile shall not be on the distribution site or operate a cannabis distribution business in any capacity, including, but not limited to, as a manager, staff, employee, contractor, or volunteer.

        7.     Tax Compliance. A cannabis distribution business shall maintain any applicable tax certificates and permits, and timely remit any taxes due to the appropriate government entity.

        8.     Insurance. A cannabis distribution business shall maintain certificates of commercial general liability insurance and endorsements and certificates of all other insurance related to the operation of the cannabis business.

        9.     Waste Management Plan. A cannabis distribution business shall submit and comply with an approved commercial cannabis waste management plan describing how commercial cannabis waste will be disposed. (Ord. 2019-05 §1).

 

8.34.090 Inspections and record retention.
        A.    Authority to Inspect.

        1.     City officials or law enforcement may reasonably enter and inspect the cannabis business at any time between the hours of six a.m. and eleven p.m. on any day of the week, or at any reasonable time, to ensure compliance and enforcement of this chapter.

        2.     City officials may inspect and demand copies of records maintained by the cannabis business, except for private medical records, that shall be made available to law enforcement agencies only pursuant to a properly executed search warrant, subpoena, or court order.

        3.     A person shall not refuse, impede, obstruct, or interfere with an inspection pursuant to this chapter.

        B.     Records. A cannabis business shall maintain accurate records of commercial cannabis activity for a minimum of seven years in accordance with Chapter 16 (commencing with Section 2610) of Division 10 of the Business and Professions Code. (Ord. 2019-05 §1).

 

8.34.100 Appeals.
        A.    An applicant or cannabis business may appeal any adverse action taken under this chapter to the city council.

        B.     All appeals taken under this chapter must be taken within thirty days after the adverse action by filing with the office of the city clerk a written notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. An appeal shall be accompanied by a non-refundable filing fee, as established by resolution adopted by the city council from time to time.

        C.     The city clerk, upon the filing of such appeal and payment of an appeal fee, shall place the matter upon the agenda for the next regular meeting of the city council occurring not earlier than five days after the filing of the appeal, and shall notify the appealing permit applicant by letter of the meeting date and place at which the appeal will be heard. (Ord. 2019-05 §1).

 

8.34.110 Penalties.
        A.    Any use or condition caused, or permitted to exist, in violation of any provision of this chapter shall be, and hereby is declared to be, a public nuisance and may be abated by the city as provided in the Waterford Municipal Code or under any applicable provision of state law.

        B.     In addition to any other enforcement permitted by this chapter, the city attorney may bring a civil action for injunctive relief and civil penalties against any person or entity that violates this chapter. In any civil action brought pursuant to this chapter, a court of competent jurisdiction may award reasonable attorney’s fees and costs to the prevailing party.

        C.     Violations of this chapter shall be subject to an administrative penalty. The amount of the administrative penalty shall be five hundred dollars  for the first offense within a twelve-month period, seven hundred and fifty dollars or the second offense within a twelve-month period, and one thousand dollars for any subsequent offense within a twelve-month period.

        D.    Penalty Enhancements.

        1.     In addition to any other enforcement permitted by this chapter, the city may double any administrative penalty for egregious violations of this chapter. Egregious violations include: (a) the unpermitted use of volatile solvents; (b) the operation of a cannabis business without city approval; or (c) a cannabis business allowing minors to consume or possess cannabis or cannabis products.

        2.     If a cannabis business receives four or more penalties for violating this chapter within any twelve-month period, that business shall be immediately prohibited from operating within the city. (Ord. 2019-05 §1).

 

8.34.120 Cost recovery.
        A.    The city shall be entitled to recover its abatement and enforcement costs incurred in obtaining compliance with this chapter. Costs incurred by the city are recoverable even if a public nuisance, a violation of the Waterford Municipal Code, or other applicable law is corrected by the property owner or other responsible party.

        B.     The cost of abating a public nuisance or enforcing this chapter shall either be a special assessment and lien on the subject property or the personal obligation of the owner of the subject property or the responsible party. If there is more than one responsible party, each party shall be jointly and severally liable for the costs.

        C.     For purposes of this chapter, the following additional definitions shall apply:

        1.     “Abatement costs” include the actual and reasonable costs incurred by the city to abate a public nuisance. These costs include all direct and indirect costs to the city that result from the total abatement action, including, but not limited to, investigation costs, costs to enforce the Waterford Municipal Code and any applicable state or county law, clerical and administrative costs to process paperwork, costs incurred to provide notices and prepare for and conduct administrative appeal hearings, and costs to conduct actual abatement of the nuisance. Costs include personnel costs, administrative overhead, costs for equipment such as cameras and vehicles, staff time to hire a contractor, and reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by city.

        2.     “Enforcement costs” include all actual and reasonable costs incurred by the city to enforce compliance with the Waterford Municipal Code and any applicable state, county, or city public health and safety law that are not included within abatement costs. Enforcement costs shall also include, but are not limited to, costs of fringe benefits for personnel, administrative overhead, costs of equipment, costs of materials, costs related to investigations, costs related to issuing and defending administrative or court citations, costs incurred investigating and abating violations of the Waterford Municipal Code or state or county law violations, and reasonable attorneys’ fees related to these activities.

        3.     “Responsible party” means a person or entity responsible for creating, causing, committing, or maintaining the violation of this chapter or state or county law.

        4.     “Subject property” means the real property that is the subject of any abatement or enforcement action by the city for which the city incurred costs and seeks recovery under this chapter. (Ord. 2019-05 §1).

Title 9 PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE
Chapter 9.04 INTERFERENCE WITH EMERGENCY VEHICLES
Chapter 9.08 FORTUNETELLING
Chapter 9.12 TRESPASSING AND LOITERING
Chapter 9.13 PROHIBITED ACTS OF SOLICITATION
Chapter 9.14 DEFACEMENT OF PROPERTY
Chapter 9.16 MINORS
Chapter 9.17 PROHIBITION AGAINST UNDERAGE DRINKING AND SOCIAL HOST LIABILITY
Chapter 9.18 FIREARMS
Chapter 9.22 DISPLAY OF MATERIALS HARMFUL TO MINORS

Chapter 9.04 INTERFERENCE WITH EMERGENCY VEHICLES
9.04.010 Findings—Purpose.
        The city council finds and declares that because of the installation of fire hydrants in alleys in many subdivisions in the city limits and the necessary use of such alleys by authorized emergency vehicles, the public peace, health and safety require that such alleys be free from parked vehicles or other obstructions at all times. It is the purpose of this chapter to require that all alleys in the city limits be kept clear of vehicles and obstructions at all hours of the day and night. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 70-05 §1(4), 1970).

 

9.04.020 Definitions.
        Unless the context otherwise requires, the definitions of words and phrases set forth in this section shall govern the construction of this chapter:

        A.    “Alley” means any public way, lane or place other than a public highway, private road or driveway as defined in this section located in the city limits and open to the use of the public for vehicular travel whether or not the same have been accepted and maintained by the city.

        B.     “Authorized emergency vehicle” means all authorized emergency vehicles as defined in the Vehicle Code of California.

        C.     “Private road or driveway” means a way or place in private ownership and used for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or implied permission from the owner but not by other members of the public.

        D.    “Public highway” means any highway, road, street, way or place of whatever nature outside of incorporated municipalities open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel.

        E.     “Vehicle” means a device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be propelled, moved or drawn upon a public highway, including a bicycle or such other vehicle of propulsion moved by human power. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(4), 1970).

 

9.04.030 Applicability of provisions.
        The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any persons operating any authorized emergency vehicles as defined in this chapter, nor to any persons acting in compliance with the lawful and proper directions of a peace officer or officer of any fire department. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(4), 1970).

 

9.04.040 Blocking passage prohibited.
        It is unlawful for any person to operate, drive, stop or park any vehicle upon a public highway or any private road or driveway in such a manner as to interfere with or obstruct the operation of any authorized emergency vehicle. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(4), 1970).

 

9.04.050 Parking in alley prohibited.
        It is unlawful for any person to park or stand any vehicle in or upon any alley unless such parking or standing is necessary for the loading or unloading of passengers or materials in or from such vehicle, and the operator of such vehicle remains then and there in immediate attendance of such vehicle. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(4), 1970).

 

9.04.060 Blocking alley prohibited.
        It is unlawful for any person to place or deposit any material or object in any alley which will in any manner obstruct the free passage of traffic in such alley, or the use of such alley by authorized emergency vehicles. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(4), 1970).

 

9.04.070 Parking within one thousand feet prohibited.
        It is unlawful for any person to park, stop, or abandon any vehicle within one thousand feet of any authorized emergency vehicle when such authorized emergency vehicle is actively engaged at the scene of any fire, accident, explosion, flood, riot, earthquake or any other emergency. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(4), 1970).

 

9.04.080 Assembling within one thousand feet prohibited.
        It is unlawful for any person to remain and for two or more persons to gather, collect, assemble or congregate within one thousand feet of the scene of any fire, accident, explosion, flood, riot, earthquake or any other emergency when any authorized emergency vehicle is actively engaged thereat. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(4), 1970).

Chapter 9.08 FORTUNETELLING
9.08.010 Fortunetelling prohibited.
        It is unlawful for any person, firm, association or corporation to engage in, or carry on business in the city limits as a fortuneteller, soothsayer, mind reader, palm reader, clairvoyant, astrologer, phrenologist or seer for a fee, or other remuneration, or to accept a fee, remuneration or any representative or article of value for fortunetelling, soothsaying, mind reading, palm reading, clairvoyance, astrology or phrenology in said city limits. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(2)(part), 1970).

Chapter 9.12 TRESPASSING AND LOITERING
9.12.010 Trespass prohibited.
        No person, without permission, express or implied, of the owner or lessee or other person in charge of private property or business premises, shall enter upon such private property or business premises after having been notified by the owner or lessee or other person in charge thereof to keep off or keep away therefrom. (Ord. 79-2 §2, 1979).

 

9.12.020 Loitering—Prohibited.
        No person shall remain on any private property or business premises, after being notified by the owner or lessee or other person in charge thereof to remove therefrom. (Ord. 79-7 §1, 1979).

 

9.12.030 Loitering—Creation of disturbance.
        A.    No person shall remain upon any sidewalk or other public right-of-way adjacent to any private property or business premises, after being notified by the owner or lessee or other person in charge thereof to remove therefrom if said person is loitering, as defined in this section, in such a manner as to:

        1.     Create or cause to be created a danger of a breach of the peace;

        2.     Create or cause to be created any disturbance, harassment of or annoyance to the comfort and repose of any person;

        3.     Create or cause to be created any interference with the operation or functioning of any business;

        4.     Obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles;

        5.     Obstruct, molest or interfere with any person lawfully in any public place;

        6.     Create or cause to be created the making of unsolicited remarks, sounds, noises or gestures of an offensive, disgusting or insulting nature, or which are calculated to annoy or disturb the person to, or in whose hearing or presence, they are made.

        B.     “Loitering” as used in this section means remaining idle in essentially one location and shall include the concept of spending time idly, loafing, or walking about aimlessly, and shall include all manifestations of the colloquial expression “hanging around.” (Ord. 79-7 §3, 1979).

 

9.12.040 Exceptions.
        This chapter shall not apply in any of the following instances:

        A.    Where its application results in or is coupled with an act prohibited by the Unruh Civil Rights Act or any other provision of law relating to prohibited discrimination against any person on account of color, race, religion, creed, ancestry or national origin;

        B.     Where its application results in or is coupled with an act prohibited by Section 365 of the California Penal Code or any other provision of law relating to duties of innkeepers and common carriers;

        C.     Where its application would result in an interference with or inhibition of peaceful labor picketing or other lawful labor activities;

        D.    Where its application would result in an interference or inhibition of any other exercise of a constitutionally protected right of freedom of speech such as, but not limited to, peaceful expressions of political or religious opinions, not involving offensive personal conduct; or

        E.     Where the person who is upon another’s private property or business premises is there under claim or color of legal right. This exception is applicable, but not limited to, the following types of situations involving disputes wherein the participants have available to them practical and effective civil remedies:

        1.     Marital and post-marital disputes,

        2.     Child custody or visitation disputes,

        3.     Disputes regarding title to or rights in real property,

        4.     Landlord-tenant disputes,

        5.     Disputes between members of the same family or between persons residing on the property concerned up until the time of the dispute,

        6.     Employer-employee disputes,

        7.     Business-type disputes such as those between partners,

        8.     Debtor-creditor disputes, and

        9.     Instances wherein the person claims rights to be present pursuant to order, decree or process of a court. (Ord. 79-7 §4, 1979).

Chapter 9.13 PROHIBITED ACTS OF SOLICITATION
9.13.010 Definitions.
        As used in this chapter the following meanings shall apply:

        A.    “Employment” means and includes services, industry or labor performed by a person for wages or other compensation or under any contract of hire, written, oral, express or implied.

        B.     “Solicit” means and includes any request, offer, enticement or action which announces the availability for or of employment, the sale of goods, or a request for money or other property, or any request, offer, enticement or action which seeks to purchase or secure goods or employment, or to make a contribution of money or other property. As defined herein, a solicitation shall be deemed complete when made, whether or not an actual employment relationship is created, a transaction is completed, or an exchange of money or other property takes place.

        C.     “Business” means and includes any type of produce, goods, service, performance or activity which is provided or performed, or offered to be provided or performed, in exchange for money, labor, goods or any other form of consideration. (Ord. 02-03 §1, 2002).

 

9.13.020 Solicitation of persons traveling in vehicles on public right-of-way prohibited—Exception—Permit.
        It is unlawful for any person, while standing in any portion of the public right-of-way, including but not limited to public streets, highways, sidewalks and driveways, to solicit, or attempt to solicit, employment, business, or contributions of money or other property, from any person traveling in a vehicle along a public right-of-way, including, but not limited to, public streets, highways or driveways. The provisions of this section shall only be operative in the municipal area of the city of Waterford. This section is not applicable to itinerant vendors holding valid permits issued in accordance with the Waterford Municipal Code. (Ord. 02-03 §1, 2002).

 

9.13.030 Solicitation by persons in moving vehicles on public right-of-way prohibited.
        It is unlawful for any person, while the occupant of a moving vehicle, to solicit, or attempt to solicit, employment, business, or contributions of money or other property, from a person who is within the public right-of-way, including but not limited to a public street, highway, sidewalk or driveway. The provisions of this section shall only be operative in the municipal area of the city of Waterford. (Ord. 02-03 §1, 2002).

 

9.13.040 Solicitation prohibited in commercial parking areas—Exception—Written policy and notice.
        A.    No person shall solicit, or attempt to solicit, from a location within a commercial parking area other than an area within or served by such parking area which is authorized by the property owner or the property owner’s authorized representative for such solicitations. This section shall not apply to a solicitation to perform employment or business for the owner or lawful tenants of the subject premises. (Ord. 20-03 §1, 2002).

        B.     For purposes of this section, “commercial parking area” means privately owned property which is designed or used primarily for the parking of vehicles and which adjoins one or more commercial establishments. This section shall only apply to commercial parking areas where the following occurs:

        1.     The owner or person in lawful possession of the commercial parking area establishes a written policy which provides an area or areas for lawful solicitation in locations which are accessible to the public and do not interfere with normal business operations of the commercial premises; and

        2.     The owner or person in lawful possession of the commercial parking area has caused a notice to be posted in a conspicuous place at each entrance to such commercial parking area not less than eighteen by twenty-four inches in size with lettering not less than one inch in height and not to exceed in total area, six square feet. The notice shall be in substantially the following form:

 

It is an infraction to solicit in areas of this commercial parking lot which are not approved for such activity by the property owner, other than to perform employment or business for the owner or lawful tenants of the premises.

(Ord. 02-03 §1, 2002).

 

9.13.050 Loitering on median islands.
        It is unlawful for any person to stand or use the median island on a divided highway or median separating the frontage road from the main roadway for any period of time other than at an intersection as a pedestrian refuge while actively crossing such highway. (Ord. 02-03 §1, 2002).

 

9.13.060 Violation—Penalty.
        A.    Every person violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of an infraction punishable in accordance with Chapter 1.12.

        B.     Each person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each day during any portion of which the violation of or failure, neglect or refusal to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person. (Ord. 02-03 §1, 2002).

Chapter 9.14 DEFACEMENT OF PROPERTY
9.14.010 Purpose.
        The purpose of this legislation is to provide programs for removal of graffiti from public and private property within the city and to establish regulations designed to prevent and control the spread of graffiti in Waterford.

        The city council finds and determines that the increase of graffiti on both public and private buildings, structures, and in other places, creates a condition of blight within the city which can result in the deterioration of the property values, business opportunities, and enjoyment of life for persons using adjacent and surrounding properties. The council further finds and determines that graffiti is inconsistent with the city’s property maintenance goals, crime prevention programs, and aesthetic standards, and, unless graffiti is quickly removed from public and private properties, other properties soon become the target of graffiti. (Ord. 93-12 §1, 1993).

 

9.14.020 Definitions.
        As used in this chapter:

        A.    “Graffiti” means any inscription, word, figure, or design that is marked, etched, scratched, drawn, sprayed, painted, pasted or otherwise affixed to, or on, any surface to the extent that same was unauthorized by the owner thereof, or, despite authorization, is otherwise deemed by the city council to be a public nuisance.

        B.     “Property” means real or personal property, whether publicly or privately owned, within the city.

        C.     “Pressured container” means any can, bottle, spray device or other mechanism designed to propel liquid which contains ink, paint, dye or other similar substance which is expelled under pressure, either through the use of aerosol devices, pumps or similar propulsion devices.

        D.    “Ink marker” means any broad tipped marker pen with a tip of one quarter inch or greater in width.

        E.     “Paint stick” means any device containing a solid form of paint, chalk, wax, epoxy, or other similar substance capable of being applied to a surface and upon application leaving a mark upon property of at least one quarter inch or greater in width.

        F.     “Graffiti implement” means a pressurized container, ink marker, or paint stick. (Ord. 93-12 §1, 1993).

 

9.14.030 Graffiti declared a public nuisance.
        The city council hereby declares that graffiti is a public nuisance and is subject to punishment and abatement as prescribed in this code. (Ord. 93-12 §1, 1993).

 

9.14.040 Graffiti prohibited.
        A.    It is unlawful for any person to apply graffiti upon any property within the city.

        B.     It is unlawful for any person owning or otherwise being in control of any property within the city to maintain, permit or allow any graffiti to remain upon such property when the graffiti is visible from the street or other public or private property. (Ord. 93-12 §1, 1993).

 

9.14.050 Assisting in or encouraging violations.
        It is unlawful for any person to assist, aid, abet or encourage another to violate the provisions of this article by words or overt act. (Ord. 93-12 §1, 1993).

 

9.14.060 Punishment provisions.
        A.    Each violation of this chapter shall be punishable by: (1) a fine of one hundred twenty-five dollars for a first violation; (2) a fine of two hundred fifty dollars for a second violation within a year; (3) a fine of five hundred dollars for each additional violation within one year.

        B.     Where there has been a conviction, or guilty or nolo contendere plea of a violation of this chapter, the court shall, in addition to any fine imposed to this chapter, and at the city’s option, order the defendant to complete community service, including graffiti removal service, of not less than six hours and no more than forty-eight hours for a first conviction. Upon the second and subsequent conviction, a person shall be required, at the city’s option, to perform community service, including graffiti removal service of not less than forty-eight hours and no more than ninety-six hours. A defendant shall be ordered to complete community service during a time other than during his or her hours of school attendance or employment.

        C.     Where there has been a conviction, or guilty or nolo contendere plea of a violation of this chapter, the court shall, in addition to any punishment imposed pursuant to this chapter, and at the victim’s option, order the defendant to perform the necessary labor to cleanup, repair, or replace the property damaged by that person.

        D.    Where there has been a conviction, or guilty or nolo contendere plea of a violation of this chapter, the court shall, in addition to any punishment imposed pursuant to this chapter, and at the victim’s option, and as restitution, order the defendant to pay for any related costs incurred for the cleanup, repair, or replacement of the property damaged by that person.

        E.     If a minor is personally unable to pay any fine or restitution levied for violating any provision of this chapter, the parent or legal guardian of the minor shall be liable for payment of the fine and restitution. (Ord. 93-12 §1, 1993).

 

9.14.070 Removal of graffiti.
        A.    Graffiti on Public Property. Where graffiti exists on property owned by a public agency other than the city, then graffiti may be removed by the city with the consent of the public agency owning said property, and the city may proceed with any enforcement actions authorized by law against any person responsible for the graffiti. Any fines or penalties collected as a result of the arrest and conviction of any person for a violation of this chapter shall be credited to the city as reimbursement for its abatement of the graffiti.

        B.     Graffiti on Private Property.

        1.     Graffiti shall be removed from private property within fifteen calendar days after notification to the property owner by the city to remove such graffiti.

        2.     In the event a property owner fails to remove the graffiti after notice has been given, the city may, at its option, abate the graffiti as a nuisance, and the cost of such abatement may be placed as a lien or assessment against the property. (Ord. 93-12 §1, 1993).

 

9.14.080 Accessibility to graffiti implements.
        Every person, firm or entity who owns, conducts, operates, or manages a retail commercial establishment selling graffiti implements within the city of Waterford shall store, stock, keep or display for sale or transfer graffiti implements in an area secure and not accessible to the public in the regular course of business and accessible only to employees of such retail commercial establishments. (Ord. 93-12 §1, 1993).

 

9.14.090 Summary abatement.
        The city shall have the right but not the duty to obscure or remove, at its sole expense, any graffiti upon the exterior of walls or fences upon the perimeters of private property within the city. The city manager shall direct such abatement when he or she finds that the graffiti is plainly visible to the public and is detrimental to the health or welfare of city residents; and, in the case of publicly owned property, after securing the consent of and appropriate release by the public entity having jurisdiction over the property. In the case of privately owned property, the city shall attempt to provide three days’ notice of the planned abatement activities, but failure to do so or nonreceipt of any notice shall not invalidate the city’s powers hereunder. The provisions of this section authorize the removal of graffiti only upon the exterior of walls or fences upon the perimeter of private property. The scope of removal is limited to such areas as are determined appropriate by the city and not the repair or masking of a more extensive area. (Ord. 93-12 §1, 1993).

 

9.14.100 Reward.
        The city hereby offers a reward of one hundred dollars or such other sum as council may direct for information leading to the arrest and conviction of any person injuring, defacing, or destroying property by the application of graffiti. (Ord. 93-12 §1, 1993).

 

9.14.110 Cumulative remedies.
        The procedures set forth in this chapter are not exclusive and nothing contained herein shall be deemed to preclude the city attorney from initiation of any civil or criminal action or from the pursuit of any available remedy. (Ord. 93-12 §1, 1993).

Chapter 9.16 MINORS
9.16.010 Definitions.
        For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and phrases are defined, and certain provisions shall be contrasted as herein set out, unless it shall be apparent from their content that a different meaning is intended:

        A.    “Buildings and places open to the public where alcoholic beverages are sold” means, but is not limited to, any liquor store, liquor outlet, inn, tavern, bar, saloon, or any premises wherein the owner, tenant or occupant possesses and purveys alcoholic beverages to the public pursuant to an “on sale” or “off sale” liquor license of whatever classification.

        B.     “Curfew hours” means:

        1.     Eleven p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday or Thursday until six a.m. of the following day.

        2.     Twelve p.m. until six a.m. on any Friday or Saturday.

        C.     “Emergency” means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.

        D.    “Guardian” means:

        1.     A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or

        2.     At least seventeen years of age and authorized by an owner, operator or person in control of the premises.

        E.     “Loiter” means to linger, wait or delay in and about the places designated with not lawful purpose.

        F.     “Operator” means an individual, firm, association, partnership or corporation operating, managing or conducting any establishment. The term includes the members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a corporation.

        G.    “Remain” means to:

        1.     Linger or stay; or

        2.     Fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a police officer or the owner, operator or other person in control of the premises. (Ord. 97-02 §1, 1997; Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part) and Art. III §O, 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(2), 1970).

 

9.16.020 Offenses.
        A.    It is unlawful for any person under the age of seventeen years to remain in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, public places and public buildings or vacant lots between “curfew hours” of the day immediately following; provided, however, that the provisions of this section do not apply when the person is accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the person or when the person is returning directly home from a meeting, entertainment, recreational activity or dance, or when the person is going directly to or returning directly from work.

        B.     It is unlawful for any parent, guardian or person having a minor in his or her charge, after receiving notice of the apprehension, arrest or detention of said minor, to fail or neglect to go in person or send some suitable person after said minor so detained.

        C.     It is unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one to loiter on any highway, street, alley, sidewalk, public parking lot, parking lot open to the public use, any real property or structure of any kind without the consent of the owner, his or her agent or person in lawful possession thereof, within five hundred feet of buildings or places open to the public where alcoholic beverages are sold.

        D.    It is unlawful for an owner, operator or any employee of an establishment to knowingly allow a minor to remain upon the premises of the establishment during curfew hours. (Ord. 97-02 §1, 1997; Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part) and Art. III §O, 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(2)(part), 1970).

 

9.16.030 Limitations to offenses.
        The offenses listed in Section 9.16.020 are limited and shall not apply in the following circumstances:

        A.    When the minor is accompanied by the minor’s parent or guardian;

        B.     When the minor is on an errand at the direction of the minor’s parent or guardian, without any detour or stop;

        C.     When the minor is in a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel, or other travel not in violation of this chapter;

        D.    When the minor is engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;

        E.     When the minor is involved in an emergency;

        F.     When the minor is on the sidewalk abutting the minor’s residence or abutting the residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the police department about the minor’s presence;

        G.    When the minor is attending an official school, religious or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city of Waterford, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school, religious or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city of Waterford, a civic organization or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor;

        H.    When the minor is exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and the right of assembly; or

        I.      When the minor is married or has been emancipated in accordance with California Family Code Sections 7000 et seq. (Ord. 97-02 §1, 1997; Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part) and Art. III §O, 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(2)(part), 1970).

 

9.16.040 Enforcement.
        A.    Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a police officer shall ask the apparent offender’s age and reason for being in the public place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred, as set forth above, and with regard to the limitations to offenses.

        B.     Any minor under the age of seventeen years found in violation of this chapter shall be immediately apprehended and taken to the proper detention place for minors including, but not limited to, that particular minor’s home and the city of Waterford police department and there detained until the arrival of the parent, guardian or proper person to care for said minor. (Ord. 97-02 §1, 1997; Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part) and Art. III §O, 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(2), 1970).

 

9.16.050 Penalties.
        A.    A person who violates a provision of this chapter is guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of a day during which the violation is committed, continued or permitted. Each offense, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars.

        B.     Every parent, guardian or other person having the legal care, custody or control of any person under the age of seventeen years who permits such person to violate the provisions of this chapter may be punished as an infraction by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars or as a misdemeanor by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars and/or incarceration not to exceed one year. (Ord. 97-02 §1, 1997; Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part) and Art. III §O, 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(2)(part), 1970).

Chapter 9.17 PROHIBITION AGAINST UNDERAGE DRINKING AND SOCIAL HOST LIABILITY
9.17.010 Title.
        This chapter shall be known as the “Prohibition Against Underage Drinking and Social Host Liability Ordinance.” (Ord. 07-05 §1, 2007).

 

9.17.020 Legislative findings.
        A.    Minors often obtain, possess, or consume alcoholic beverages at gatherings held at private residences or other private property, places or premises, including rented commercial premises which are under the control of a person who knows or should know of the consumption of alcoholic beverages by minors yet persons responsible for the occurrence of such gatherings often fail to take reasonable steps to prevent the consumption of alcoholic beverages by minors at these gatherings.

        B.     Consumption of alcoholic beverages by minors who are under the legal age to consume alcohol in the state of California, is harmful to the minors themselves and poses an immediate threat to the public health, safety and welfare in that it increases alcohol abuse by minors, physical altercations, violent crimes including rape and other sexual offenses, accidental injury, neighborhood vandalism, and excessive noise disturbance, all of which may require intervention by local law enforcement.

        C.     Law enforcement responses to gatherings involving consumption of alcoholic beverages by minors often requires extensive resources to manage the incident. Further, when law enforcement personnel respond to gatherings involving the consumption of alcoholic beverages by minors it takes away valuable resources from other service calls in the community, thereby placing the community at increased risk. Law enforcement, fire and emergency response services are not currently reimbursed for the response cost associated when called to a premises or gathering where minors obtain, possess, or consume alcoholic beverages.

        D.    The prohibitions found in this chapter are reasonable and expected to deter the consumption of alcoholic beverages by minors by holding responsible persons who know of the illegal conduct yet fail to stop or prevent it. In addition, the revenue received by the city of Waterford after cost reimbursement will be directed toward alcohol abuse and prevention education programs in the community. (Ord. 07-05 §1, 2007).

 

9.17.030 Intent and purpose.
        The purposes of this chapter are:

        A.    To protect public health, safety and general welfare;

        B.     To enforce laws prohibiting the service to and consumption of alcoholic beverages by minors;

        C.     To reduce the costs of providing law enforcement, fire, and other emergency response services to premises where alcoholic beverages are served to or consumed by a minor, by holding the responsible person, social host and/or landowners responsible for the costs associated with providing law enforcement and other emergency response services. (Ord. 07-05 §1, 2007).

 

9.17.040 Definitions.
        The terms used in this chapter have the meaning provided by state law except as expressly provided herein.

        A.    “Adult” is any person over the age of eighteen years.

        B. 1. “Alcoholic beverage” includes any liquid or solid material intended to be ingested by a person which contains ethanol, also known as ethyl alcohol, drinking alcohol, or alcohol, including, but not limited to, alcoholic beverages as defined in Section 23004 of the Business and Professions Code, intoxicating liquor, malt beverage, beer, wine, spirits, liqueur, whiskey, rum, vodka, cordials, gin, and brandy, and any mixture containing one or more alcoholic beverages. Alcoholic beverage includes a mixture of one or more alcoholic beverages whether found or ingested separately or as a mixture.

        2.     “Alcohol” means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced.

        C.     “Response costs” are the costs associated with response providers to a gathering, including but not limited to: (1) salaries and benefits of law enforcement, fire or other emergency response personnel for the amount of time spent responding to, remaining at, or otherwise dealing with a gathering, and the administrative cost associated with or attributed to such response(s); (2) the cost of any medical treatment for any law enforcement, code enforcement, fire, or other emergency response personnel injured responding to, remaining at, or leaving the scene of a gathering; (3) the cost of repairing any city equipment or property damaged, and the cost of the use of any such equipment in, responding to, remaining at, or leaving the scene of a gathering; and (4) any other allowable costs related to enforcement of Sections 9.17.050 and 9.17.060.

        D.    “Family gathering” is a gathering where each minor present is supervised by his or her parent or legal guardian.

        E.     “Legal guardian” means: (1) a person who, by court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or (2) a public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by the court.

        F.     “Minor” is any person under the age of twenty-one years.

        G.    “Juvenile” is any person under the age of eighteen years.

        H.    “Parent” is a person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, foster parent, or step-parent of another person.

        I.      “Gathering” is a party, gathering or event where a group of two or more persons have assembled or are assembling for a social occasion or social activity.

        J.      “Premises” means any residence or other private property, place, or premises, including any commercial or business premises.

        K.    “Social host” is a person who knowingly hosts, permits, or allows a gathering to take place where one or more minors consume one or more alcoholic beverages on property owned or controlled by the person and the person knows or reasonably should have known that the minor is consuming or has consumed an alcoholic beverage.

        L.     “Responsible person” means a person or persons with a right of possession in the premises including, but not limited to:

        1.     An owner of the residence or other private property, place or premises, including any commercial or business premises;

        2.     A tenant or lessee of the residence or other private property, place or premises, including any commercial or business premises;

        3.     The landlord of another person responsible for the gathering;

        4.     The person(s) in charge of the residence or other private property, place or premises, including commercial or business premises; and

        5.     The person(s) who organizes, supervises, officiates, conducts or controls the gathering or any other person(s) accepting responsibility for such a gathering;

        6.     If a responsible person or social host for the party or gathering is a juvenile, then the parents or guardians of that juvenile and the juvenile will be jointly and severally liable for the response costs incurred pursuant to this chapter. To incur liability for response costs imposed by this chapter, the responsible person or social host for the gathering must be aware of the gathering, but need not be present at such gathering which results in the imposition of response costs pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 07-05 §1, 2007).

 

9.17.050 Consumption of alcohol by minor prohibited in public place, place open to public, or place not open to public.
        Except as permitted by state law, it is unlawful for any minor to:

        A.    Consume at any public place or any place open to the public any alcoholic beverage; or

        B.     Consume at any place not open to the public any alcoholic beverage, unless in connection with the consumption of the alcoholic beverages that minor is being supervised by his or her own parent or legal guardian. (Ord. 07-05 §1, 2007).

 

9.17.060 Hosting, permitting, allowing a party, gathering or event where minors consume alcoholic beverages prohibited.
        A.    It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person having control of any premises to knowingly host, permit, or allow a gathering to take place at said premises where at least one minor consumes an alcoholic beverage, whenever the person having control of the premises either knows a minor is or has consumed an alcoholic beverage or reasonably should have known that a minor is or has consumed an alcoholic beverage had the person taken all reasonable steps to prevent the consumption of alcoholic beverages by a minor as set forth in subsection B of this section.

        B.     It is the duty of any person having control of any premises, who knowingly hosts, permits or allows a gathering at said premises to take all reasonable steps to prevent the consumption of alcoholic beverages by any minor at the gathering. Reasonable steps include, but are not limited to: (1) controlling access to alcoholic beverages at the gathering; (2) controlling the quantity of alcoholic beverages at the gathering; (3) verifying the age of persons attending the gathering by inspecting drivers’ licenses or other government-issued identification cards to ensure minors do not consume alcoholic beverages while at the gathering; and (4) supervising the activities of minors at the gathering.

        C.     This section shall not apply to conduct involving the use of alcoholic beverages that occurs exclusively between a minor and his or her parent or legal guardian, as permitted by Article I, Section 4, of the California Constitution or if the event is a family gathering.

        D.    This section shall not apply to any California Department of Alcoholic Beverages Control licensee at any premises regulated by the Department of Alcoholic Beverages Control. (Ord. 07-05 §1, 2007).

 

9.17.070 Prima facie evidence.
        Whenever a responsible person and/or social host having control of the premises is present at the premises at the time that a minor obtains, possesses, or consumes any alcoholic beverage, it shall be prima facie evidence that such adult had the knowledge or should have had the knowledge, that the minor obtained, possessed, or consumed an alcoholic beverage at the gathering. (Ord. 07-05 §1, 2007).

 

9.17.080 Separate violation for each incident.
        Each incident in violation of Sections 9.17.050 and 9.17.060 shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 07-05 §1, 2007).

 

9.17.090 Enforcement authority.
        The Waterford law enforcement agency is authorized to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. The city attorney and the police chief and/or their designees may exercise any enforcement powers provided by law. (Ord. 07-05 §1, 2007).

 

9.17.100 Enforcement remedies.
        In addition to any other remedies available by law, including criminal prosecution, the city of Waterford may seek administrative penalties, response costs, and any other cost associated with enforcement of Sections 9.17.050 and 9.17.060, through all remedies or procedures provided by statute, ordinance, or law. Sections 9.17.050 and 9.17.060 shall not limit the authority of peace officers to make arrests for any criminal offense arising out of conduct regulated by Sections 9.17.050 and 9.17.060.

        If a violation of Sections 9.17.050 and/or 9.17.060 is prosecuted administratively the mandatory minimum penalty shall be five hundred dollars for the first offense, one thousand dollars for the second offense, and one thousand five hundred dollars for a third offense in a twelve-month period. (Ord. 07-05 §1, 2007).

 

9.17.110 Public nuisance and recovery of response costs.
        A. In addition to any other remedies available by law, a violation of Section 9.17.050 and/or 9.17.060 shall constitute a public nuisance, as an immediate threat to the public health, safety and welfare.

        B.     As a public nuisance, the gathering of underage drinkers may be summarily abated by police by all reasonable means, singularly or in combination, including, but not limited to:

        1.     An order requiring the gathering to be disbanded;

        2.     Issuance of an administrative citation under this chapter;

        3.     Issuance of an administrative citation, misdemeanor citation and/or

arrest of any law violators under any other applicable ordinances and/or statutes.

        C.     When law enforcement, fire, or other emergency response provider responds to a gathering at which a minor obtains, possesses, or uses alcoholic beverages within the city of Waterford all responsible persons and/or social host(s) shall be jointly and severally liable for the city of Waterford’s response costs to abate the nuisance. (Ord. 07-05 §1, 2007).

 

9.17.120 Billing and collection.
        A.    The amount of response costs shall be deemed a debt owed to the city of Waterford by the responsible person and/or social host. If a juvenile, by the juvenile’s parents or guardians. Any person owing such costs shall be liable in a civil action brought in the name of the city for recovery for such costs, including reasonable attorneys’ fees.

        Notice of the costs for which the responsible person is liable shall be mailed via first-class mail. The notice shall contain the following information:

        1.     The name of the person(s) being held liable for the payment of such costs;

        2.     The address of the private property or private premises where the party occurred;

        3.     The date and time of the response;

        4.     The law enforcement, fire, or emergency service provider(s) who responded;

        5.     An itemized list of the response costs for which the person(s) is being held liable.

        The responsible person must remit payment of the noticed response costs to the Waterford police department within thirty calendar days of the date of the notice. The payment of any such costs shall be stayed upon the filing of a timely appeal pursuant to Section 9.17.140.

        B.     The failure of any person to pay the penalties assessed by an administrative citation and/or response costs within the time specified on the administrative citation or response cost bill may result in the police chief or authorized designee referring the matter to the finance department or other designated agent for collection. The police chief or designated agent may pursue any other legal remedy to collect the penalties and/or response costs including the recording of a code enforcement lien. (Ord. 07-05 §1, 2007).

 

9.17.130 Special fund.
        A.    There is hereby established a special fund for the purposes of receiving and expending civil penalties and response costs collected. This special fund shall be known and designated as the prevention of underage drinking fund.

        B.     Expenditure of Moneys. The appropriation of all moneys in the prevention of underage drinking fund shall be made exclusively for the purposes of prevention of underage drinking programs within the city of Waterford.

        The underage drinking program shall include the enforcement of, education for, and prevention of underage drinking. Expenditures shall include, but not be limited to, purchase of equipment, contractual services, material and supplies, or any other expenditures related to the prevention of underage drinking within the city of Waterford. The administration of the fund shall conform to this code and all accounting principles practiced by the city.

        C.     Accumulation of Moneys in the Funds. The balance remaining in the prevention of underage drinking fund at the close of any fiscal year shall be deemed to have been provided for a specialized purpose and shall be carried forward and accumulated in said fund for the purposes set forth herein. (Ord. 07-05 §1, 2007).

 

9.17.140 Appeals.
        Any person upon whom is imposed a fine/penalty pursuant to Section 9.17.100 and/or response costs pursuant to Section 9.17.110 shall have the right to appeal the imposition of such fine/penalty or response costs pursuant to the appeal procedures. (Ord. 07-05 §1, 2007).

 

9.17.150 Severability.
        If any provision of this chapter or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect other provisions or applications of this chapter that can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this chapter are severable. (Ord. 07-05 §1, 2007).

Chapter 9.18 FIREARMS
9.18.010 Discharge prohibited—Exceptions.
        It is unlawful for any person to discharge any firearm or gun within the city. This section shall not apply to any regularly established gun or rifle club or shooting gallery, the location of which has previously been approved in writing by the city, nor to any person specially licensed by the city to destroy pests, nor to peace officers in the discharge of their official duties, nor to other persons in the ordinary course of any lawful business within the city; providing, that prior approval of the city is obtained. “Firearm” or “gun”, within the meaning of this section, means and includes air guns, BB guns, spring guns, air rifles, pistols, revolvers and guns of any character fired by explosives, air compulsion, or mechanical devices. (Ord. 81-2, 1981).

Chapter 9.22 DISPLAY OF MATERIALS HARMFUL TO MINORS
9.22.010 Definitions.
        For the purpose of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:

        A.    “Display” means to place in plain view.

        B.     “Harmful matter” means matter taken as a whole, the predominant appeal of which to the average person, applying contemporary statewide standards, is to prurient interest, meaning a shameful or morbid interest in nudity, sex, or excretion; and is patently offensive to the prevailing standards in the adult community as a whole with respect to what is suitable material for minors, and lacks significant literary, artistic, political, educational, or scientific value for minors.

        1.     When it appears from the nature of the matter or the circumstances of its dissemination, distribution or exhibition that it is designed for clearly defined deviant sexual groups, the predominant appeal of the matter shall be judged with reference to its intended recipient group.

        2.     In prosecutions under this section, where circumstances of production, presentation, sale, dissemination, distribution, or publicity indicate that matter is being commercially exploited by the defendant for the sake of its prurient appeal, that evidence is probative with respect to the nature of the matter and can justify the conclusion that the matter lacks significant literary, artistic, political, educational, or scientific value for minors.

        C.     “Matter” means any book, magazine, newspaper, video movie box/cover or other printed or written material or any picture, drawing, photograph, motion picture, or other pictorial representation or any statue or other figure, or any recording, transcription, or mechanical, chemical or electrical reproduction or any other articles, equipment, machines or materials.

        D.    “Minor” means any natural person under eighteen years of age.

        E.     “Person” means any individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation or other legal entity. (Ord. 91-01 §1(part), 1991).

 

9.22.020 Blinder rack required.
        No person shall display harmful matter in a public place, other than a public place from which minors are excluded, without placing a device commonly known as a blinder rack in front of such matter, so that that which is the harmful matter as defined by Section 9.22.010 of this chapter is not exposed to view. The blinder rack shall expose no more than the top third of the material. (Ord. 91-01 §1(part), 1991).

 

9.22.030 Maintenance and display of video tapes.
        A.    No person shall maintain or operate any place of business in which “harmful matter” as defined by subsection B of Section 9.22.010 of this chapter are kept, displayed, or offered in any manner, sold, rented, furnished, transferred, or given away, unless such harmful matter is completely and wholly kept, displayed or offered within a separate room or enclosure from which persons under the age of eighteen years who are not accompanied by a parent or legal guardian are excluded. Each entrance to such a room or enclosure shall be signposted in reasonable, visible, and legible words to the effect that minors, unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian, are excluded.

        B.     No owner, manager, proprietor, or other person in charge of any room or enclosure within any place of business in which harmful matter is kept, displayed, or offered in any manner, sold, rented, furnished, transferred, or given away shall permit or allow any person under the age of eighteen years to enter, be in, remain in, or visit such room or enclosure, unless such minor is accompanied by one of his or her parents or his or her legal guardian.

        C.     No person under the age of eighteen years shall enter, be in, remain in, or visit any room or enclosure in any place of business which has been signposted in the manner prescribed in subsection A of this section, unless accompanied by one of his or her parents or by his or her legal guardian. (Ord. 91-01 §1(part), 1991).

 

9.22.040 Sales or renting to minors prohibited.
        No person shall sell or rent to a minor any harmful matter as defined in subsection B of Section 9.22.010 of this chapter. (Ord. 91-01 §1(part), 1991).

 

9.22.050 Exceptions.
        The provisions of subsection B of Section 9.22.030 of this chapter shall not apply to any owner, manager, proprietor, or other person in charge of any room or enclosure within any place of business in which harmful matter is kept, unless the harmful matter is required by the provisions of subsection A of Section 9.22.030 of this chapter to be kept, displayed, offered within such separate room or enclosure. (Ord. 91-01 §1(part), 1991).

 

9.22.060 Enforcement.
        A.    Misdemeanor. Failure to comply with this chapter shall be a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in Section 1.12.020 of Chapter 1.12 of Title 1 of this code.

        B.     Public Nuisances. A violation of any provision of this chapter is declared to be a public nuisance, subject to abatement pursuant to Section 731 of the Code of Civil Procedure of the state.

        C.     Business Licenses. A violation of any provision of this chapter shall be sufficient grounds for the city manager to revoke, suspend, refuse to renew the business license of the person or entity violating this chapter. A criminal conviction/adverse judgment in a nuisance action shall not be required in order to establish a violation of this chapter for the purposes of revocation, suspension, refusal to issue/renew a business license pursuant to this subsection. Any person/entity aggrieved by the action of the city manager in revoking, suspending, refusing to renew or issue a business license pursuant to this subsection shall have the right to appeal to the city council if done in writing within ten days of the notice of the action by the city manager. Other interested persons may within four days of the city manager’s action appeal in writing to the city council. (Ord. 91-01 §1(part), 1991).

Title 10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Chapter 10.04 DEFINITIONS
Chapter 10.08 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Chapter 10.12 TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICE
Chapter 10.16 TURNING MOVEMENTS
Chapter 10.20 ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS
Chapter 10.24 SPEED LIMITS
Chapter 10.28 STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
Chapter 10.32 MISCELLANEOUS DRIVING RULES
Chapter 10.36 TRUCK ROUTES
Chapter 10.40 PEDESTRIANS
Chapter 10.48 BICYCLES
Chapter 10.50 MOTORCYCLES AND OFF-HIGHWAY MOTOR VEHICLES
Chapter 10.54 ABANDONED VEHICLES

Chapter 10.04 DEFINITIONS
10.04.010 Generally.
        A.    The following words and phrases when used in this title shall for the purpose of this title have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this chapter.

        B.     Whenever any words or phrases used in this title are not defined, but are defined in the Vehicle Code of the state and amendments thereto, such definitions shall apply. (Ord. 71-6 §§1, 1.1, 1971).

 

10.04.020 Central traffic district.
        “Central traffic district” means all streets and portions of streets within the area described as follows:

        All that area bounded by Oakdale-Waterford Highway (also known as “F” Street), “D” Street, Main Street and Welch Street. (Ord. 71-6 §1.2, 1971).

 

10.04.030 Curb.
        “Curb” means the lateral boundary of the roadway whether such curbs are marked by curbing construction, or not so marked. The word “curb” as used in this title shall not include the line dividing the roadway of a street from parking strips in the center of a street, nor from tracks or rights of way of public utility companies. (Ord. 71-6 §1.4, 1971).

 

10.04.040 Holidays.
        Within the meaning of this title, “holidays” are:

        A.    Every Sunday;

        B.     January 1st;

        C.     February 12th, known as “Lincoln Day”;

        D.    The third Monday in February;

        E.     The last Monday in May;

        F.     July 4th;

        G.    The first Monday in September;

        H.    September 9th, known as “Admission Day”;

        I.      November 11th, known as “Veterans Day”;

        J.      December 25th;

        K.    Good Friday from twelve noon until three p.m.;

        L.     Every day appointed by the President or Governor for a public fast, thanksgiving or holiday;

        M.    The second Monday in October, “Columbus Day.” (Ord. 79-6 Art. III §P(1), 1979; Ord. 71-6 §1.5, 1971).

 

10.04.050 Loading zone.
        “Loading zone” means the space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials. (Ord. 71-6 §1.6, 1971).

 

10.04.060 Official time standard.
        Whenever certain hours are named in this title, they means standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use in this city. (Ord. 71-6 §1.7, 1971).

 

10.04.070 Parkway.
        “Parkway” means that portion of a street other than a roadway or a sidewalk. (Ord. 71-6 §1.8, 1971).

 

10.04.080 Passenger loading zone.
        “Passenger loading zone” means the space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers. (Ord. 71-6 §1.9, 1971).

 

10.04.090 Pedestrian.
        “Pedestrian” means any person afoot. (Ord. 71-6 §1.10, 1971).

 

10.04.100 Police officer.
        “Police officer” means every officer of the police department of this city or any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or make arrests for violations of traffic regulations. (Ord. 71-6 §1.11, 1971).

 

10.04.110 Stop.
        “Stop,” when required, means complete cessation of movement. (Ord. 71-6 §1.12, 1971).

 

10.04.120 Vehicle Code.
        “Vehicle Code” means the Vehicle Code of the state. (Ord. 71-6 §1.13, 1971).

Chapter 10.08 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
10.08.010 Traffic division—Established.
        There is established in the police department of the city a traffic division to be under the control of an officer of police appointed by and directly responsible to the chief of police. (Ord. 71-6 §2, 1971).

 

10.08.020 Traffic division—Duties.
        It shall be the duty of the traffic division with such aid as may be rendered by other members of the police department to enforce the street traffic regulations of the city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in the city, to make arrests for traffic violations, to investigate traffic accidents and to cooperate with the city traffic engineer and other officers of the city in the administration of the traffic laws and in developing ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out those duties specially imposed upon said division by this title and the traffic ordinances of the city. (Ord. 71-6 §2.1, 1971).

 

10.08.030 City traffic engineer—Office established.
        The office of city traffic engineer is established. The city traffic engineer shall be appointed by the council, and he or she shall exercise the powers and duties as provided in this title and in the traffic ordinance of the city. Whenever the city traffic engineer is required or authorized to place or maintain official traffic-control devices or signals, he or she may cause such devices or signals to be placed or maintained. (Ord. 79-2 §1, 1979; Ord. 71-6 §2.5, 1971).

 

10.08.040 City traffic engineer—Powers and duties.
        It shall be the general duty of the city traffic engineer to determine the installation and proper timing and maintenance of traffic-control devices and signals, to conduct engineering analyses of traffic accidents and to devise remedial measures, to conduct the engineering and traffic investigations of traffic conditions and to cooperate with other city officials in the development of ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out the additional powers and duties imposed by ordinances of the city. Whenever, by the provisions of this title a power is granted to the city traffic engineer or a duty imposed upon him or her, the power may be exercised or the duty performed by his or her deputy or by a person authorized in writing by him or her. (Ord. 71-6 §2.6, 1971).

 

10.08.050 Traffic committee—Established.
        There is established an advisory committee to serve without compensation, consisting of the city traffic engineer, the chief of police or in his or her discretion as his or her representative the chief of the traffic division, a member of the city council and one representative each from the city engineer’s office and the city attorney’s office and such number of other city officers and representatives of unofficial bodies as may be determined and appointed by the mayor. The chairman of the committee shall be appointed by the mayor and may be removed by him or her. (Ord. 71-6 §2.7, 1971).

 

10.08.060 Traffic committee—Duties.
        It shall be the duty of the traffic committee to suggest the most practicable means for coordinating the activities of all officers and agencies of this city having authority with respect to the administration or enforcement of traffic regulations; to stimulate and assist in the preparation and publication of traffic reports; to receive complaints having to do with traffic matters; and to recommend to the legislative body of this city and to the city traffic engineer, the chief of the traffic division and other city officials ways and means for improving traffic conditions and the administration and enforcement of traffic regulations. (Ord. 71-6 §2.8, 1971).

 

10.08.070 Police and fire department officials—Authority.
        Officers of the police department and such officers as are assigned by the chief of police are authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand, audible or other signal in conformance with traffic laws, except that in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department or members of the fire department may direct traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions of the contrary contained in this title or the Vehicle Code. (Ord. 71-6 §3, 1971).

 

10.08.080 Police and fire department officials—Obedience required.
        No person shall fail or refuse to comply with or to perform any act forbidden by lawful order, signal or direction of a traffic or police officer, or a member of the fire department, or a person authorized by the chief of police or by law. (Ord. 71-6 §3.2, 1971).

 

10.08.090 Police and fire department officials—Obstruction or interference prohibited.
        No person shall interfere with or obstruct in any way any police officer or other officer or employee of this city in their enforcement of the provisions of this title. The removal, obliteration or concealment of any chalk mark or other distinguishing mark used by any police officer or other employee or officer of this city in connection with the enforcement of the parking regulations of this title shall, if done for the purpose of evading the provisions of this title, constitute such interference or obstruction. (Ord. 71-6 §3.4, 1971).

 

10.08.100 Persons other than officials shall not direct traffic.
        No person other than an officer of the police department or members of the fire department or a person authorized by the chief of police or a person authorized by law shall direct or attempt to direct traffic by voice, hand or other signal, except that persons may operate, when and as provided in this title, any mechanical pushbutton signal erected by order of the city traffic engineer. (Ord. 71-6 §3.1, 1971).

 

10.08.110 Applicability of provisions—Bicycles.
        Every person riding a bicycle or riding or driving an animal upon a highway has all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by this title, except those provisions which by their very nature can have no application. (Ord. 71-6 §3.3, 1971).

 

10.08.120 Applicability of provisions—Public employees.
        The provisions of this title shall apply to the operator of any vehicle owned by or used in the service of the United States Government, this state, any county or city, and it is unlawful for any said operator to violate any of the provisions of this title except as otherwise permitted in this title or by the Vehicle Code. (Ord. 71-6 §3.5, 1971).

 

10.08.130 Exemptions.
        A.    The provisions of this title regulating the operation, parking and standing of vehicles shall not apply to vehicles operated by the police or fire department, any public ambulance or any public utility vehicle or any private ambulance, which public utility vehicle or private ambulance has qualified as an authorized emergency vehicle, when any vehicle mentioned in this section is operated in the manner specified by the Vehicle Code in response to an emergency call.

        B.     The foregoing exemptions shall not, however, relieve the operator of any such vehicle from obligation to exercise due care for the safety of others or the consequences of his or her willful disregard of the safety of others.

        C.     The provisions of this title regulating the parking or standing of vehicles shall not apply to any vehicle of a city department or public utility while necessarily in use for construction or repair work or any vehicle owned or operated by the United States Post Office while in use for the collection, transportation, or delivery of United States mail. (Ord. 71-6 §3.6, 1971).

 

10.08.140 Accidents—Studies.
        Whenever the accidents at any particular location become numerous, the traffic division shall cooperate with the city traffic engineer in conducting studies of such accidents and determining remedial measures. (Ord. 71-6 §2.2, 1971).

 

10.08.150 Accidents—Reports.
        The traffic division shall maintain a suitable system of filing traffic accident reports. Accident reports or cards referring to them shall be filed alphabetically by location. Such reports shall be available for the use and information of the city traffic engineer. (Ord. 71-6 §2.3, 1971).

 

10.08.160 Property damage reports.
        A.    The operator of a vehicle or the person in charge of any animal involved in any accident resulting in damage to any property publicly owned or owned by a public utility, including but not limited to any fire hydrant, parking meter, lighting post, telephone pole, electric light or power pole, or resulting in damage to any tree, traffic-control device or other property of a like nature located in or along any street, shall within twenty-four hours after such accident make a written report of such accident to the police department of the city.

        B.     Every such report shall state the time when and the place where the accident took place, the name and address of the person owning and of the person operating or in charge of such vehicle or animal, the license number of every such vehicle, and shall briefly describe the property damage in such accident.

        C.     The operator of any vehicle involved in an accident shall not be subject to the requirements or penalties of this section if and during the time he or she is physically incapable of making a report, but in such event he or she shall make a report as required in subsection A of this section within twenty-four hours after regaining ability to make such report. (Ord. 71-6 §3.7, 1971).

Chapter 10.12 TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICE
10.12.010 Installation authority.
        A.    The city traffic engineer shall have the power and duty to place and maintain or cause to be placed and maintained official traffic-control devices when and as required to make effective the provisions of this title.

        B.     Whenever the Vehicle Code requires for the effectiveness of any provision thereof that traffic-control devices be installed to give notice to the public of the application of such law, the city traffic engineer is authorized to install or cause to be installed the necessary devices subject to any limitations or restrictions set forth in the law applicable thereto.

        C.     The city traffic engineer may also place and maintain or cause to place and maintain such additional traffic-control devices as he or she may deem necessary or proper to regulate traffic or to guide or warn traffic, but he or she shall make such determination only upon the basis of traffic engineering principles and traffic investigations and in accordance with such standards, limitations and rules as may be set forth in this title or as may be determined by ordinance or resolution of the council. (Ord. 71-6 §4, 1971).

 

10.12.020 Required for enforcement.
        No provision of the Vehicle Code or of this title for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator unless appropriate legible signs are in place giving notice of such provisions of the traffic laws. (Ord. 71-6 §4.1, 1971).

 

10.12.030 Obedience required.
        The operator of any vehicle or train shall obey the instructions of any official traffic-control device placed in accordance with this title unless otherwise directed by a police officer or other authorized person subject to the exceptions granted the operator of an authorized emergency vehicle responding to emergency calls. (Ord. 71-6 §4.2, 1971).

 

10.12.040 Hours of operation.
        The city traffic engineer shall determine the hours and days during which any traffic-control device shall be in operation or be in effect, except in those cases where such hours or days are specified in this title. (Ord. 71-6 §4.6, 1971).

 

10.12.050 Removal and relocation authority.
        The city traffic engineer is authorized to remove, relocate or discontinue the operation of any traffic-control device not specifically required by the Vehicle Code or this title whenever he or she determines in any particular case that the conditions which warranted or required the installation no longer exist. (Ord. 71-6 §4.5, 1971).

 

10.12.060 Distinctive roadway markings.
        The city traffic engineer is authorized to place and maintain distinctive roadway markings as described in the Vehicle Code on those streets or parts of streets where the volume of traffic or the vertical or other curvature of the roadway renders it hazardous to drive on the left side of such marking or signs and markings. Such marking or signs and marking shall have the same effect as similar markings placed by the State Department of Transportation pursuant to provisions of the Vehicle Code. (Ord. 79-6 Art. III §P(2), 1979; Ord. 71-6 §4.4, 1971).

 

10.12.070 Lane marking.
        The city traffic engineer is authorized to mark centerlines and lane lines upon the surface of the roadway to indicate the course to be traveled by vehicles and may place signs temporarily designating lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless of the centerline of the highway. (Ord. 71-6 §4.3, 1971).

 

10.12.080 Unauthorized painting of curbs prohibited.
        No person, unless authorized by the city, shall paint any street or curb surface; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to the painting of numbers on a curb surface by any person who has complied with the provisions of any resolution or ordinance of the city pertaining thereto. (Ord. 71-6 §4.8, 1971).

Chapter 10.16 TURNING MOVEMENTS
10.16.010 Direction indication—Signal placement.
        The city traffic engineer is authorized to place official traffic-control devices within or adjacent to intersections and indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections, and the city traffic engineer is authorized to locate and indicate more than one lane of traffic from which drivers of vehicles may make right-hand or left-hand turns, and the course to be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law or ordinance. (Ord. 71-6 §5, 1971).

 

10.16.020 Intersection determination and signing.
        The city traffic engineer is authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left, or U-turn, and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs or they may be removed when such turns are permitted. (Ord. 71-6 §5.1, 1971).

 

10.16.030 Signal-controlled intersections—Right turns.
        A.    No driver of a vehicle shall make a right turn against a red or stop signal at any intersection which is signposted giving notice of such restriction as provided in this section.

        B.     The city traffic engineer shall post appropriate signs giving effect to this section where he or she determines that the making of right turns against traffic signal “stop” indication would seriously interfere with the safe and orderly flow of traffic. (Ord. 71-6 §5.2, 1971).

Chapter 10.20 ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS
10.20.010 Signing.
        Whenever any ordinance or resolution of the city designates any one-way street or alley, the city traffic engineer shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulations shall be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. (Ord. 71-6 §6, 1971).

Chapter 10.24 SPEED LIMITS
10.24.010 Decrease of state law maximum speed.
        It is determined upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that the speed permitted by state law outside of business and residence districts as applicable upon the following streets is greater than is reasonable or safe under the conditions found to exist upon such streets, and it is declared that the prima facie speed limit shall be as herein set forth on those streets or parts of streets herein designated when signs are erected giving notice thereof:

 

 

Name of Street or Portion Affected

Declared Prima Facie Speed Limit

On Oakdale-Waterford Highway (“F” Street) from the north side of the intersection of Highway 132 (Yosemite Blvd.) to the northern most curb line of Bonnie Brae Avenue

35 miles per hour

On Oakdale-Waterford Highway (“F” Street) from the northern most curb line of Bonnie-Brae Avenue to the north city limits

45 miles per hour

On Tim Bell Road from Highway No. 132 to the MID Main Canal

25 miles per hour

On Reinway Avenue from south city limits to the north city limits

25 miles per hour

On Pasadena Avenue from Washington Road to Kadota Avenue

25 miles per hour

On Bentley Street from Tim Bell Road to Skyline Boulevard

25 miles per hour

On Welch Street from Oakdale-Waterford Highway (“F” Street) to Bentley Street

25 miles per hour

On Skyline Boulevard from Highway No. 132 to Welch Street

25 miles per hour

On Western Avenue from Riverside Road to Oakdale-Waterford Highway (“F” Street)

25 miles per hour

On Riverside Road from Western Avenue to Highway No. 132

25 miles per hour

On Bonnie Brae Avenue from Oakdale Waterford Highway to Tim Bell Road

25 miles per hour

On “E” Street from Highway No. 132 to Oden Drive

25 miles per hour

On Main Street from Oakdale-Waterford Highway (“F” Street) to Tim Bell Road

25 miles per hour

On Kadota Avenue from Reinway Avenue to Church Street

25 miles per hour

On Pecan Avenue from Reinway Avenue to Church Street

25 miles per hour

On Church Street from Highway No. 132 to Kadota Avenue

25 miles per hour

On Bentley Avenue from Highway 132 to “F” Street

35 miles per hour

(Ord. 2015-03 §1; Ord. 79-18 §1, 1979; Ord. 71-6 §14, 1971).

Chapter 10.28 STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
10.28.010 Applicability of provisions.
        A.    The provisions of this title prohibiting the stopping, standing or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times specified in this chapter, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic-control device.

        B.     The provisions of this title imposing a time limit on standing or parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions of the Vehicle Code or the ordinances of the city prohibiting or limiting the standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times. (Ord. 71-6 §10, 1971).

 

10.28.020 Stop sign erection.
        Whenever any ordinance or resolution of the city designates and describes any street or portion thereof as a through street, or any intersection at which vehicles are required to stop at one or more entrances thereto, or any railroad grade crossing at which vehicles are required to stop, the city traffic engineer shall erect and maintain stop signs as follows:

        A stop sign shall be erected on each and every street intersecting such through street or portion thereof so designated and at those entrances to other intersections where a stop is required and at any railroad grade crossing so designated; provided, however, stop signs shall not be erected or maintained at any entrance to an intersection when such entrance is controlled by an official traffic-control signal. Every such sign shall conform with, and shall be placed as provided in, the Vehicle Code. (Ord. 71-6 §7, 1971).

 

10.28.030 No-stopping zones—Designation.
        A.    The city traffic engineer shall designate established no-stopping zones by placing and maintaining appropriate signs indicating that stopping of vehicles is prohibited and indicating the hours and day when stopping is prohibited.

        B.     During the hours and on the days designated on the signs, it is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop said vehicle on any of the streets or parts of streets established by resolution of the council as no-stopping zones. (Ord. 71-6 §11.5, 1971).

 

10.28.040 No-stopping zones—No-parking areas—Maintenance—Compliance required.
        A.    The city traffic engineer is authorized to maintain, by appropriate signs or by paint upon the curb surface, all no-stopping zones, no-parking areas, and restricted parking areas, as defined and described in this title.

        B.     When said curb markings or signs are in place no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park such vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb marking or sign in violation of any of the provisions of this title. (Ord. 71-6 §10.2, 1971).

 

10.28.050 Curb markings.
        A.    The city traffic engineer is authorized, subject to the provisions and limitations of this title, to place, and when required herein shall place, the following curb markings to indicate parking or standing regulations, and said curb markings shall have the meanings as follows:

        1.     Red means no stopping, standing or parking at any time except as permitted by the Vehicle Code, and except that a bus may stop in a red zone marked or signed as a bus zone;

        2.     Yellow means no stopping, standing or parking at any time between seven a.m. and six p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers or materials; provided, that the loading or unloading of passengers shall not consume more than three minutes nor the loading or unloading of materials more than twenty minutes;

        3.     White means no stopping, standing or parking for any purpose other than loading or unloading of passengers, or for the purpose of depositing mail in an adjacent mailbox, which shall not exceed three minutes and such restrictions shall apply between seven a.m. and six p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays and except as follows:

        a.     When such zone is in front of a hotel or in front of a mailbox the restrictions shall apply at all times,

        b.     When such zone is in front of a theater the restrictions shall apply at all times except when such theater is closed.

        4.     Blue shall indicate that the parking space adjacent to such curb is limited exclusively to the vehicles of physically handicapped persons.

        B.     When the city traffic engineer as authorized under this title has caused curb markings to be placed, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle adjacent to such legible curb marking in violation of any of the provisions of this section. (Ord. 79-6 Art. III §P(4), 1979; Ord. 71-6 §12.1, 1971).

 

10.28.060 Stopping through street or stop sign.
        A.    Those streets and parts of streets established by resolution of the council are declared to be through streets for the purposes of this section.

        B.     The provisions of this section shall also apply at one or more entrances to the intersections as such entrances and intersections are established by resolution of the council.

        C.     The provisions of this section shall apply at those highway railway grade crossings as established by resolution of the council. (Ord. 71-6 §7.1, 1971).

 

10.28.070 Stopping emerging from alley, driveway or building.
        The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or into the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway or driveway. (Ord. 71-6 §7.2, 1971).

 

10.28.080 Prohibited in parkways.
        No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within any parkway. (Ord. 71-6 §10.1, 1971).

 

10.28.090 Prohibited in alleys.
        No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of persons or materials in any alley. (Ord. 71-6 §12.5, 1971).

 

10.28.100 No-parking areas.
        No operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand, park or leave standing such vehicle in any of the following places, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police officer or other authorized officer, or traffic sign or signal:

        A.    Within any divisional island unless authorized and clearly indicated with appropriate signs or markings;

        B.     On either side of any street between the projected property lines of any public walk, public steps, street or thoroughfare terminating at such street, when such area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface;

        C.     In any area where the city traffic engineer determines that the parking or stopping of a vehicle would constitute a traffic hazard or would endanger life or property, when such area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface;

        D.    In any area established by resolution of the council as a no-parking area, when such area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface;

        E.     Upon, along or across any railway track in such manner as to hinder, delay or obstruct the movement of any car traveling upon such track;

        F.     In any area where the parking or stopping of any vehicle would constitute a traffic hazard or would endanger life or property;

        G.    On any street or highway where the use of such street or highway or a portion thereof is necessary for the cleaning, repair or construction of the street or highway or the installation of underground utilities or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is authorized for a purpose other than the normal flow of traffic or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is necessary for the movement of equipment, articles or structures of unusual size, and the parking of such vehicle would prohibit or interfere with such use or movement; provided, that signs giving notice of such no parking are erected or placed at least twenty-four hours prior to the effective time of such no parking;

        H.    At any place within twenty feet of a point on the curb immediately opposite the mid-block end of a safety zone, when such place is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface;

        I.      At any place within twenty feet of a crosswalk at an intersection in the central traffic district or in any business district when such place is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface except that a bus may stop at a designated bus stop;

        J.      Within twenty feet of the approach to any traffic signal, boulevard stop sign or official electric flashing device.

        K.    No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle in the front yard of their residence except for minor repairs or a same day cleaning. All vehicles in residential districts shall be parked and left in a parking lot, garage or space as defined in Waterford Municipal Code Chapter 17.54, Section 17.54.040.

        L.     No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle outside of designated parking spaces in a school parking area or in school transportation areas. (Ord. 2003-01, §1, 2003; Ord. 71-6 §10.3, 1971).

 

10.28.110 Emergency parking signs.
        A.    Whenever the chief of police determines that an emergency traffic congestion is likely to result from the holding of public or private assemblages, gatherings or functions, or for other reasons, the chief of police shall have power and authority to order temporary signs to be erected or posted indicating that the operation, parking or standing of vehicles is prohibited on such streets and alleys as the chief of police shall direct during the time such temporary signs are in place. Such signs shall remain in place only during the existence of such emergency and the chief of police shall cause such signs to be removed promptly thereafter.

        B.     When signs authorized by the provisions of this section are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall operate, park or stand any vehicle contrary to the directions and provisions of such signs. (Ord. 71-6 §10.12, 1971).

 

10.28.120 Parking—For demonstration prohibited.
        No operator of any vehicle shall park said vehicle upon any street in this city for the principle purpose of advertising or displaying it for sale, unless authorized by resolution of the council. (Ord. 71-6 §10.5, 1971).

 

10.28.130 Parking—For cleaning or repair purposes prohibited.
        A.    No person shall construct or cause to be constructed, repair or cause to be repaired, grease or cause to be greased, dismantle or cause to be dismantled any vehicle or any part thereof upon any public street in the city. Temporary emergency repairs may be made upon a public street.

        B.     No person shall wash or cause to be washed, polish or cause to be polished any vehicle or any part thereof upon any public street in the city, when a charge is made for such service. (Ord. 71-6 §§10.6, 10.7, 1971).

 

10.28.140 Parking—For storage purposes prohibited.
        No person who owns or has possession, custody or control of any vehicle shall park such vehicle upon any street or alley for more than a consecutive period of seventy-two hours. (Ord. 71-6 §10.4, 1971).

 

10.28.150 Parking—Adjacent to schools prohibited when.
        A.    The city traffic engineer is authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon that side of any street adjacent to any school property when such parking would, in his or her opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation.

        B.     When official signs are erected prohibiting parking upon that side of a street adjacent to any school property, no person shall park a vehicle in any such designated place. (Ord. 71-6 §10.8, 1971).

 

10.28.160 Parking—On grades prohibited when.
        No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle unattended on a highway when upon any grade exceeding three percent within any business or residence district without blocking the wheels of said vehicle by turning them against the curb or by other means. (Ord. 71-6 §10.10, 1971).

 

10.28.170 Parking—Prohibited on narrow streets.
        A.    The city traffic engineer is authorized to place signs or markings indicating no parking upon any street when the width of the roadway does not exceed twenty feet, or upon one side of a street as indicated by such signs or markings when the width of the roadway does not exceed thirty feet.

        B.     When official signs or markings prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow streets as authorized in this section, no person shall park a vehicle upon any such street in violation of any such sign or marking. (Ord. 71-6 §10.9, 1971).

 

10.28.180 Parking—Peddlers and vendors.
        A.    Except as otherwise provided in this section, no person shall stand or park any vehicle, wagon or pushcart from which goods, wares, merchandise, fruits, vegetables or food stuffs are sold, displayed, solicited or offered for sale or bartered or exchanged, or any lunch wagon or eating cart or vehicle, on any portion of any street within this city except that such vehicles, wagons or pushcarts may stand or park only at the request of a bona fide purchaser for a period of time not to exceed ten minutes at any one place. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to persons delivering such articles upon order of, or by agreement with a customer from a store or other fixed place of business or distribution.

        B.     No person shall park or stand on any street any lunch wagon, eating cart or vehicle, or pushcart from which tamales, peanuts, popcorn, candy, ice cream or other articles of food are sold or offered for sale without first obtaining a written permit to do so from the city traffic engineer which shall designate the specific location in which such cart shall stand.

        C.     No person shall park or stand any vehicle or wagon used or intended to be used in the transportation of property for hire on any street while awaiting patronage for such vehicle or wagon without first obtaining a written permit to do so from the city traffic engineer which shall designate the specific location where such vehicle may stand.

        D.    Whenever any permit is granted under the provisions of this section and a particular location to park or stand is specified therein, no person shall park or stand any vehicle, wagon or pushcart on any location other than as designated in such permit. In the event that the holder of any such permit is convicted in court of competent jurisdiction for violating any of the provisions of this section, such permit shall be forthwith revoked by the city traffic engineer upon the filing of the record of such conviction with such officer and no permit shall thereafter be issued to such person until six months have elapsed from the date of such revocation. (Ord. 71-6 §10.11, 1977).

 

10.28.190 Parking—Commercial vehicles.
        Except as hereafter provided, no person shall park or leave standing in any residential district of the city, other than on a portion of a truck route established pursuant to Section 10.36.010 and property contiguous therewith, unless excepted from parking by resolution of the council pursuant to Sections 10.28.100 and 10.36.010, any commercial vehicle having a manufacturer’s gross vehicle weight rating of ten thousand pounds or more. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the operator of any commercial vehicle exceeding a manufacturer’s gross vehicle weight rating of ten thousand pounds coming from a truck route having ingress and egress by direct route to and from restricted streets when necessary for the purpose of making pickups or deliveries of goods, wares and merchandise from or to any building or structure located on such restricted streets or for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of any building or structure upon such restricted streets for which a building permit has previously been obtained therefor. Also, the provisions of this section shall not apply to:

        A.    Passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the public utilities commission; or

        B.     Any vehicle owned by a public utility while necessarily in use in the construction, installation or repair of any public utility. The prohibition contained in this section shall apply to privately and publicly owned property as well as to streets. (Ord. 2013-04 §1; Ord. 79-1 §1, 1979; Ord. 71-6 §10.14, 1971).

 

10.28.200 Parking—Twenty-four minute limit.
        A.    Green curb marking shall mean no standing or parking for a period of time longer than twenty-four minutes at any time between nine a.m. and six p.m. on any day except Sunday and holidays.

        B.     When authorized signs or curb markings have been determined by the city traffic engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park said vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb marking or sign in violation thereof. (Ord. 71-6 §11, 1971).

 

10.28.205 Parking—One hour limit.
        When authorized signs or curb markings have been determined by the city traffic engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park said vehicle between the hours of nine a.m. and six p.m. of any day except Sunday and holidays for a period of time longer than one hour. (Ord. 07-02 §1).

 

10.28.210 Parking—Two hour limit.
        When authorized signs or curb markings have been determined by the city traffic engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park said vehicle between the hours of nine a.m. and six p.m. of any day except Sunday and holidays for a period of time longer than two hours. (Ord. 71-6 §11.1, 1971).

 

10.28.220 Parking—Private facilities.
        Upon designation of “customer parking only” pursuant to this section, the property owner may post at each extremity of such parking area a sign reading:

“CUSTOMER PARKING ONLY, VIOLATORS SUBJECT TO TOW AT OWNER’S EXPENSE, WMC Section 10.28.220, CVC Section 21107.8, Waterford Police Department 874-2349.”

(Ord. 07-03 §1).

 

10.28.230 Parking—Space markings.
        A.    The city traffic engineer is authorized to install and maintain parking space markings to indicate parking spaces adjacent to curbings where authorized parking is permitted.

        B.     When such parking space markings are placed on the highway, subject to other and more restrictive limitations, no vehicle shall be stopped, left standing or parked other than within a single space unless the size or shape of such vehicle makes compliance impossible. (Ord. 71-6 §11.4, 1971).

 

10.28.240 Parallel parking.
        A.    Subject to other and more restrictive limitations, a vehicle may be stopped or parked within eighteen inches of the left-hand curb facing in the direction of traffic movement upon any one-way street unless signs are in place prohibiting such stopping or standing.

        B.     In the event a highway includes two or more separate roadways and traffic is restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of such one-way roadway unless signs are in place permitting such standing or parking.

        C.     The city traffic engineer is authorized to determine when standing or parking shall be prohibited upon the left-hand side of any one-way street or when standing or parking may be permitted upon the left-hand side of any one-way roadway of a highway having two or more separate roadways and shall erect signs giving notice thereof.

        D.    The requirement of parallel parking imposed by this section shall not apply in the event any commercial vehicle is actually engaged in the process of loading or unloading freight or goods, in which case such vehicle may be backed up to the curb; provided, that such vehicle does not extend beyond the centerline of the street and does not block traffic thereby. (Ord. 71-6 §11.2, 1971).

 

10.28.250 Diagonal parking.
        A.    On any of the streets or portions of streets established by resolution of the council as diagonal parking zones, when signs or pavement markings are in place indicating such diagonal parking, it is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to park said vehicle except:

        1.     At the angle to the curb indicated by signs or pavement markings allotting space to parked vehicles and entirely within the limits of said allotted space;

        2.     With the front wheel nearest the curb within six inches of said curb.

        B.     The provisions of this section shall not apply when such vehicle is actually engaged in the process of loading or unloading passengers, freight or goods, in which event the provisions applicable in Section 10.28.240 shall be complied with. (Ord. 71-6 §11.3, 1971).

 

10.28.260 Loading zones—Establishment.
        A.    The city traffic engineer is authorized to determine and to mark loading zones and passenger loading zones as follows:

        1.     At any place in the central traffic district or any business district;

        2.     Elsewhere in front of the entrance to any place of business or in front of any hall or place used for the purpose of public assembly.

        B.     In no event shall more than one-half of the total curb length in any block be reserved for loading zone purposes.

        C.     Loading zones shall be indicated by yellow paint upon the top of all curbs within such zones.

        D.    Passenger loading zones shall be indicated by white paint upon the top of all curbs in said zones. (Ord. 71-6 §12, 1971).

 

10.28.270 Loading zones—Time limit.
        A.    Permission granted in this chapter to stop or stand a vehicle for purposes of loading or unloading of materials shall apply only to commercial vehicles and shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor, and in no event for more than twenty minutes.

        B.     The loading or unloading of materials shall apply only to commercial deliveries, also the delivery or pick-up of express and parcel post packages and United States mail.

        C.     Permission granted in this chapter to stop or park for purposes of loading or unloading passengers shall include the loading or unloading of personal baggage but shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor and in no event for more than three minutes.

        D.    Within the total time limits above specified the provisions of this section shall be enforced so as to accommodate necessary and reasonable loading or unloading but without permitting abuse of the privilege granted in this chapter. (Ord. 71-6 §12.2, 1971).

 

10.28.280 Loading zones—Restricted use.
        No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any yellow loading zone for any purpose other than loading or unloading passengers or material for such time as is permitted in Section 10.28.270. (Ord. 71-6 §12.3, 1971).

 

10.28.290 Loading zones—Standing in passenger loading zone prohibited.
        No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any passenger loading zone as is specified in Section 10.28.270. (Ord. 71-2 §12.4, 1971).

 

10.28.300 Display of warning devices when commercial vehicle disabled.
        Every motor truck having an unladen weight of four thousand pounds or more, and every truck tractor irrespective of weight when operated upon any street or highway during darkness shall be equipped with and carry such warning lights and devices as are required by California Vehicle Code Section 25300. When any vehicle above mentioned or any trailer or semi-trailer is disabled on streets or highways outside of any business or residence district within the city and upon which street or highway there is insufficient street lighting to reveal a vehicle at a distance of two hundred feet during darkness, a warning signal of the character indicated above shall be immediately placed at a distance of approximately one hundred feet in advance of, and one hundred feet to the rear of, such disabled vehicle. The continuous flashing of at least four approved Class A Type I turn signal lamps, at least two toward the front and at least two toward the rear of the vehicle, shall be considered to meet the requirements of this section until the devices mentioned above can be placed in the required locations. The warning signals mentioned in this section shall be displayed continuously during darkness while such vehicle remains disabled upon such street or highway. (Ord. 79-6 Art. III §P(3), 1979; Ord. 71-6 §10.13, 1971).

 

10.28.310 Stop intersections designated.
        The intersection of Bentley and Tim Bell Roads shall be made a four-way stop sign intersection. Stop signs shall be placed on Becky Way, at the intersections of Pecan and Kadota Streets. (Ord. 79-24 §1(1), (2), 1980).

 

10.28.320 Parking—Spaces on designated streets.
        One parking space is eliminated on the south side of Bentley Street, immediately west of the crosswalk at “C” Street. (Ord. 79-24 §1(3), 1980).

 

10.28.330 Parking prohibited in pedestrian walkways.
        No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in such a manner as to block pedestrian access within a public right-of-way. For that purpose, a minimum clear space of five feet shall be maintained behind all curbs, whether or not such area has been improved by sidewalk construction. On those streets where the public right-of-way does not extend at least five feet behind the curb, the entire right-of-way behind the curb shall remain unobstructed for pedestrian access. (Ord. 83-6 §B, 1983).

 

10.28.340 Violation—Penalties.
        Violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable by fine in the amounts set forth by resolution of the city council from time to time. (Ord. 2013-01 §1; Ord. 03-01, §2; Ord. 83-6 §B, 1983).

Chapter 10.32 MISCELLANEOUS DRIVING RULES
10.32.010 Driving through funeral procession.
        No operator of any vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral procession or a parade; provided, that such vehicles are conspicuously so designated. The directing of all vehicles and traffic on any street over which such funeral procession or parade wishes to pass shall be subject to the orders of the police department. (Ord. 71-6 §8, 1971).

 

10.32.020 Commercial vehicles using private driveways.
        No person shall operate or drive a commercial vehicle in, on or across any private driveway approach or sidewalk area or the driveway itself without the consent of the owner or occupant of the property, if a sign or markings are in place indicating that the use of such driveway is prohibited. For the purpose of this section a commercial vehicle shall mean a vehicle having a rated capacity in excess of one-half ton. (Ord. 71-6 §8.2, 1971).

 

10.32.030 Riding or driving on sidewalk.
        No person shall ride, drive, propel or cause to be propelled any vehicle or animal across or upon any sidewalk excepting over permanently constructed driveways and excepting when it is necessary for any temporary purpose to drive a loaded vehicle across a sidewalk; provided, further, that said sidewalk area is to be substantially protected by wooden planks two inches thick, and written permission be previously obtained from the city traffic engineer. Such wooden planks shall not be permitted to remain upon such sidewalk area during the hours from six p.m. to six a.m. (Ord. 71-6 §8.3, 1971).

 

10.32.040 New pavement and markings.
        No person shall ride or drive any animal or any vehicle over or across any newly made pavement or freshly painted markings in any street when a barrier sign, cone marker or other warning device is in place warning persons not to drive over or across such pavement or marking, or when any such device is in place indicating that the street or any portion thereof is closed. (Ord. 71-6 §8.4, 1971).

 

10.32.050 Obedience to barriers and signs.
        No person, public utility or department in the city shall erect or place any barrier or sign on any street unless of a type approved by the city traffic engineer or disobey the instructions, remove, tamper with or destroy any barrier or sign lawfully placed on any street by any person, public utility or by any department of the city. (Ord. 71-6 §8.5, 1971).

 

10.32.060 Entering intersection prohibited when.
        No operator of any vehicle shall enter any intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he or she is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles of pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control signal indication to proceed. (Ord. 71-6 §8.6, 1971).

 

10.32.070 Entering limited-access roadway.
        No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any limited-access roadway except at such entrances and exits as are lawfully established. (Ord. 71-6 §8.7, 1971).

Chapter 10.36 TRUCK ROUTES
10.36.010 Designation—Regulations.
        A.    Whenever any resolution of the council designates and describes any street or portion thereof as a street the use of which is permitted by any vehicle exceeding a maximum unladen weight limit of five tons, the city traffic engineer is authorized to designate such street or streets by appropriate signs as “truck routes” for the movement of vehicles exceeding a maximum unladen weight limit of five tons.

        B.     When any such truck route or routes are established and designated by appropriate signs the operator of any commercial vehicle exceeding a maximum unladen weight limit of five tons shall drive on such route or routes and none other, except that nothing in this section shall prohibit the operator of any commercial vehicle exceeding a maximum unladen weight of five tons coming from a “truck route” having ingress and egress by direct route to and from restricted streets when necessary for the purpose of making pickups or deliveries of goods, wares and merchandise from or to any building or structure located on such restricted streets or for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of any building or structure upon such restricted streets for which a building permit has previously been obtained therefor.

        C.     The provisions of this section shall not apply:

        1.     To passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the public utilities commission; or

        2.     To any vehicle owned by a public utility while necessarily in use in the construction, installation or repair of any public utility.

        D.    Those streets and parts of streets established by resolution of the council are declared to be truck routes for the movement of commercial vehicles exceeding a maximum unladen weight of five tons. (Ord. 77-9 §1, 1977; Ord. 71-6 §8.8, 1971).

Chapter 10.40 PEDESTRIANS
10.40.010 Crosswalks—Establishment.
        A.    The city traffic engineer shall establish, designate and maintain crosswalks at intersections and other places by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway as follows:

        Crosswalks shall be established and maintained at all intersections within the central traffic district and at such intersections outside such district, and at other within or outside said district where the city traffic engineer determines that there is particular hazard to pedestrians crossing the roadway subject to the limitation contained in subsection B of this section.

        B.     Other than crosswalks at intersections, no crosswalk shall be established in any block which is less than four hundred feet in length and such crosswalk shall be located as nearly as practicable at mid-block.

        C.     The city traffic engineer may place signs at or adjacent to an intersection in respect to any crosswalk directing that pedestrians shall not cross in the crosswalk so indicated. (Ord. 71-6 §9, 1971).

 

10.40.020 Crosswalks—Use required.
        No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than by a crosswalk in the central traffic district or in any business district. (Ord. 71-6 §9.1, 1971).

Chapter 10.48 BICYCLES
10.48.010 Bicycle defined.
        “Bicycle,” for the purposes of this chapter, means any device upon which a person may ride, which is propelled by human power through a system of belts, chains or gears and which has wheels at least twenty inches in diameter and a frame size of at least fourteen inches. (Ord. 75-6 §1, 1975).

 

10.48.020 License—Required.
        It is unlawful for any resident of the city to operate any bicycle on any street, road, highway or other public property within the jurisdiction of the city unless such bicycle is licensed in accordance with this chapter. (Ord. 75-6 §2, 1975).

 

10.48.030 License—Issuance.
        The police department shall issue bicycle license indicia provided by the Department of Motor Vehicles of the state to the owners of any bicycle which is first sold as a new bicycle in California on or after September 20, 1974. In addition, the police department shall issue, upon application, bicycle license indicia to the owners of all other bicycles whether new or used. The license, when issued, shall entitle the licensee to operate the bicycle, for which the license has been issued, upon all streets, alleys and public highways, exclusive of any sidewalk area, as defined by the Vehicle Code. (Ord. 75-6 §3(a), 1975).

 

10.48.040 License—Registration plates and cards—Recordkeeping.
        A.    The city shall provide adhesive license indicia in the shape and form as provided by the Department of Motor Vehicles.

        B.     It shall be the duty of the bicycle owner to attach the license indicia to the frame of the bicycle.

        C.     The police department shall issue a registration card to each licensee corresponding to each license indicia upon the payment of the license fee provided for in this chapter.

        D.    The police department shall also keep records showing the date of issuance of each license, the name and address of each licensee, the license number, the serial number of the bicycle, if any, and the make, type and model of the bicycle. Such records shall be maintained during the period of validity of the license or until notification that the bicycle no longer is to be operated. (Ord. 75-6 §4, 1975).

 

10.48.050 License—Renewal.
        All licenses issued pursuant to this title shall be renewed by the licensee at such periods and intervals as the Director of the Department of Motor Vehicles of the state may direct. (Ord. 75-6 §8, 1975).

 

10.48.060 License—Fee—Renewal and transfer.
        A.    The license fee for each license issued under this chapter shall be two dollars and shall be paid in advance when the license is issued.

        B.     Pursuant to Section 10.48.100, the license may be transferred when the ownership is transferred and a fee of one dollar shall be paid for the registration of the transfer by the transferee.

        C.     The renewal fee for each license issued pursuant to this title shall be two dollars.

        D.    However, the total fees charged for any one license shall not exceed the sum of two dollars per year. (Ord. 75-6 §9, 1975).

 

10.48.070 License—Fee—Use of funds.
        All fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall be deposited in a special fund and shall be used for the support of the administration of this chapter, to improve bicycle safety programs, and to establish bicycle facilities, including bicycle paths and lanes, within the city. (Ord. 75-6 §10, 1975).

 

10.48.080 Serial number mutilation prohibited.
        It is unlawful for any person to willfully or maliciously remove, destroy, mutilate or alter the serial number of any bicycle licensed pursuant to this chapter. It is also unlawful for any person to remove, destroy, mutilate or alter any license indicia, seal or registration card during the time in which such license indicia, seal or registration card is operative; however, nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the police department from stamping numbers on the frame, rear drop-out, toe plate or bottom sprocket bracket of bicycles on which no serial number can be found, or on which the number is illegible or insufficient for identification purposes. (Ord. 75-6 §7, 1975).

 

10.48.090 Sale of secondhand bicycles.
        A.    All persons engaged in the business of buying secondhand bicycles in the city are required to make a monthly report to the police department, giving the name and address of the person from whom each bicycle is purchased, the description of each bicycle purchased, the serial number thereof, and the number of the license indicia found thereon, if any.

        B.     All persons engaged in the business of selling new or secondhand bicycles in the city are required to make a monthly report to the police department, giving a list of all sales made by such dealers, which list shall include the name and address of each person to whom sold, the kind of bicycle sold, together with a description and serial number thereof, and the number of the license indicia attached thereto, if any. (Ord. 75-6 §5, 1975).

 

10.48.100 Sale, ownership transfer or change of address.
        A.    It shall be the duty of every person who sells or transfers ownership of any bicycle to report such sale or transfer by returning to the police department the registration card issued to such person or licensee thereof, together with the name and address of the person to whom the bicycle was sold or transferred, and such report shall be made within ten days of the date of the sale or transfer.

        B.     It shall be the duty of the purchaser or transferee of the bicycle to apply for transfer of registration therefor, within ten days of the date of sale or transfer.

        C.     Whenever the owner of a bicycle licensed pursuant to this chapter changes his or her address, he or she shall within ten days notify the police department of the old and new address. (Ord. 75-6 §6, 1975).

 

10.48.110 Parking on sidewalk prohibited when.
        It is unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any bicycle on any of the sidewalks of the city, except in racks or parking areas specifically designated for the parking of bicycles. (Ord. 75-6 §3(b), 1975).

 

10.48.120 Violation—Penalty.
        A.    Every person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of an infraction and shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five dollars.

        B.     In addition to the fine set forth above, the police department or any of the members thereof may impound any unlicensed bicycle operated in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter and retain possession of it until the license provided for in this chapter is obtained by the owner of the bicycle. (Ord. 75-6 §11, 1975).

Chapter 10.50 MOTORCYCLES AND OFF-HIGHWAY MOTOR VEHICLES
10.50.010 Findings and purpose.
        A.    The city council finds that the driving, riding, and use of motor vehicles as defined in the Vehicle Code of the state of California, Sections 400, 405, 415, and 38012 on public and private property within the limits of the city is and can be the cause of noise and dust and of the destruction of plants, landscaping, and other personal and real property, which conduct adversely affects the comfort and privacy of occupants, and residents of the city. Because said conduct may be intermittent, fleeting, moving, or caused by persons who are minors, the other provisions of this code, as well as other legal remedies, are inadequate to control said conduct and its adverse effects. The provisions of this section relating to the regulation of motor vehicles are therefore necessary for the public welfare.

        B.     The city council declares that the purpose of this section is to exercise the general police power in order to protect the enjoyment and use of public and private property, to protect the rights of privacy, to preserve property and personal values, and to promote peace and quiet within the city by regulating the use of motor vehicles on public and private property within the city.

        C.     This section shall not apply to the driving, riding and use of motor vehicles on streets and highways or in other areas which are specifically governed or preempted by the Vehicle Code or any other statutes of the state of California. (Ord. 84-2 §1(part), 1984).

 

10.50.020 Use.
        It is unlawful for any person to drive, ride, or use a motor vehicle, as such vehicles are defined in Sections 400, 405, 415 and 38012 respectively of the Vehicle Code of the state of California, upon any public or private property which is not an improved public street or highway, or an improved private street constructed in accordance with city standards and approved by the city, except that this Section 10.50.020 shall not apply in any of the following instances:

        A.    Where such vehicle is being driven, ridden, or used upon property by the owner, resident or tenant of such property, or by an authorized visitor when such visitor is accompanied by or has a written authorization in his or her possession from the owner, resident or tenant of such property.

        B.     Where such use is permitted pursuant to a use permit or otherwise in accordance with the zoning regulations of the city. (Ord. 84-2 §1(part), 1984).

 

10.50.030 Mufflers.
        It is unlawful for any person to drive, ride or use a motor vehicle, as such vehicles are defined in Sections 400, 405, 415 and 38012 respectively of the Vehicle Code of the state of California, upon any public or private property which is not an improved public street or highway, or an improved private street constructed in accordance with the city standards and approved by the city, unless said motor vehicle is at all times equipped with an adequate muffler in constant operation and properly maintained so as to meet the requirements of Section 38280 of the Vehicle Code of the state of California, as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended, and no muffler or exhaust system shall be equipped with a cutout, bypass, or similar device. (Ord. 84-2 §1(part), 1984).

 

10.50.040 Other regulations.
        The regulations contained in this chapter do not supersede or preclude the enforcement of the zoning regulations or any other regulations contained in this code which are applicable to any conduct regulated hereby. (Ord. 84-2 §1(part), 1984).

Chapter 10.54 ABANDONED VEHICLES
10.54.010 Definitions.
        Unless the context otherwise requires, the definitions of words and phrases set forth in this section shall govern the construction of this chapter.

        “Abandoned vehicle” includes the following:

        1.     “Public nuisance vehicle” means any vehicle or parts thereof, that is abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative, that is left on public or private property, including highways and that creates a condition tending to reduce the value of private property, promotes blight and deterioration, invites plundering, creates fire hazards, constitutes an attractive nuisance endangering the health and safety of minors, harbors rodents and insects, or jeopardizes health, safety and general welfare.

        “Board” means the appeals hearing board of the city of Waterford as set by resolution of the city council.

        “Employee” means a city employee designated by the city manager.

        “Highway” means a way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular traffic. Highway includes a street, and all or any part of the entire width of the right-of-way of said highway.

        “Peace officer” means an individual as defined in Chapter 4.5 (commencing with Section 830) of Title 3 of Part 2 of the Penal Code.

        “Vehicle” is a device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be propelled, moved, or drawn upon a highway, excepting a device moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. (Ord. 2014-12 §1; Ord. 08-02 §1, 2008; Ord. 92-08 §3, 1992).

 

10.54.020 Findings.
        In addition to and in accordance with the determination made and the authority granted by the state under Section 22660 of the Vehicle Code to remove abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicles or parts as public nuisances, the city council makes the following findings and declarations:

        The accumulation and storage of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicles or parts, on private or public property, including highways, creates a condition tending to reduce the value of private property, promotes blight and deterioration, invites plundering, creates fire hazards, constitutes an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, creates a harborage for rodents and insects and is injurious to the health, safety, and general welfare. Therefore, the presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicle or parts, on private or public property, including highways, is declared to constitute a nuisance which may be abated in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 92-08 §3, 1992).

 

10.54.030 Enforcement by city manager.
        Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or by law, the provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by city manager or employees designated in writing by the city manager. (Ord. 92-08 §3, 1992).

 

10.54.040 Authority of peace officer or employee to remove abandoned vehicles.
        Any peace officer or any other employee, in the territorial limits in which the officer or employee is authorized to act, who has reasonable grounds to believe that a vehicle has been abandoned, may remove the vehicle from a highway or from public or private property. (Ord. 92-08 §3, 1992).

 

10.54.050 Authority of peace officer to remove vehicles left for seventy-two hours on a highway.
        Any peace officer may remove a vehicle located within the territorial limits in which the officer or employee may act, when any vehicle is parked or left standing upon a highway for seventy-two or more consecutive hours. (Ord. 92-08 §3, 1992).

 

10.54.060 Authority to immediately remove from a highway vehicles which lack necessary equipment.
        Motor vehicles which are parked, resting, or otherwise immobilized on any highway or public right-of-way and which lack an engine, transmission, wheels, tires, doors, windshield, or any other part or equipment necessary to operate safely on the highways of this state are a public nuisance and may be removed immediately upon discovery by a peace officer or employee. (Ord. 92-08 §3, 1992).

 

10.54.070 Authority of contractor to remove abandoned vehicles.
        Any person performing a franchise or contract awarded pursuant to subdivision (a) of Vehicle Code Section 22710 may remove a vehicle from a highway or from public or private property, after a determination by a peace officer or other employee, that the vehicle is abandoned, as determined pursuant to Vehicle Code Section 22523. (Ord. 92-08 §3, 1992).

 

10.54.080 Authority to enter private property.
        In the enforcement of this chapter, the city manager and designated employees may enter upon private property for the purposes specified in the ordinance to examine a vehicle or parts thereof, obtain information as to the identity of a vehicle, and remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or part thereof declared a nuisance pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 92-08 §3, 1992).

 

10.54.090 Authority of contracted person to enter private property.
        When the city has contracted with or granted a franchise to any person or persons for the abatement of abandoned vehicles, such person or persons shall be authorized to enter upon private property or public property to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 92-08 §3, 1992).

 

10.54.100 Chapter not exclusive.
        This chapter is not the exclusive regulation of abandoned wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicles. It shall supplement and be in addition to the other regulatory codes, statutes, and ordinances enacted by the city, county, state, or other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction. (Ord. 92-08 §3, 1992).

 

10.54.110 Abandoned vehicles on public or private property, excluding a highway.
        A.    Upon discovery of an abandoned vehicle or a vehicle which lacks an engine, transmission, wheels, tires, doors, windshield, or other major part or equipment necessary to operate safely on the highway, the city manager shall have the authority to cause the abatement and removal of said vehicle in accordance with the procedure prescribed in this section.

        B.     Except as otherwise provided by law or this chapter, not less than a ten-day notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle or part thereof as a public nuisance shall be issued for a vehicle abandoned on public or private property, excluding a highway, unless the property owner and the owner of the vehicle have signed releases authorizing removal and waiving further interest in the vehicle or part thereof, except as provided in Vehicle Code Section 22661(c).

        C.     The ten-day notice of intention to abate and remove a vehicle or part thereof, when required by this chapter, shall contain a statement of hearing rights of the owner of the property on which the vehicle is located and of the owner of the vehicle. The statement shall include notice to the property owner that he or she may appear in person at a hearing or may submit a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, with his or her reason for such denial, in lieu of appearing. The notice of intention to abate shall be mailed, by registered or certified mail, to the owner of the land as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the last registered and legal owners of record unless the vehicle is in such condition that the identification numbers are not available to determine ownership.

        D.    A request for a hearing shall be made to the city clerk within ten days after the mailing of notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle or at the time of signing a release.

        E.     Upon a request for a hearing by the owner of the vehicle or the owner of the land upon which such vehicle is located, a public hearing shall be held before the board.

        F.     If such a request is not received within such period, the appropriate public body, agency, or officer shall have the authority to remove the vehicle.

        G.    The board shall hear all facts and testimony it deems pertinent. The facts and testimony may include testimony on the condition of the vehicle or parts, and the circumstances concerning its location on the private property or public property. The board shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence.

        H.    The owner of the land on which the vehicle is located is authorized to appear in person at the hearing or present a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, with his or her reason for such denial.

        I.      If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle was placed on the land without the consent of the landowner and that he or she has not subsequently acquiesced in its presence, then the local authority shall not assess costs of administration or removal of the vehicle against the property on which the vehicle is located or otherwise attempt to collect such cost from the owner.

        J.      If the owner of the land on which the vehicle is located submits a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his or her land within such time period, this statement shall be construed as a request for hearing which does not require the presence of the owner submitting such request.

        K.    The board may impose such conditions and take such other action as it deems appropriate under the circumstances to carry out the purpose of this chapter. It may delay the time for removal of the vehicle, or parts, if, in the public hearing, the city manager or designee may find that a vehicle, or parts, has been abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or is inoperative on private or public property and order the same be removed from the property as a public nuisance and disposed of as provided in this chapter and determine the administrative costs and the cost of removal to be charged against the owner of the land. The order requiring removal shall include a description of the vehicle or parts and correct identification number and license number of the vehicle, if available.

        L.     Any interested party may appeal the decision of the board by filing a written notice of appeal with the city council within five days after the decision. Such appeal shall be heard by the city council which may affirm, amend, or reverse the order or take other action deemed appropriate. The clerk shall give written notice of the time and place of the hearing to the appellant, to the owner of the land, and the owner of the vehicle. In conducting the hearing, the city council shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence.

        M.    This section shall not apply to: (1) a vehicle or part thereof which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property; or (2) a vehicle or part thereof which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer, or junk yard. This exception shall not, however, authorize the maintenance of a public or private nuisance as defined under provisions of law other than this chapter. (Ord. 2014-12 §1; Ord. 92-08 §3, 1992).

 

10.54.120 Storage of vehicle—Mileage.
        A.    Whenever a peace officer or employee removes a vehicle from a highway, or from public or private property, unless otherwise provided, he or she shall take the vehicle to the nearest garage or other place of safety or to a garage designated by the city, where the vehicle shall be placed in storage.

        B.     At the time of removal, the officer or employee shall determine the amount of mileage on the vehicle.

        C.     A vehicle placed in storage shall be released to the owner or person in control of the vehicle only if the owner or person furnishes, to the law enforcement agency or employee who placed the vehicle in storage, satisfactory proof of current vehicle registration. In lieu of obtaining proof of current registration, the agency which caused the vehicle to be stored may, in its discretion, issue a notice to appear for the registration violation. (Ord. 92-08 §3, 1992).

 

10.54.130 Notice and hearing rights.
        A peace officer or employee shall provide notice and the opportunity for a hearing in accordance with Vehicle Code Sections 22851.2 through 22851.12, 22852, or 22661(c). (Ord. 92-08 §3, 1992).

 

10.54.140 Disposition of abandoned vehicles.
        Vehicles or parts thereof may be disposed of by removal to a scrap yard, automobile dismantler’s yard, or other suitable site. (Ord. 92-08 §3, 1992).

 

10.54.150 Prohibition against reconstruction.
        After a vehicle has been removed, it shall not be reconstructed or be made operable, unless it is a vehicle which qualifies for either horseless carriage license plates or historical vehicle license plates, pursuant to Vehicle Code Section 5004, in which case the vehicle may be reconstructed or made operable. (Ord. 92-08 §3, 1992).

 

10.54.160 Notice to the Department of Motor Vehicles.
        Notice shall be given to the Department of Motor Vehicles within five days after the date of removal, identifying the vehicle or part thereof and any evidence of registration available, including, but not limited to, the registration card, certificates of ownership, or license plates. (Ord. 92-08 §3, 1992).

 

10.54.170 Notice to California Highway Patrol.
        An employee, other than a peace officer or employee of a sheriff’s department, designated to remove vehicles pursuant to Section 22669 of the Vehicle Code may do so only after he or she has mailed or personally delivered a written report identifying the vehicle and its location to the Department of California Highway Patrol located nearest to the vehicle. (Ord. 92-08 §3, 1992).

 

10.54.180 Administrative costs fixed by resolution.
        The city council, by resolution, shall from time to time determine and fix an amount to be assessed as vehicle abatement administrative, hearing, and appeal costs. Said costs shall exclude the actual cost of removal of any vehicle or parts under this chapter. (Ord. 92-08 §3, 1992).

 

10.54.190 Collection of costs as tax assessment in cases of nonpayment.
        If the administrative costs and the cost of removal which are charged against the owner of a parcel of land pursuant to Section 10.54.120 are not paid within thirty days of the date of the order, or the final disposition of an appeal therefrom, a statement of these charges shall be sent to that owner by the city. If not paid, such costs shall be assessed against the parcel of land with a nuisance abatement lien pursuant to Government Code Section 38773.1. Prior to the recordation of the lien, written notice shall be given to the owner of record of the parcel on which the nuisance was maintained, based on the last equalized assessment roll or the supplemental roll, whichever is more current. The notice shall be served in the same manner as a summons in a civil action, in accordance with Article 3 (commencing with Section 45.10) of Chapter 4 of Title 5 of Part 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure. The nuisance abatement lien shall be recorded in the county recorder’s office in the county in which the parcel of land is located, and shall specify the amount of the lien, the name of the agency on whose behalf the lien is imposed, the date of the abatement order, the street address, legal description and assessor’s parcel number on which the lien is imposed, and the name and address of the recorded owner of the parcel. (Ord. 92-08 §3, 1992).

 

10.54.200 Penalty.
        A.    No person shall abandon a vehicle upon any highway. Any violation of this section constitutes an infraction.

        B.     Every person who parks or leaves standing a vehicle on a highway for seventy-two consecutive hours or more is guilty of an infraction.

        C.     No person shall abandon a vehicle upon public or private property without the express or implied consent of the owner or person in lawful possession or control of the property. Any violation of this section constitutes an infraction.

        D.    A person convicted of a violation of this section shall pay a penalty set forth in the Waterford Municipal Code, Chapter 1.12, and in addition, such person shall provide proof that the costs of removal and disposition of the vehicle have been paid. No part of any fine imposed shall be suspended. The fine may be paid in installments if the court determines that the defendant is unable to pay the entire amount in one payment.

        E.     Proof that the costs of removal and disposition of the vehicle have been paid shall not be required if proof is provided to the court that the vehicle was stolen prior to abandonment. That proof may consist of a police report or other evidence acceptable to the court. (Ord. 92-08 §3, 1992).

 

10.54.210 Second or subsequent civil or criminal judgment—Abatement of nuisance—Treble damages.
        The city council, by ordinance, may provide that upon entry of a second or subsequent civil or criminal judgment within a two-year period finding that an owner of property is responsible for a condition that may be abated in accordance with an ordinance enacted pursuant to Section 38773.5, except for conditions abated pursuant to Section 17980 of the Health and Safety Code, the Court may order the owner to pay treble the costs of the abatement. (Ord. 92-08 §3, 1992).

Title 11 (RESERVED)

Title 12 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES
Chapter 12.04 STREET IMPROVEMENTS
Chapter 12.08 EXCAVATIONS
Chapter 12.12 FLOODING ROADS
Chapter 12.16 UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICTS
Chapter 12.20 TREES
Chapter 12.24 ENCROACHMENT PERMITS
Chapter 12.28 WATERFORD LANDSCAPING AND LIGHTING ASSESSMENT DISTRICT
Chapter 12.30 TREE AND SIDEWALK MAINTENANCE
Chapter 12.34 PARK USE
Chapter 12.35 SKATE PARKS

Chapter 12.04 STREET IMPROVEMENTS
12.04.010 Purpose.
        The purposes of this chapter are to provide for and safeguard life, health, property and the public welfare by maintaining and improving the standards of thoroughfares, for the public safety and for the protection of public investment in existing streets and highways. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A, 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(6), 1970).

 

12.04.020 Building permit issuance.
        No building permit, when such permit is required by the provisions of this code, shall be issued for the erection or construction, or the moving on to any land, of any building or structure, or for the remodeling or converting of any building or structure to an extent exceeding fifty percent of the full cash value thereof as shown in the assessor’s records, unless concrete curbs and gutters, standard driveway approaches and matching pavement are provided, except as follows:

        A.    Lots having a frontage of two hundred feet or more on a public maintained street or highway and where only on single-family dwelling is to be constructed and structures for uses appurtenant thereto;

        B.     Lots in the A-2 zone districts having a frontage of two hundred feet or more on which there is to be constructed one or more structures for those uses permitted in A-2 zone districts, as provided in Chapter 17.12 of this code;

        C.     On large sized parcels on which only a portion of the property is to be occupied by structures for uses other than one single residence or those uses permitted in A-2 zone districts; the director of public works may limit the requirement of construction of curbs and gutters, driveway approaches and matching pavement to that frontage opposite the area being developed for buildings, parking for motor vehicles and outside storage or uses in connection with the buildings;

        D.    When the director of public works finds that the installation of concrete curb and gutter, standard driveway approaches and/or matching pavement is undesirable or unfeasible due to the possibility of increased traffic hazards, bad drainage, difficulties for on-street parking, driveway access, or the establishment of grade lines; or any other condition which the director of public works deems justifiable in delaying such street improvements until the public maintained thoroughfare is reconstructed, the owner shall deposit a sum of money or an approved instrument of credit, in an amount set by the director of public works equal to the estimated cost of the improvements, which may be retained and used by the city to make such improvements, after regarding or reconstruction has been done or other need for postponement has been eliminated or has ceased to exist;

        E. 1. In the case of lots having a street or road frontage of less than two hundred feet, which are of legal record on the effective date of this subsection, and for which no official street plan and profile providing for adequate drainage or street width, has been adopted by the city council or for other reasons as determined by the city engineer for which a delay in the installation of such improvements would be of advantage to the city, a recordable deferred street improvement agreement providing for the installation of concrete curb, gutter, matching pavement and sidewalk, when required by this code, and specifying that the sum to be expended for improvements shall be in the amount equal to the cost of such improvements at the time they are completed, may be executed in lieu of making such improvements. Such agreement shall be in form as approved by the city attorney and as accepted on behalf of the city by the city engineer or his or her authorized deputy, and when recorded shall constitute a lien upon the property.

        2.     The agreement shall be performed and complied with upon demand of the director of public works after a finding by the city council that one or more of the conditions listed below is applicable:

        a.     A satisfactory drainage system exists, with direct benefit to such lot, which will accommodate surface stormwater to the established community standard.

        b.     The public maintained thoroughfare abutting the lot is to be or has been reconstructed to a satisfactory grade.

        c.     Fifty percent of the frontage of a particular block on the side of the street on which the lot is located has curb, gutter and matching pavement installed or the owners of such percentage of frontage have agreed to install such improvements by agreements executed pursuant to the provisions of this subsection. For purposes hereof, block shall be the distance on one side of a street between two intersecting streets as shown on the recorded subdivision map, or one thousand feet, whichever is less. The director shall establish the limits of the one thousand feet, for the purpose of determining that fifty percent of frontage is or will be improved. In the case of a cul-de-sac or dead-end street, “block” shall mean the distance along one side of the street for not more than one thousand feet, as determined by the director.

        d.     That special circumstances exist which justify requiring immediate construction of street improvements.

        3.     The director of public works shall give thirty days’ notice, in writing, to the owner of the property to install the required improvements. If the owner of the property refuses or neglects to install the required improvements within such period of thirty days, the agreement may be referred to the city attorney for action for enforcement of the lien thereof, or said improvements may be installed by the department of public works and the cost thereof shall become a lien and charge upon the property and collectible in the same manner as unpaid taxes, together with costs of collection.

        4.     Upon the satisfactory completion of the obligation or a substitution of the agreement by a cash deposit with the city as provided in the agreement, the city shall record a release and satisfaction exonerating the agreement and lien thereof. (Ord. 79-22 §1, 1979; Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 76-2 §1, 1976; Ord. 70-5 §1(6), 1970).

 

12.04.025 Storm drainage.
        No building permit, when such permit is required by the provisions of this code, shall be issued for the erection or construction, or the moving on to any land, of any building or structure, or for the remodeling or converting of any structure to an extent exceeding fifty percent of the full cash value thereof as shown in the assessor’s records, unless:

        A.    Adequate storm and runoff drainage exists for such lot, in the determination of the building official; or

        B.     Adequate storm and runoff drainage is provided for such lot as part of the erection, construction, moving, remodeling, or conversion, in the determination of the building official; or

        C.     The applicant for such building permit pays fees in lieu of provisions of adequate storm and runoff drainage, the amount of which shall be determined from time to time by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 86-7 §1, 1986).

 

12.04.030 Plans and profiles—Time limit for completion.
        If improvements are required, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter or any other provision of this code, plan and profile of proposed street improvements, prepared by a licensed civil engineer, shall be submitted to the director of public works for review and approval prior to the issuance of a building permit. All improvements shall be completed prior to final approval of the building or structure by the department of public works, unless the director finds that by reason of special circumstances completion thereof may be postponed, but in such event cash in an amount set by the director of public works equal to the estimated cost of the improvements shall first be deposited with the department of public works. (Ord. 79 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(6), 1970).

 

12.04.040 Land dedication.
        The director of public works may require dedication of land for street or highway purposes, to achieve conformance with the city general plan therefor, prior to issuance of building permit, or the director may accept in lieu thereof an agreement to make such dedication, in form and substance as specified by the director. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(6), 1970).

 

12.04.050 Sidewalks required when.
        No building permit, when such permit is required by the provisions of this code for the erection, construction, moving, remodeling or converting of any building or structure, as provided in Section 12.04.020, shall be issued except upon requirement that sidewalk be provided on the frontage of the lot, and on the side of corner lots, whenever the frontage is less than one hundred thirty feet and where standard curb and gutter have been constructed, except in those subdivisions of more than four parcels which have been recorded between May 10, 1961, and June 27, 1969. Exceptions to this requirement may be granted by the city council upon application therefor and upon a showing of special hardship or of incompatibility of sidewalk requirement with present or reasonably contemplated community design or development. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(6), 1970).

 

12.04.060 Appeal.
        A.    Any permit applicant, if of the opinion that any decision, determination, or requirement of the director of public works is an improper application of this chapter or not legally justified, may appeal to the city planning commission.

        B.     All appeals taken under this section must be taken within thirty days after the decision, determination, or statement of requirement of the director of public works by filing with the office of the planning commission a written notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The planning director shall notify the director of public works of the filing of such appeal, and the director of public works shall forthwith transmit to the planning commission all the papers constituting the file and record upon which the action appealed from was taken.

        C.     The planning director, upon the filing of such appeal, shall place the matter upon the agenda for the next regular meeting of the planning commission occurring not earlier than five days after the filing of appeal, and shall notify the appealing permit applicant by letter of the meeting date and place at which the appeal will be heard.

        D.    The planning commission may, in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or modify, the decision, determination, or requirement appealed from and may make such decision, determination, or requirement as ought to be made, and to that end shall have all the powers of the director of public works provided in this chapter.

        E.     Appeal from the action of the planning commission may be made to the city council, in accordance with the procedure, and with the effect, provided in Sections 17.66.050 and 17.66.060. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(6), 1970).

Chapter 12.08 EXCAVATIONS
12.08.010 Definitions.
        As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meaning:

        A.    “Applicant” means any person applying for permission of the city council or the written permit of the street superintendent as provided for in this chapter.

        B.     “New or different use” means a change in use of an existing installation or structure constituting a substantially increased burden upon a county highway or other public place.

        C.     “Permittee” means any person who shall have received the permission of the city council or the written permit of the street superintendent as provided for herein.

        D.    “Person” means any individual, municipal, quasi-municipal, public or private corporation and any improvement, water, sanitary, irrigation or other public district.

        E.     “Street superintendent” means the superintendent of streets and maintenance of the city.

        F.     “Work day” means every day other than a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979: Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979: Ord. 70-5 §1(3)(part), 1970).

 

12.08.020 Applicability to county highway installations.
        Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to apply to poles, lines, fences, wires or other surface or overhead installations in county highways; provided, however, that no person having permission of the city council a franchise or other authority of law so to install such surface or overhead installations, shall do so without first consulting with and fully advising the street superintendent. Persons maintaining such surface or overhead installations need not consult with or advise the street superintendent concerning matters of normal maintenance or the routine providing of new service to the customers of such person. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(3)(part), 1970).

 

12.08.030 Permit—Required.
        It is unlawful for any person not having a franchise or other authority of law to make any excavation in or upon any city street or other public place or to construct, install or make a new or different use of any siphon, bridge, pipeline, conduit or similar structure in, along, upon or across any city street or other public place without first obtaining permission of the city council to do so. It is unlawful for any person having permission of the city council, a franchise, or other authority of law, to make any excavation in or upon any city street or to construct, install or make a new or different use of any siphon, bridge, pipeline, conduit or similar structure in, along, upon or across any city street or other public place without first applying for and obtaining a permit from the street superintendent as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(3)(part), 1970).

 

12.08.040 Permit—Application.
        A.    Applications for permits provided in this chapter shall be made in writing in such form as may be prescribed by the street superintendent.

        B.     Such application shall show at least the following information:

        1.     Estimated cost to the city of repairing damage to the street or other public place caused by the excavation required by any burying, laying or installing of an underground pipe, line, conduit or similar structure;

        2.     Plans and a brief description of the proposed excavation and installation;

        3.     Location of the excavation and installation;

        4.     Estimated time necessary to complete the making, filling, compacting and resurfacing of such excavation and installation;

        5.     The necessity for excavating in a city street or other public place;

        6.     Proposed date of commencement of work.

        C.     Except as hereinafter provided, the application shall be accompanied by a deposit of cash, certified check, cashier’s check, bond executed in favor of the city by a surety company or other undertaking acceptable to the city council in a sum not less than the amount estimated in the application as the cost of repairing damage to the road, and conditioned upon the applicant’s faithfully performing all work to be done under the permit applied for, and conforming to all conditions or restrictions which may be specified in said permit to the satisfaction of the director of public works. In lieu of the deposit required with each application, any applicant may make a blanket deposit in a form and amount acceptable to the city council, which shall remain on deposit until returned or exonerated by the council, as security for the performance of any permit for work to be done hereunder then pending or thereafter submitted. The foregoing to the contrary notwithstanding, such a deposit or security shall not be required of a public utility or public agency which engages in excavation as a usual and ordinary part of its business or service; provided, however, that the director of public works may require of any such applicant a bond or other security satisfactory to the city council in a sum not to exceed twenty thousand dollars if such applicant has in fact prior to such application failed to comply with the provisions of this chapter or with the provisions of a previous permit.

        D.    Upon receiving an application to excavate and make an installation in a city street, the street superintendent shall either approve it or reject it. If the application is approved, the street superintendent shall cause the deposit, if any, to be paid into the city treasury and shall issue a written permit authorizing the excavation and installation, which permit shall embody and be subject to all of the conditions of this chapter and to such further conditions as the street superintendent may deem for the best interests of the city in each application. In the event the application is rejected, any deposit or bond made and delivered in connection therewith shall be forthwith returned to the applicant together with the reason for such rejection and recommendations for modification of the application. Applicant may thereupon submit a new application or, if dissatisfied with such rejection, may make a similar application in a similar manner to the city council.

        E.     Anything in this chapter to the contrary notwithstanding, the street superintendent shall have the power to issue permits as set forth in subsections B, C and D of this section without prior order of the city council in the following cases:

        1.     The construction of sewers within the right-of-way by a city or other public corporation or district;

        2.     The construction of house sewer laterals wholly within the right-of-way;

        3.     Installation of siphons, pipelines, conduits, culverts or similar water carrying facilities across a city street at an angle no greater than forty-five degrees from a right angle intersection with the centerline of the right-of-way.

        F.     The street superintendent shall report to the city council from time to time upon the issuance of such permits. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 72-11 §1, 1972; Ord. 70-5 §1(3)(part), 1970).

 

12.08.050 Bond refund.
        A.    Any deposit or bond made and delivered pursuant to this chapter shall be held by the auditor or street superintendent, respectively, and returned or retained as herein directed.

        B.     In the event the construction, excavation or installation is properly completed by the permittee to the satisfaction of the street superintendent, whose sole judgment and decision in such matter shall be final and conclusive, the bond filed shall be returned to the permittee by the street superintendent or the amount of his or her deposit shall be returned to him or her upon the order of the city council directing the auditor to draw his or her warrant on the city treasurer for the proper amount involved.

        C.     No such bond or deposit shall be returned to the permittee until the reasonable inspection fees and the amount of any damage to the city by reason of the exercise of the permit has been paid to the city. If all such fees and damages are not paid to the city within a reasonable time after completion of the work contemplated by the permit, then the city shall retain so much of the deposit as the city council shall determine it may be entitled to hereunder or proceed upon the bond therefor. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(3)(part), 1970).

 

12.08.060 Construction requirements.
        All proposed siphons, culverts, bridges, excavations and installations in, along, upon or across the city streets shall be made in accordance with the plans and descriptions approved by and filed in the office of the street superintendent, and shall be subject to the conditions imposed as follows:

        A.    The street superintendent shall have the right to inspect the work to be performed and to prescribe any and all conditions pertaining to such construction or excavation and installation. Written notice shall be given to the street superintendent not less than three work days prior to the commencement of any work under the permit granted unless the date of commencement has been specified in the application or permit. The permittee shall properly compact and resurface the backfilled material in a manner acceptable to the street superintendent and, in the event of any settlement of backfill from any cause whatsoever on such city street where such installation is made within one year thereof the permittee shall make necessary repairs to the damaged area.

        B.     If at any time after the installation the city finds it necessary and proper to change the grade in or make a new alignment of any city street where such installation is made, the permittee, upon written demand by the city, shall at permittee’s sole expense alter any of such installations or structures which may be in conflict with the new grade or alignment; provided, however, that this subsection shall cease to apply when such city street becomes a state freeway.

        C.     Unless otherwise expressly permitted by the street superintendent, the permittee shall, during the entire period of construction, maintain access to traffic over, upon and across such city streets and approaches thereto so as not unreasonably to hinder, render inconvenient or interfere with the public use thereof or with persons lawfully entitled to the use thereof. It shall be the duty of the permittee to place and maintain lights at each end of any such excavation, and at distances of not more than fifty feet along the line thereof, from sunset of each day to sunrise of the next day, until such excavation is entirely refilled; and the permittee shall safeguard the excavation by such other barriers, signs and measures, as may be necessary and proper in each case to provide for the safety of persons, animals and vehicles using such street.

        D.    After such excavation is commenced, the work of making, filling, compacting and resurfacing the same shall be prosecuted with due diligence, from day to day until completed, and so as not to obstruct the street more than is reasonably necessary.

        E.     If any construction, excavation or installation is not completed in the manner and within the time required by any of the provisions of this chapter, the street superintendent shall notify the permittee of such defect in writing and if the permittee fails to commence the work of remedying such defect within five days, the street superintendent shall, at the sole cost and expense of the permittee, cause the defect to be remedied in the proper manner and shall restore the street to its original condition. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(3)(part), 1970).

 

12.08.070 Depth of installation.
        All underground gas, water, electrical or other pipelines, conduits and similar structures permitted to be installed in, along or across a city street shall be buried as herein provided and shall be laid at a clear depth and have a cover of not less than two and one-half feet below the surface of the highway at the point of installation whichever is the lower.

        A.    Whenever in the opinion of the street superintendent such installation may not be laid and covered at such depth by reason of an existing obstruction, the street superintendent may grant a variance of six inches from such clear depth and cover upon the condition that such applicant assumes all risk and responsibility for injury to such installation or the city, its officers and employees occasioned by reason of said reduced clear depth or cover.

        B.     The requirements of this section shall not apply to installations necessarily rising to or emerging from the surface of the ground as in the case of manholes and electrical or telephone lines ascending poles. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(3)(part), 1970).

 

12.08.080 Repair permitted.
        Any permittee lawfully maintaining any underground installation in, along, upon or across any city street by virtue of a permit obtained here-under may, without first obtaining a new permit, perform any emergency maintenance or repair such installation. Notice of any such emergency maintenance or repair work shall be given to the street superintendent as soon as practicable and thereafter such permittee shall comply with all pertinent provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(3)(part), 1970).

 

12.08.090 Siphons, culverts and bridges.
        It is unlawful for any person to convey or permit flow or discharge of water from one side of a city street to the other except through a siphon, culvert or bridge.

        A.    A siphon or culvert shall consist of either concrete or corrugated iron pipe extending the full width of the street right-of-way and to the edges thereof. It shall form a leak-proof connection with any existing or hereafter installed pipe, conduit or other enclosed artificial water course approaching within fifty feet of said siphon or culvert, water from or to which naturally flows, or artificially is caused to flow, to or from such siphon or culvert. Any such siphon or culvert shall be constructed in accordance with plans and specifications approved by and on file in the office of the street superintendent.

        B.     A bridge shall have a clear width or improved roadway of not less than thirty-two feet and shall be constructed of reinforced concrete in accordance with plans and specifications approved by and on file in the office of the street superintendent.

        C.     All such siphons, culverts and bridges installed or constructed pursuant to permits as provided in this chapter shall be maintained and kept in good repair by the applicant permitted to make such installation or construction for a period of one year from and after such installation or construction.

        D.    Any applicant desiring to make new or different use of any existing siphon, culvert or bridge shall make such repairs and improvements therein as may in the opinion of the street superintendent be necessary. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(3)(part), 1970).

 

12.08.100 Map maintenance.
        All persons maintaining underground gas, water, electrical or other pipelines, conduits or similar structures, in the city streets or other public places heretofore installed pursuant to permission of the city council, a franchise or other authority of law, shall maintain reasonably current maps of such installations and structures which shall be open to the inspection of the street superintendent. Upon the written request of the street superintendent such persons shall, within a reasonable time, furnish to the street superintendent, a map or maps or copies thereof showing the nature, extent and location of all structures or installations specified. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(3)(part), 1970).

 

12.08.110 Inspections.
        Every construction, excavation or installation permitted in this chapter may be inspected by the street superintendent and the applicant shall pay to the street superintendent the reasonable cost of such inspection. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part) , 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(3)(part), 1970).

 

12.08.120 Liability for injury or damage.
        Permittee is responsible for all liability for personal injury or property damage which may arise out of work permitted and done under a permit or which may arise out of failure on the permittee’s part to perform his or her obligations under any permit in respect to maintenance. In the event any claim of such liability is made against the city, or any department, officer, or employee therefor, permittee shall defend, indemnify and hold them and each of them, harmless from such claim. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(3)(part), 1970).

Chapter 12.12 FLOODING ROADS
12.12.010 Prohibited.
        It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to flow water, or to drain water upon, or over, any public highway in the city, or to permit irrigation water to flow or drain upon or over any such highways. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(3)(part), 1970).

Chapter 12.16 UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICTS
12.16.010 Definitions.
        The following words and phrases, when used in any provision of this chapter, shall be construed to have the following meaning:

        A.    “Clerk” means the clerk of the city council.

        B.     “Commission” means the Public Utilities Commission of the state.

        C.     “Person” means and includes individuals, firms, corporations, partnerships and their agents and employees.

        D.    “Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures” means poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms, braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits, appliances, attachments and appurtenances located above ground within a district and used or useful in supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service, excepting those that may be owned, controlled or operated by an irrigation district.

        E.     “Underground utility district” or “district” means that area in the city within which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are prohibited as such area is described in a resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 12.16.030.

        F.     “Utility” means and includes all persons or entities supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service by means of electrical materials or devices, but excludes the Turlock Irrigation District and the Modesto Irrigation District. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A (part) and Art. III §Q(1), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(3), 1970).

 

12.16.020 Public hearing.
        The city council may from time to time call public hearings to ascertain whether the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures within designated areas of the city and the underground installation of wires and facilities for supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service. The city clerk shall notify all affected property owners, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, and utilities concerned by mail of the time and place of such hearings at least fifteen days prior to the date thereof. Each such hearing shall be open to the public and may be continued from time to time. At each such hearing, all persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The decision of the city council shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part) and Art. III §Q (2), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(3)(part), 1970).

 

12.16.030 Declaration.
        If, after any such public hearing, the city council finds that the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires such removal and such underground installation within a designated area, the city council shall, by resolution, declare such designated area an underground utility district and order such removal and underground installation. Such resolutions shall include a description of the area comprising such district and shall fix the time within which such removal and underground installation shall be accomplished and within which affected property owners must be ready to receive underground service. A reasonable time shall be allowed for such removal and underground installation, having due regard for the availability of labor, materials and equipment necessary for such removal and for the installation of such underground facilities as may be occasioned thereby. Pursuant to California Streets and Highways Code Section 5896.5, if the proceedings for conversion from overhead to underground installations is initiated by legislative determination, then the city council must first determine that the city or a public utility has voluntarily agreed to pay over fifty percent of all cost of conversion, except the cost of users’ connections, in order to initiate conversion proceedings. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part) and Art. III §Q(3), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(3)(part), 1970).

 

12.16.040 Overhead structures prohibited when.
        Whenever the city council creates an underground utility district and orders the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures therein as provided in Section 12.16.030, it is unlawful for any person or utility to erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures in the district after the date when said overhead facilities are required to be removed by such resolution, except as said overhead facilities may be required to furnish service to an owner or occupant of property, prior to the performance by such owner or occupant of the underground work necessary for such owner or occupant to continue to receive utility service as provided in Section 12.16.090, and for such reasonable time required to remove said facilities after said work has been performed, and except as otherwise provided in this chapter. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part) and Art. III §Q (1), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(3)(part), 1970).

 

12.16.050 Emergency service.
        Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, overhead facilities may be installed and maintained for a period, not to exceed ten days, without authority of the city council in order to provide emergency service. The city council may grant special permission, on such terms as the council may deem appropriate, in cases of unusual circumstances, without discrimination as to any person or utility, to erect, construct, install, maintain, use or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part) and Art. III §Q(1), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(3)(part), 1970).

 

12.16.060 Exemptions.
        This chapter and any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 12.16.030 shall, unless otherwise provided in such resolution, not apply to the following types of facilities:

        A.    Any city facilities or equipment installed under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the director of public works;

        B.     Poles or electroliers used exclusively for street lighting;

        C.     Overhead wires, exclusive of supporting structures, crossing any portion of a district within which overhead wires have been prohibited, or connecting to buildings on the perimeter of a district, when such wires originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are not prohibited;

        D.    Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used for the transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of thirty-four thousand five hundred volts;

        E.     Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location on the building to another location on the same building or to an adjacent building without crossing any public street;

        F.     Antennae, associated equipment and supporting structures, used by a utility for furnishing communication services;

        G.    Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface mounted transformers, pedestal mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts;

        H.    Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used or to be used in conjunction with construction projects. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(3)(part), 1970).

 

12.16.070 Notification of property owners.
        Within ten days after the effective date of a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 12.16.030, the clerk shall notify all affected utilities and all persons owning real property within the district created by said resolution of the adoption thereof. Said clerk shall further notify such affected property owners of the necessity that, if they or any person occupying such property desire to continue to receive electric, communication or similar or associated service, they or such occupant shall provide all necessary facility changes on their premises so as to receive such service from the lines of the supplying utility or utilities at a new location, subject to applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the commission. Notification by the clerk shall be made by mailing a copy of the resolution adopted pursuant to Section 12.16.030, together with a copy of this chapter, to affected property owners as such are shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the affected utilities. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part) , 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(3)(part), 1970).

 

12.16.080 Equipment.
        If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service within a district created by any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 12.16.030, the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of the conduits, conductors and associated equipment required to be furnished by it under its applicable rules, regulations and tariffs on file with the commission. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(3)(part), 1970).

 

12.16.090 Compliance required.
        A.    Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting a building or structure within a district shall perform construction and provide that portion of the service connection on his or her property between the facilities referred to in Section 12.16.080 and the termination facility on or within said building or structure being served, all in accordance with applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the commission.

        B.     In the event any person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting said property does not comply with the provisions of subsection A of this section within the time provided for in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 12.16.030, the director of public works shall post written notice on the property being served and thirty days thereafter shall have the authority to order the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated facilities supplying utility service to said property. The cost of such action by the director of public works shall then constitute a lien on the property. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(3)(part), 1970).

 

12.16.100 City equipment removal.
        The city shall remove at its own expense all city-owned equipment from all poles required to be removed hereunder in ample time to enable the owner or user of such poles to remove the same within the time specified in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 12.16.030. (Ord. 79-17 §1(part), 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A(part), 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(3)(part), 1970).

 

12.16.110 Time limit extension.
        In the event that any act required by this chapter or by a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 12.16.030 cannot be performed within the time provided on account of shortage of materials, war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor disturbances, civil disobedience or any other circumstances beyond the control of the actor, then the time within which such act will be accomplished shall be extended for a period equivalent to the time of such limitation. (Ord. 79-17 §1, 1979; Ord. 79-6 Art. I §A, 1979; Ord. 70-5 §1(3), 1970).

Chapter 12.20 TREES
Note
*       Prior ordinance history: Ords. 79-16 and 86-3.

 

12.20.010 Title.
        The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the “Tree Ordinance” of the city. (Ord. 2012-03 §1).

 

12.20.020 Purpose.
        The council finds that:

        A.    Street trees are of economic, environmental, and aesthetic importance to the city; and

        B.     The city requires the planting of street trees as a part of subdivision developments and along major streets to enhance the character of the city; and

        C.     Street trees directly benefit the city residents by:

        1.     Reducing erosion of the topsoil by breaking the summer winds,

        2.     Reducing air pollution by producing oxygen from carbon dioxide,

        3.     Increasing property values,

        4.     Maintaining the ecological balance of the area,

        5.     Providing shade and buffering from noise and glare,

        6.     Providing energy conservation by the reduction of summer temperatures; and

        D.    The health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens will best be served by regulating the removal, severe pruning, topping, and planting of street trees and encouraging the reforestation of areas in which street trees have been removed. (Ord. 2012-03 §1).

 

12.20.030 Definitions.
        For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall be defined as follows:

        “City manager” means the city manager of the city or authorized representative.

        “City tree” means any tree, other than a street tree, planted or maintained by the city within a city easement, right-of-way, park, greenbelt, public place or property owned by the city.

        “City tree planting and maintenance specifications” are the city-adopted standards for care of trees, including, but not limited to, tree planting, young tree care, pruning, mulching, fertilization, irrigation, pest management and removal and replacement. They are included in the Waterford Urban Forest Plan and the city of Waterford Improvement Standards.

        “Department” means the public works department.

        “Director” means the public works director or designated representative.

        “Groundcover” means and includes low plants, including grass, commonly maintained at less than two feet in height when fully grown.

        “Maintain” when used herein in reference to plants, trees, shrubs or other growth means clipping, pruning, fertilizing, spraying, treating for disease or injury, and any other similar acts which promote the health, growth or beauty of such plants, trees, shrubs or other growth.

        “Owner” means and includes the legal owner of real property fronting on any street of the city, and any lessee of such owner.

        “Parkway” means the area between a sidewalk and curb.

        “Person” means any individual, firm, partnership, association or corporation acting as principal agent officer, servant or employee, for him or herself, or for any other person, firm or corporation and shall include a public utility company or similar entity.

        “Planning commission” or “commission” means the planning commission of the city.

        “Planting easement” means that portion of land made available as a public easement for the purpose of planting and maintaining street trees.

        “Property owner” means the owner of the real property, or the owner of the property adjacent to the right-of-way, on which the street tree is located or authorized agent or representative.

        “Pruning” means the usual pruning, cutting, or thinning or otherwise the removal of branches, stems, and other parts of a tree.

        “Public streets” or “streets” means and includes all roads, streets, avenues, boulevards, alleys, parkways and public rights-of-way, or any portion thereof, of the city.

        “Shrub” means and includes any low plant, commonly maintained at less than eight feet and more than two feet in height when fully grown.

        “Street right-of-way” means the street right-of-way belonging to the public, including islands, dividers and parkways.

        “Street tree” means any tree planted and/or maintained by the city as specified in the street tree plan, adjacent to a street or within a city easement or right-of-way on private property, within the street tree easement.

        “Street tree area” means that area between public street right-of-way lines plus twenty feet each side thereof.

        “Street tree easement” refers to the ten-foot zone behind the sidewalk or between curb and sidewalk (or if no sidewalk exists, behind the street curb, gutter, edge of street or property line at street) within which a street tree or private tree may exist or be planted.

        “Street tree plan” means an official adopted plan such as the Waterford Urban Forest and Resource Guide that establishes standards for the planting of certain varieties of trees in public rights-of-way, planting easements or street tree area.

        “Tree” means and includes any woody perennial commonly maintained at more than eight feet in height when fully grown. (Ord. 2012-03 §1).

 

12.20.040 Applicability.
        These rules and regulations shall apply:

        A.    To all work required under any city ordinance, including the subdivision ordinance, or required as a condition of other work performed in the street right-of-way and public places of the city; and

        B.     To individuals and groups planting trees and shrubs voluntarily. These rules and regulations shall also serve as a guide for work done by or under contract for the city. (Ord. 2012-03 §1).

 

12.20.050 Director to enforce chapter provisions.
        The director, under the general direction of the city manager, shall have the authority and responsibility to carry out the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2012-03 §1).

 

12.20.060 Authority to enter premises.
        The director shall have the authority to enter in or upon any part of the parkway or planting easement or adjacent property as is reasonably necessary for the purpose of planting, maintaining, pruning, spraying, or removing a street tree. (Ord. 2012-03 §1).

 

12.20.070 Control of disease and the like.
        The director shall have the authority to order a property owner to take such action as is necessary to control insects, scales, parasites, fungus, or other injurious pests or plant materials which could cause serious injuries to the city street trees or other plant materials within the city. The director shall notify the property owner in writing of the condition which exists and the controls necessary to correct the conditions and establish a reasonable time in which the corrective action shall be taken. (Ord. 2012-03 §1).

 

12.20.080 Responsibility for condition of trees.
        The director shall be responsible for inspecting, supervising, or ordering the maintenance, removal, and replacement of street trees planted within parkways or planting easements by the property owner or by the city. The director may cause or permit street trees or other plant materials planted in the parkways or planting easements to be removed by the city or the property owner if the trees are deemed by the director to be unhealthy, hazardous, undesirable, or causing, or will cause, excessive damages to the existing public improvements or street trees. (Ord. 2012-03 §1).

 

12.20.090 Authority to seek advice.
        The director shall have the authority to consult and seek the advice and recommendations of nurserymen, arborists, and other persons qualified in horticulture. (Ord. 2012-03 §1).

 

12.20.110 Owners to perform work—Costs.
        All work, and the costs thereof, required in the removal, pruning, or maintenance of a street tree shall be provided by the property owner or agent, including the removal of the stump to a depth as specified by the director. (Ord. 2012-03 §1).

 

12.20.120 Refusal to perform work.
        If the property owner refuses to perform the work after notice from the director, the director may order the work done by the city, and the costs shall be assessed to the property owner and tenant consistent with the city’s policy resolution establishing procedures for collection of obligations owed to the city, as amended from time to time by the city council. (Ord. 2012-03 §1).

 

12.20.130 Pruning.
        Street trees shall be pruned to enhance the natural growth, characteristics, and traits of the trees. Street trees shall not be pruned to create a form unnatural to the street tree. (Ord. 2012-03 §1).

 

12.20.140 Duty to protect.
        It shall be the responsibility of every property owner and every person occupying land to protect street trees planted in the parkways or planting easements on or adjacent to his or her property from physical damages and other plant materials which can be detrimental to the street tree’s growth or health. (Ord. 2012-03 §1).

 

12.20.150 Maintenance and protection.
        A.    It is the responsibility of each owner to control insects, scales, parasites, fungus and other injurious pests or plant material that would cause serious injury to street trees and other plant material within the city.

        B.     Each owner is responsible for proper watering of street trees.

        C.     Except as provided elsewhere in this chapter, it is unlawful to cut foliage overhanging city streets or roots in city streets without a permit.

        D.    Obstruction of visibility on corner lots in the area between thirty inches above the ground and eight feet above the ground may restrict the public’s visual enjoyment of the street and be hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic. Therefore, no shrubs shall be planted in a parkway or within ten feet of the curbline on corner lots without a permit being approved by the director after finding that such shrubbery will enhance the appearance of the street, not be detrimental to traffic safety, and not impede pedestrian use. Any shrub or tree within the street right-of-way of any lot, whether a corner or interior lot, determined by the director to be a hazard to vehicular or pedestrian traffic, may be required to be removed or pruned by the property owner to eliminate such hazard.

        E.     City forces will, within available resources, periodically trim all trees in the street rights-of-way in accordance with their growth characteristics. Generally, trees will be trimmed to provide clearance for the travel way of vehicles.

        F.     No person shall injure, break, deface, mutilate, kill or destroy any tree in the street tree area by any means, including but not limited to the following:

        1.     Constructing a sidewalk or otherwise filling up the ground area around any tree so as to shut off light, air or water from the roots without special construction;

        2.     Altering the existing ground surface within four feet (measured horizontally) of the base of any tree by cut, fill or compacting. Tree wells may be used where advisable. Excavation adjacent to any tree shall not be permitted where damage to the root system will result;

        3.     No oil, gas, chemicals, heavy construction machinery, or other construction materials shall be stored within ten feet of any tree;

        4.     No piling of building material, equipment or other substance around any tree;

        5.     Attach or place any rope, wire (other than those needed for support of a young or broken tree), sign (other than small tree identification signs), poster or handbill, wires charged with electricity (except Christmas lights during the Christmas season), or any other thing on any tree growing in any street right-of-way;

        6.     Set fire to or permit any fire to burn where such fire or heat thereof will injure any portion of any tree in any street tree area in the city;

        7.     Allow mistletoe to grow on any tree in the street tree area.

        G.    Any such tree allowed or maintained contrary to the provisions of this section is declared to be a public nuisance. Upon a determination by the director that such private tree constitutes a nuisance, he or she shall give a written notice to the owner of the property upon which said nuisance exists to trim, remove, or otherwise control such tree in such a manner as will abate such nuisance. Failure to comply with such written notice within ten days thereafter shall be deemed a violation of this section. Such written notice may be given by a personal service of a copy thereof, or by placing a copy of said notice in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the owner of the property as shown by the last assessment roll of the city. Upon failure to comply, the director may cause the work to be done, the cost thereof to be charged to the property owner. (Ord. 2012-03 §1).

 

12.20.160 Tree removal.
        A.    No person shall remove any tree upon or in any public street, planting easement, or street tree area in the city without prior permission and approval therefor from the director. The director is authorized to grant such permission at his or her discretion and where necessary. Excepting those issued to public utility companies and subdividers, as provided in Sections 12.20.260 and 12.20.300, no such permission granted shall be valid for a longer period than thirty days after its issuance.

        B.     As a condition to granting a permit under this section, the director shall collect a deposit from the applicant sufficient to defray the cost of replacing said removed tree with an approved tree in conformance with the street tree plan.

        C.     In case of emergency when a tree is hazardous or dangerous to life or property it may be removed upon order of the director. (Ord. 2012-03 §1).

 

12.20.170 Protection while trenching, grading, performing construction, or other related site work.
        Prior to any demolition, trenching, grading, construction, repair, alteration, removal or moving of any building, house or structure, or other site work, all trees to be preserved in compliance with this chapter shall be protected in accordance with the tree preservation and protection standards, and as follows:

        A.    Approved development plans and specifications shall state protection procedures for trees that are to be preserved as outlined in the tree protection specifications and shall be available at the project site. From the conception of plans, developers, architects, landscape architects, engineers and/or planners shall accurately locate and identify all existing trees on proposed project site plans and shall comply with the city policies for tree preservation. Tree care practices, such as the cutting of roots, pruning the top, etc., shall be described in the approved tree modification permit, tree preservation plan or project conditions.

        B.     It is the responsibility of the property owner or designated representative to ensure that all trades/subcontractors and utility companies abide by the preservation.

        C.     Violation or failure to comply with the requirements of this section or the condition of permit approval may result in a penalty. (Ord. 2012-03 §1).

 

12.20.180 Dangerous trees.
        Any tree or shrub growing in a street tree area or public place which in the opinion of the director endangers the life, health, safety of the public or the full and safe operation of a public utility shall be declared to be a public nuisance, and the director shall notify the owner, or duly authorized agent, in writing, that such tree or shrub is a nuisance and shall be trimmed or removed. Failure of the property owner or duly authorized agent to remove or trim such tree or shrub, within ten days after receipt of said notice by the director, shall be a violation of this chapter, and the director may then remove or trim said tree or shrub and assess the cost against the property owner. (Ord. 2012-03 §1).

 

12.20.190 Prohibited acts.
        It is unlawful for any person other than the director or designee to cut, prune, spray, brace, plant, move, remove, replace or damage any street tree or city tree or to cause the same to be done, except as authorized pursuant to this chapter. Acts prohibited by this chapter include, but are not limited to, the following:

        A.    Pruning a street tree or a city tree even if done to make room for a private tree or to clear branches overhanging private property;

        B.     Knowingly causing or permitting any wire charge with electricity to come into contact with any street tree or city tree;

        C.     Placing, applying, attaching or keeping attached any wire, rope, sign, nail, paint or other substance or structure to any street tree or city tree or to any guard or stake intended to protect such tree;

        D.    Placing or maintaining any stone, pavement or other substance so that it substantially impedes the free access of water or air to the roots of any street tree;

        E.     Cutting so many or so large a root(s) as to cause the street tree or city tree’s health to decline or cause a safety hazard;

        F.     Any other activity causing damage as defined in Section 12.20.150;

        G.    Placing fencing around a street tree;

        H.    Grading around the trunk or within the tree protection zone of a street tree or city tree;

        I.      Altering the landscaping or grade of the property including trenching, in a manner that could damage, or potentially and adversely affect the well-being of a street tree or city tree;

        J.      Allowing a private tree to violate the provisions of Sections 17.58.050 and 17.58.060 (Zoning) of Waterford Municipal Code. (Ord. 2012-03 §1).

 

12.20.200 Permits required.
        It is unlawful for any person to remove, prune, or severely prune or alter any street tree within the city, without a permit from the city. (Ord. 2012-03 §1).

 

12.20.210 Permit—Application—Conditions for granting.
        A.    Any person desiring to plant, cut down, destroy, remove or move any tree within the street tree plan area in the city shall make application to the director for a permit. Said application shall contain the number, species, size and location of the trees to be planted, cut down, destroyed, removed or moved and a brief statement of the reason as well as any other pertinent information he or she may require. The permit, when granted, shall entitle the applicant to proceed with the work.

        B.     Any person desiring to remove, prune, severely prune, or otherwise alter a street tree shall file an application for a permit with the director. Such application shall be provided by the director and may contain such information deemed necessary by the director to insure compliance with the spirit and intent of this chapter. Applications for permits shall be signed by the property owner.

        C.     Upon receiving any such application for permit, the director may inspect the premises involved, and the surrounding area, and shall ascertain the effecting tree’s removal on the street tree plan.

        D.    The determination of the director in granting or denying a permit shall be based upon the following standards:

        1.     The condition of the trees with respect to disease, general health, damage, public nuisance, danger of falling, proximity to existing or proposed structures and interference with utility service; and whether or not the tree acts as a host for a plant which is parasitic to another species of tree which is in danger of being exterminated by the parasite;

        2.     The species of the tree;

        3.     The number of existing trees in the area and the effect of tree removal upon the public health, safety, prosperity, beauty and general welfare of the area;

        4.     Good forestry practices, i.e., the number of healthy trees that a given parcel of land will support;

        5.     The necessity to remove the tree or trees in order to construct any proposed improvements to allow economic enjoyment of the property;

        6.     The topography of the land and the effect of the removal of tree on erosion, soil retention and diversion or increased flow of surface waters;

        7.     As part of a city-approved program of replacement of nonconforming trees;

        8.     The tree is causing extensive damage to public or private property and root pruning and other remedial means have proven unsuccessful.

        E.     For new trees the director shall approve the specific location of each tree in the field or on a plan drawn to scale, taking into consideration topography, street configuration, clearance from intersecting streets, alleys, driveways, walks, street lights, traffic signs, utility vaults, and other public facilities, preservation views, and coordination with other existing and proposed public and private plantings and other authorized work.

        F.     In granting a permit, the director may attach reasonable conditions to insure compliance with the intent and purpose of this section. When a permit is denied, the director shall state the reasons from said denial based on the above standards. (Ord. 2012-03 §1).

 

12.20.220 Time for performance under permits.
        The director shall stipulate a time by which all work shall be performed, not to exceed sixty days after the date of the issuance of the permit, and may require the posting of cash or other surety in an amount equal to the cost of the work to insure the faithful completion of the work specified and the cleanup of debris within the time stipulated for performance. (Ord. 2012-03 §1).

 

12.20.230 Removal permits.
        A.    Upon the receipt of an application to remove a street tree, the director shall determine whether or not such tree should be removed.

        B.     The director may issue a permit to remove or conditionally remove a street tree when one or more of the following conditions apply to the tree:

        The tree is:

        1.     Dying or dead;

        2.     Decayed, rotted, or otherwise hazardous to the public;

        3.     Diseased beyond reclamation;

        4.     Damaging or causing a nuisance to public improvements, such as curbs, gutters, sidewalks, or other utilities;

        5.     Required to be removed due to building moving from the lot or parcel provided it is not practical or reasonable to save the tree; all work and costs will be provided by the owner;

        6.     Required to be removed for new construction and the director believes better and more suitable planting will result provided there is no practical or reasonable means to save the tree; all work and costs will be provided by the owner; or

        7.     Located so that thinning is desired to improve spacing or conformity.

        C.     The director, as a condition of the removal of a tree, whenever possible shall require the planting of a tree from the Street Tree List in a location along the property frontage in keeping with the street tree plan. (Ord. 2012-03 §1).

 

12.20.240 Pruning permits.
        A.    Upon the receipt of an application to prune or severely cut a street tree, the director shall determine whether or not the tree should be pruned or otherwise severely cut.

        B.     The director may issue a permit to prune or severely cut a street tree when limb reduction or severe cutting is required either to:

        1.     Maintain pedestrian or traffic clearance and visibility;

        2.     Maintain tree health;

        3.     Maintain continuity with prior pruning practices; or

        4.     Remove a building from the parcel. (Ord. 2012-03 §1).

 

12.20.250 Permit—Public utilities.
        Any person doing business as a public utility subject to the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission of the state and any duly constituted public agency authorized to provide and providing utility service, shall be given a permit from the director, valid for one year from the date of issuance, permitting such person, to trim, brace, remove or perform such other acts with respect to trees growing in public street rights-of-way or which grow upon private property to the extent that they encroach upon such public streets as may be necessary to comply with the safety regulations of said Commission and as may be necessary to maintain the safe operation of its business. Such maintenance for utility purpose shall be performed in a manner to prevent damage to other plants or property.

        A.    The director may issue a comprehensive permit to any public utility for the pruning or other maintenance tasks of street trees and city trees, in accordance with this section to be valid for a period of one year from the date of issuance. A public utility may request that a street tree or city tree be removed.

        B.     Any public utility maintaining any overhead wire or underground pipe, wire, or conduit shall obtain permission from the director before performing any maintenance to wires or pipes or conduits which would cause injuries to street trees. Such public utility shall in no way injure, deface, prune, scar, or top any tree until its plans and procedures have been approved by the director.

        C.     The director shall be permitted to inspect all maintenance or operational work performed by public utilities which might affect the street trees. If, in the opinion of the director, the performance of work would cause excessive or unnecessary injuries to any street tree, the director shall have the authority to stop such maintenance and operational work and arrange with such utility another method of maintenance or operational work satisfactory to the city.

        D.    This section shall not apply to emergency public utility maintenance work which is performed during nonworking hours for city personnel. (Ord. 2012-03 §1).

 

12.20.260 Permit—Commercial tree trimmers.
        Any person engaging in the business of pruning, trimming or removing of trees in the city shall secure an annual permit to so operate from the director. This permit is in addition to all other business licenses required by Chapter 5.04 of this code. A fee as established by resolution of the city council may be charged for the issuance of said permit. As a condition to obtaining said permit, the person shall furnish satisfactory proof to the director that he or she has public liability insurance covering said pruning, trimming or removing trees, in minimum amounts of fifty thousand dollars for injury to any one individual, one hundred thousand dollars in the aggregate, and property damage insurance in the minimum amount of twenty-five thousand dollars or other amounts as established by the council by resolution. The policy or policies of insurance, or certificates thereof, shall be filed with the director, prior to the issuance of said license, and such person shall keep said insurance in full force and effect during the term of the permit. (Ord. 2012-03 §1).

 

12.20.270 Permits not required.
        A permit shall not be required when an immediate threat to the public health and safety exists due to an accidental occurrence or act of God and, in the opinion of the director, the removal, pruning, or cutting is required. (Ord. 2012-03 §1).

 

12.20.280 Notification of street improvements.
        The engineering department and planning department shall notify the director of any known applications for a new curb, gutter, sidewalk, driveway approach, or other installation which might require the removal of, or cause injury to, any street tree or otherwise be contrary to the intent of this chapter. (Ord. 2012-03 §1).

 

12.20.290 Street tree or urban forest plan.
        A.    The director shall prepare or have prepared a report of a street tree plan. Such plan shall be submitted to the planning commission which shall review such plan and submit its recommendations to the city council. After making any revisions thereto it may deem advisable, the city council shall adopt such plan by resolution. Amendments to the plan shall be made in the same manner as the original adoption. Said plan shall include a master tree list containing the botanical name, common name, spacing and other pertinent data.

        B.     No tree shall hereafter be planted in any public street, planting easement or street tree area without a permit from the city. The director shall require that all new plantings of trees shall be in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the street tree plan. (Ord. 2012-03 §1).

 

12.20.300 Subdivisions.
        A.    With the filing of a tentative map of any new subdivision for five or more lots, the subdivider shall file with the planning commission a proposed plan of street tree planting, designating the location and variety of trees proposed to be planted in the subdivision and shall be in conformance with the policy of the street tree plan. The map shall also designate clearly any trees upon the property which are to be removed. The planning commission shall review and approve the plan at the same time of approving the tentative subdivision map. Tentative approval of the map by the planning commission of the city shall constitute a permit to the owner to remove any trees so designated. Any changes in the trees to be planted or removed as designated on the tentative subdivision map, as filed and approved, shall be permitted under the provisions of Section 12.20.210.

        B.     Before approval of the final map of a new subdivision in the city, the subdivider shall have planted the street trees in the subdivision according to the plan approved with the tentative map or shall pay to the city the total costs of all trees required in accordance with the street tree plan and the planting thereof as computed and fixed by the director. If payment for planting the street trees is made by the subdivider to the city, the city shall plant the trees at the proper time and in conformance with the plan of the tentative subdivision. Watering and care of the trees thereafter shall be the responsibility of the owners of the property. (Ord. 2012-03 §1).

 

12.20.310 Prohibited trees.
        Some types of trees upon maturing, instead of becoming assets to the community, become liabilities, short life, destructive root systems, and rank growing branches requiring excessive maintenance. Due to one or more of these characteristics, the city council shall by a resolution in accordance with Section 12.20.290 designate prohibited trees. It is unlawful to plant prohibited trees in the city. A prohibited tree is any tree that is not listed in Chapter 15 of the Waterford Urban Forest Plan-Master Tree List. (Ord. 2012-03 §1).

 

12.20.320 Appeals.
        Any person aggrieved by any action taken by any city official pursuant to the provisions of this chapter or any guideline or procedure issued pursuant to the chapter, may appeal such action. Any person aggrieved by any act or determination of the director in the exercise of the authority herein granted shall have the right of appeal to the city council. Appeals may be made by filing written notice thereof with the city clerk within ten days after the receipt of such direction or order, stating in substance that the appeal is being made from such direction or order to the city council.

        The city clerk shall thereupon call such appeal to the attention of the city council at their next regular meeting. Action under any direction or order which has been appealed shall be suspended pending final decision of the city council on the appeal. The city council may set any such appeal for public hearing, giving such notice to the public or to the persons concerned as the council deems advisable. Following the hearing of any such appeal, the city council may affirm, reverse, or modify the action of the director, and may take any action thereof which would have been authorized in the first instance. Action by the city council shall be conclusive and final and in the event the city council upholds the direction or order of the director, the property owner, or duly authorized agent, shall, within fifteen days thereafter, comply with such direction or order. (Ord. 2012-03 §1).

 

12.20.330 Violation—Penalty.
        Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or by imprisonment in the County Jail for a period of not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 2012-03 §1).

Chapter 12.24 ENCROACHMENT PERMITS
12.24.010 Permit required.
        No works shall be done in any public right-of-way or public utility easement, nor shall any work be done on private property which involves an encroachment onto a public right-of-way unless in each case a permit is obtained from the department of public works. Application for permits shall be made on forms provided by the director of public works. (Ord. 92-15, 1992).

 

12.24.020 California licensed contractors required.
        No work shall be done in any public right-of-way or public utility easement, nor shall any work be done on private property which involves an encroachment onto a public right-of-way unless in each case a California licensed contractor performs the work. (Ord. 92-15, 1992).

 

12.24.030 Filing—Checking fees.
        Two copies of plans and specifications shall be submitted to the director of public works and shall be accompanied by a filing or checking fee in conformance with the fee schedule as set by resolution of the city council of the city of Waterford. The fee schedule shall include, but shall not be limited to, the below listed permit types. (Ord. 92-15, 1992)

        Permit Type.

        1.     Curbs and curb cuts;

        2.     Sidewalks;

        3.     Sewer service from main to lateral;

        4.     Storm drains through curb;

        5.     Utilities (major construction);

        6.     Sewer manholes;

        7.     Storm drain manholes;

        8.     Street closures (temporary);

        9.     Street lights;

        10.   Street cuts;

        11.   Street pave out;

        12.   Miscellaneous improvements;

        13.   General permit. (Ord. 92-15, 1992).

 

12.24.040 Faithful performance—Public security bond.
        The director of public works shall require the submittal of a faithful performance or public security bond or acceptable substitute security, as provided elsewhere in this title. The city attorney shall review the acceptability of those forms of security provided as an alternative to bonds and shall submit a recommendation to the city manager. (Ord. 92-15, 1992).

Chapter 12.28 WATERFORD LANDSCAPING AND LIGHTING ASSESSMENT DISTRICT
12.28.010 Definitions.
        A.    “Assessment district” means an assessment district formed pursuant to California Streets and Highways Code Section 22500 et seq.

        B.     “Clerk” means the clerk of the Waterford city council.

        C.     “Engineer” means the city engineer, engineer of the district, or any other person designated by the Waterford city council as the engineer for the purposes of this part, including any officer, board, or employee of the city of Waterford or any private person or firm specially employed by the city of Waterford as the engineer for the purposes of this part.

        D.    “Treasurer” means the treasurer of the city of Waterford.

        E.     “Fiscal year” means a twelve-month period commencing on July 1st and ending on the following June 30th.

        F.     “Improvement” means one or any combination of the following:

        1.     The installation or planning of landscaping.

        2.     The installation or construction of statuary, fountains, and other ornamental structures and facilities.

        3.     The installation or construction of public lighting facilities, including but not limited to, traffic signals.

        4.     The installation or construction of any facilities which are appurtenant to any of the foregoing or which are necessary or convenient for the maintenance or servicing thereof, including but not limited to, grading, clearing, removal of debris, the installation or construction of curbs, gutters, walls, sidewalks, paving, water, irrigation, drainage or electrical facilities.

        5.     The installation of park or recreational improvements, including but not limited to, all of the following:

        a.     Land preparation, such as grading, leveling, cutting and filling, sod, landscaping, irrigation systems, sidewalks and drainage.

        b.     Lights, playground equipment, play courts and public restrooms.

        6.     The maintenance or servicing, or both, of any of the foregoing.

        7.     The acquisition of land for park, recreational, or open space purposes.

        G.    “Landscaping” means trees, shrubs, grass, or other ornamental vegetation.

        H.    “Public lighting facilities” means all works or improvements used or useful for the lighting of any public places, including ornamental standards, luminaries, poles, supports, tunnels, manholes, vaults, conduits, pipes, wires, conductors, guys, studs, platforms, braces, transformers, insulators, contacts, switches, capacitors, meters, communication circuits, appliances, attachments, and appurtenances.

        I.      “Public places” means one or any combination of the following:

        1.     Any public street, highway, road, alley, lane, boulevard, parkway, or other way dedicated to or used for public use.

        2.     Any public property, right-of-way or leasehold interest which is in use in the perform ance of a public function and which joins any of the ways described in subsection (I)(1).

        J.      “Diagram” and “map” are used interchangeably for purposes of this part. (Ord. 90-07 §1(part), 1990).

 

12.28.020 Purpose.
        The purpose of this chapter is to establish and form the city of Waterford landscaping and lighting assessment district pursuant to the “Landscaping and Lighting Act of 1972” found in the California Streets and Highways Code, commencing with Section 22500. The district shall levy and collect assessments, and if desired to, issue bonds or notes, pursuant to the “Landscaping and Lighting Act of 1972.” (Ord. 90-07 §1(part), 1990).

 

12.28.030 Description of improvements.
        The assessments may be used to finance the installation, servicing and maintenance of publicly owned or leased landscaping (including open space areas), statuary, fountains or other ornamental structures, public lighting, including but not limited to traffic signals, and any appurtenant facilities such as sidewalks, drains, curbs or gutters; public parks and recreational improvements, including but not limited to, land, lights, equipment, restrooms and their servicing and maintenance. In addition, incidental expenses of levying and collecting the assessment may be included in the amount assessed. (Ord. 90-07 §1(part), 1990).

 

12.28.040 Description of district.
        For a full and detailed description of the Waterford landscaping and lighting assessment district, refer to the landscaping and lighting assessment district map of the city of Waterford which is on file with the clerk and is open to public inspection. The map so referred to shall govern for all details of the description. (Ord. 90-07 §1(part), 1990).

 

12.28.050 Use of assessment revenue.
        The revenue derived from the assessments (and any interest on them) must be placed in a special fund created for that purpose. The assessment is collected on the county property tax roll and the same procedures apply to delinquencies. Each year, the engineer determines the balance in the special fund by crediting any surplus, debiting any advances made by the city, and then determines the assessment amount for that year. (Ord. 90-07 §1(part), 1990).

 

12.28.060 Diagram of district.
        The diagram of an assessment district shall show:

        A.    The exterior boundaries of the assessment district.

        B.     The boundaries of any zones within the district.

        C.     The lines and dimensions of each lot or parcel of land within the district.

        D.    Each lot or parcel shall be identified by a distinctive number or letter.

        E.     New areas to the existing district may be annexed in by resolution, which shall be publicly noticed, pursuant to Streets and Highways Code Section 22500, et seq., if said annexation is not consent based. (Ord. 90-07 §1(part), 1990).

 

12.28.070 Reports.
        A.    The engineer shall prepare a report for each fiscal year for which assessments are to be levied and collected to pay the costs of the improvement described in the report.

        B.     The report shall refer to the city of Waterford landscaping and lighting assessment district by its distinctive designation, specified in the fiscal year to which the report applies, and with respect to that year, shall contain all of the following:

        1.     Plans and specifications for the improvements.

        2.     An estimate of the cost of the improvement.

        3.     A diagram of the assessment district.

        4.     An assessment of the estimated cost of improvements.

        5.     If bonds or notes will be issued, an estimate of their principal amount.

        C.     Upon completion, the engineer shall file the report with the clerk for submission to the city council. The city council may approve the report, as filed, or it may modify the report in any particular and approve it as modified. (Ord. 90-07 §1(part), 1990).

 

12.28.080 Establishing the assessment.
        A.    After approval of the report the city council shall adopt a resolution of intention, which shall include:

        1.     A declaration of the intention of the city council to levy and collect assessments within the assessment district for the fiscal year stated therein.

        2.     Generally describe the existing and proposed improvements and any substantial changes proposed to be made in existing improvements.

        3.     Refer to the assessment district by its distinctive designation and indicate the general location of the district.

        4.     Refer to the report of the engineer, on file with the clerk, for a full and detailed description of the improvements, the boundaries of the assessment district and any zones therein, and the proposed assessments upon assessable lots and parcels of land within the district.

        5.     Give notice of the time, as fixed by Section 12.28.110, and the place for hearing by the city council on the levy of the proposed assessment.

        B.     The clerk shall give notice of hearing by causing the resolution of intention to be published.

        C.     Any interested person may, prior to the conclusion of the hearing, file a written protest with the clerk. A written protest shall state all grounds of objection. A protest by a property owner shall contain a description sufficient to identify the property owned by him or her.

        D.    The city council shall hold the hearing at the time and place specified in the resolution of intention and in any order continuing the hearing, provided that no continuance shall be made to a date subsequent to August 10th without the prior consent of the county auditor.

        E.     Upon the conclusion of the hearing, the city council may adopt a resolution confirming the assessment and diagram, either as originally proposed or as changed by it. The adoption of the resolution shall constitute the levy of an assessment for the fiscal year referred to in the assessment.

        F.     The initial assessment may be established through a resolution adopted by hearing with a 10 day notice to all owners of property in the proposed assessment district of the proposed assessment derived from a city council approved engineer’s report. (Ord. 90-07 §1(part), 1990).

 

12.28.090 Collection of assessment.
        After confirmation, the assessment role is prepared and filed with the county. The assessment proceeds will be received at the same time as property taxes. The city may advance money to the district and be repaid when tax funds are received. (Ord. 90-07 §1(part), 1990).

 

12.28.100 Deposit of moneys—Expenditures.
        Upon receipt of moneys representing assessments collected by the county, the treasurer shall deposit the moneys in the treasury of the city of Waterford to the credit of an improvement fund for the assessment district from which they were collected, and the moneys shall be expended only for the improvements authorized for such district. (Ord. 90-07 §1(part), 1990).

 

12.28.110 Annual confirmation required.
        Once adopted, the assessment must be confirmed annually and the assessment roll filed with the county by August 10th of each year. The process for confirmation is for the engineer to determine the cost of performing the same services for the upcoming year as well as provide any additional services and credits or debits of the amounts in the improvement fund. The engineer submits a summary report and budget for the district. Pursuant to Section 12.28.080, published notice is given of a public hearing on that updated report and budget and written protest may be submitted. (Ord. 90-07 §1(part), 1990).

 

12.28.120 Exemptions.
        Public property owned by any public agency and in use in the performance of a public function shall not be subject to assessment under this part. Such additional exemptions may be created by the council, by resolution, based on benefit to the property to be assessed. (Ord. 90-07 §1(part), 1990).

 

12.28.130 Limitations of action and appeal.
        The validity of an assessment levied under this part may be contested in the same manner as county taxes, except that assessments levied under this part for the purpose of raising revenue necessary to pay the debt service on bonds issued pursuant to California Streets and Highways Code Section 22662.5 shall not be contested in any action or proceeding, unless the action or proceeding is commenced within thirty days after the initial assessment is levied. Any appeal from a final judgment in the action or proceeding shall be perfected within thirty days after the entry of judgment. (Ord. 90-07 §1(part), 1990).

Chapter 12.30 TREE AND SIDEWALK MAINTENANCE
12.30.010 Trees—Property owner maintenance responsibility and duty to public.
        A.    The owner of a lot fronting on or adjacent to any portion of a street shall maintain any trees, shrubs, hedges or other landscaping along said street not within the street right-of-way adjacent to his or her property in such non-dangerous condition that the trees, shrubs, hedges or other landscaping will not interfere with the public convenience or safety in the use of the streets and sidewalks. Said owners shall maintain such street trees so that there is a minimum thirteen-foot vertical vehicular clearance from the top of the curb, to any part of a street tree.

        B.     For purposes of this section, maintenance of trees, shrubs, hedges and other landscaping includes but is not limited to: deep root watering, root pruning, installing root barriers, clearance and structural trimming, fertilizing, pest control, and removal of branches, leaves, and other debris.

        C.     Property owners required by this section to maintain trees, shrubs, edges and other landscaping shall owe a duty to members of the public using public streets and sidewalks to maintain such trees, shrubs, hedges or other landscaping in a safe and non-dangerous condition for users of the public streets and sidewalks.

        D.    If any property owner fails to maintain any adjacent trees, shrubs, hedges or other landscaping in a nondangerous condition as required by this section, and any person suffers damage or injury to person or property, the property owner shall be liable for all damages or injuries caused by the failure of the owner to maintain these areas. (Ord. 93-14 §1, 1993).

 

12.30.020 Maintenance and repair of sidewalks.
        A.    Anything in this chapter to the contrary notwithstanding, the maintenance and repair of sidewalk areas and the making, confirming and collection of assessments for the cost and expenses of said maintenance and repair may be done and the proceedings therefore may be had and taken in accordance with this section and the procedure therefor provided in Chapter 22 of Division 7, Part 3 of the Streets and Highways Code of the State as the same is now in effect or may hereafter be amended. In the event of any conflict between Streets and Highways Code of the State and this Part 17, the provisions of Part 17 shall control.

        B.     The owners of lots or portions of lots adjacent to or fronting on any portion of a sidewalk area between the property line of the lots and the street line, including parking strips, sidewalks, curbs and gutters, and persons in possession of such lots by virtue of any permit or right shall repair and maintain such sidewalk areas and pay the costs expenses therefor, including a charge for the city of Waterford’s costs of inspection and administration whenever the city awards a contract for such maintenance and repair and including the costs of collection of assessments for the costs of maintenance and repair under subsection A of this section or handling of any lien placed on the property due to failure of the property owner to promptly pay such assessment.

        C.     For the purposes of this section, maintenance and repair of sidewalk area shall include, but not be limited to, maintenance and repair of surfaces including grinding, removal and replacement of sidewalks, repair and maintenance of curb and gutters, removal and filling or replacement of parking strips, removal of weeds and/or debris, tree root pruning and installing root barriers, trimming of shrubs and/or ground cover and trimming shrubs within the area between the property line of the adjacent property and the street pavement line, including parking strips and curbs, so that the sidewalk area will remain in a condition that is not dangerous to property or to persons using the sidewalk in a reasonable manner and will be in a condition which will not interfere with the public convenience in the use of said sidewalk area.

        D.    Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 5614 of the State Streets and Highways Code, the city manager may in his or her discretion, and for sufficient cause, extend the period within which required maintenance and repair of sidewalk areas must commence by a period of not to exceed seventy-four days for the time the notice referred to in said Section 5614 is given. (Ord. 93-14 §1, 1993).

 

12.30.030 Liability for injuries to public.
        The property owner required by Section 12.30.010 to maintain and repair the sidewalk area shall owe a duty to members of the public to keep and maintain the sidewalk area in a safe and non-dangerous condition. If, as a result of the failure of any property owner to maintain the sidewalk area in a non-dangerous condition as required by Section 12.30.010, any person suffers injury or damage to person or property, the property owner shall be liable to such person for the resulting damages or injury. (Ord. 93-14 §1, 1993).

Chapter 12.34 PARK USE
12.34.010 General regulations governing use of parks.
        A.    It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person, firm or corporation to do or cause or permit to be done any of the acts hereinafter specified within any park owned or operated by the city:

        1.     To enter or trespass in any area, building or facility which is fenced and locked or enclosed and locked.

        2.     To ride or bring any horse or other similar animal or to propel a vehicle in or upon any area of a park, except those areas specifically provided and designated for such purposes, unless prior written permission is obtained from the city manager or designee.

        3.     Licensed motor vehicles are only allowed on paved and designated roadways unless they have written permission from the city manager or designee in their possession to be off the paved and designated roadways.

        4.     Unlicensed vehicles or vehicles with a “state off road permit” are prohibited from city parks unless they have specific written permission from the city manager or designee in their possession. Unlicensed and/or “state off road permit” vehicles shall mean but are not limited to: motorcycles, motorized scooters, “pocket” cycles, all-terrain vehicles (“ATVs”), three wheelers and four wheelers. The exception is: motorized wheelchairs and similar devices necessary and actually being used for the mobility of disabled individuals.

        5.     To drive or operate any motor vehicle in any park in excess of fifteen miles per hour.

        6.     To park any automobile or other vehicle in any park at any place other than designated parking areas. Places where parking is permitted shall be designated by appropriate signs.

        7.     To operate gasoline powered go-carts, model airplanes, boats or midget cars in any park except on designated areas.

        8.     To clean, wash, polish or make other than emergency repairs upon any automobile, motorcycle or self-driven vehicle in any park.

        9.     To carry or bring any firearms, air gun, slingshot, firecrackers or fireworks into any park.

        10.   To make a fire in any park other than in stoves, pits or braziers provided by the city, unless prior written permission is obtained from the city manager or designee.

        11.   To bring into any park any material which will, if spilled or spread, be injurious to the turf or plant growth.

        12.   To cut or remove any wood, turf, rock, tree, flower, shrub, sand or gravel from any park unless prior written permission is obtained from the city manager or designee.

        13.   To throw or dispose of in any park any bottles, tin cans, broken glass, paper, clothes, cast iron, rubbish, soil, tree trimmings, garbage, ashes or other debris of any kind except in approved containers provided by the city.

        14.   To remove, damage or destroy any athletic equipment provided by the city, normal wear and tear excepted.

        15.   To move or remove from one location to another any part or parts of field equipment.

        16.   To move or remove from one location to another any equipment used for park maintenance.

        17.   To open or close any valve pertaining to the water mains or sprinkler system or to expose or interfere with any gas pipe, hydrant, stopcock, sewer, catch basin, back-flow preventer, or other similar device in any park.

        18.   To cut, break or deface in any way buildings, equipment, grounds or other facilities of any park.

        19.   To wound, kill or catch any bird or other wild animal in any park.

        20.   To indulge in indecent or riotous conduct or language or to otherwise make noises in such a manner as to disturb any picnic, meeting, concert or exhibition in any park.

        21.   To operate a public address system without prior written permission of the city manager or designee. This prohibition shall not include the use of small portable radios used to receive regularly broadcasted programs, as long as such radios are operated at such a volume as not to disturb other persons present in the park.

        22.   To unnecessarily disturb or interfere with spectators or participants in any event conducted in any park or to enter any areas provided for or occupied by spectators or participants at any such event for the purpose of doing any such act.

        23.   To camp or lodge in or upon any park unless prior written permission of the city manager or designee or the city council.

        24.   To sell refreshments, foodstuffs or novelties in any park or on any street immediately adjacent thereto without the prior written permission of the city manager or designee or the city council.

        25.   To practice, carry on, conduct or solicit for any trade, occupation, business or profession in any park without the prior written permission of the city council.

        26.   To play or engage in any game or contest in any park except in such places as are specially provided or designated for that purpose.

        27.   To play upon any tennis courts wearing shoes other than those having vulcanized soles and heels, commonly known as tennis shoes.

        28.   To refuse to open any tennis court being used for singles play to doubles play at the end of the set being played when other persons are waiting, unless prior written permission is obtained from the city manager or designee.

        29.   To refuse to relinquish any tennis court being used for doubles play at the end of the set being played when other persons are waiting, unless prior written permission is obtained from the city manager or designee.

        30.   To use any tennis courts for tennis tournaments, team practices or other special events of any kind without the prior written permission of the city manager or designee of the city council.

        31.   To play or engage in the hitting of golf balls in any park, except on driving ranges and golf courses.

        32.   To ride bicycles through any children’s playground area.

        33.   To smoke any substance including the use of electronic cigarettes or any other products that produce vapor or smoke.

        34.   To wade or swim in any pool in any park except when supervised.

        35.   To use any park facility for which a charge is now or hereafter made without first having paid the fee requested and having received the required permit.

        36.   To enter any park facility for which a charge is made without first paying the full legal charge made for such entrance unless such entrance is by the consent or permission of the person or persons in charge.

        37.   To use any park facility or equipment which has been reserved or which is indicated by an authorized or official sign to have been reserved without first having received the written permission of the city manager or designee.

        38.   To remove any authorized or official sign indicating that any park facility or equipment is reserved.

        39.   For any male person to resort to any toilet set apart for women, and for any female person to resort to any toilet set apart for men, provided that this prohibition shall not apply to children accompanied by their father, mother or guardian.

        40.   To loiter or remain in any park at any time between ten p.m. and daylight of the following morning, unless prior written permission is obtained from the city manager or designee or the city council.

        41.   To allow, permit, bring or otherwise cause any dog to enter or remain in or about any city owned park at any time without being attached to a leash that is no greater than six feet in length. In other words, dogs are allowed in a city owned park only when attached to a leash that is six feet in length or shorter.

        42.   For any person owning or being in charge, care, control or custody of any dog to permit, either willfully or through failure to exercise due care or control, such animal to defecate and to allow the feces to remain upon any city owned park. The person owning or being in charge, care, control or custody of any dog shall immediately and securely enclose all feces left by such dog in a bag, wrapper or other container and dispose of it in a sanitary manner,

        a.     This section shall not apply to disabled persons who have the charge or control of a companion animal.

        43.   To allow, permit or bring any glass container in or about any city owned park.

        44.   To enter or trespass upon any river front park between dusk to dawn without prior written approval from the city manager or designee. For purposes of this restriction, dusk shall be defined as one-half hour after sunset and dawn defined as one-half hour after sunrise. (Ord. 2019-06 §1; Ord. 2019-02 §1; Ord. 06-04 §2; Ord. 94-12 §1, 1994; Ord. 80-13 §5, 1980).

 

12.34.020 River front parks and trails regulations.
        Please observe the following rules:

        A.    Hours of operation: one-half hour after sunrise to one half hour after sunset.

        B.     No overnight camping allowed.

        C.     Pets must be leashed. Clean up after your pet.

        D.    Please do not litter. Bring out what you take into the park and/or on the trail.

        E.     Do not trespass on upward slope of trail. This area is private property.

        F.     No unauthorized vehicles of any kind allowed in park or on trail.

        G.    No firearms allowed.

        H.    No loud or amplified music allowed.

        I.      No alcohol allowed.

        J.      No open pit fires allowed. (Ord. 06-04 §2).

 

12.34.030 River front parks and trails general provisions.
        All sections of the Waterford Municipal Code governing the use of parks and facilities apply to the park and trail. It is your responsibility to know and observe these rules as well as be aware and familiar with the State Fish and Game laws specifically dealing with fishing regulations of the Tuolumne River. (Ord. 06-04 §2).

Chapter 12.35 SKATE PARKS
12.35.010 Purpose and intent.
        The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public peace, health, safety and general welfare of persons in the city by regulating the activity of skateboarding on public property which is accessible to the general public and to establish a skate park for people of all ages to skateboard and roller skate. (Ord. 2014-15 §1).

 

12.35.020 Definitions.
        “Roller skates” means any footwear or device which may be attached to the foot or footwear to which wheels are attached and such wheels may be used by the wearer for moving or propulsion including, but not limited to, in line skates commonly known as roller blades.

        “Safety equipment” means a helmet, elbow pads, kneepads, and shoes.

        “Skateboard” means all wheeled objects, scooters, coasters, toys, conveyances, or similar devices used for transportation or sport which are propelled by human power and which are not classified as bicycles.

        “Skate park” means any public facility that is designed for, and maintained by the city for the purpose of recreational skate use. Skate park does not include any adjacent area that is part of a public park, public right-of-way, or other public area that is specifically designed and used for skateboarding or roller skating activities. (Ord. 2014-15 §1).

 

12.35.030 Skate parks.
        The city council may designate certain areas as a skate park. They will be designated by city council resolution and shall be posted with all signs currently required by the California Health and Safety Code Section 115800 et seq., or as such statutes may be amended.

        All persons using a skate park are required to wear safety equipment. Failure to wear safety equipment shall be deemed to be a violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the penalty set forth in Section 12.35.050.

        All skate parks shall have signs posted stating that all persons using the skate park shall wear safety equipment and that failure to do so may result in the issuance of a citation pursuant to Section 12.35.050 of this code.

        The hours of operation of all skate parks shall be determined by the city council by resolution and shall be posted at such skate park.

        The city council authorizes the city manager and the director of public works to change the rules and regulations of the skate park at any time for the daily administration of the park. (Ord. 2014-15 §1).

 

12.35.040 Skate park rules and regulations.
        A.    All skaters shall be respectful, responsible and safe, and wear a helmet, knee pads, elbow pads, and shoes at all times when skating.

        B.     Any activity that constitutes dangerous or reckless behavior that has the potential of injuring another skater is prohibited.

        C.     No person shall bring structures, obstacles, or other materials, into the skate park.

        D.    No person shall skate on curbs, fences, railings, walls, benches, tables, and/or driveways in the area surrounding the skate park.

        E.     The skate park shall have fixed hours of use, which shall be posted at the skate park. No person(s) shall use or access the skate park facility other than during the posted hours of operation.

 

        F.     Graffiti, damage and defacing city property is prohibited. Any person putting graffiti on any part of the skate park facility shall pay for the cost of removal and damages thereof. Parents and guardians are liable for such costs under California Civil Code Section 1714.1(b). In addition, any person defacing city property shall face prosecution pursuant to Waterford Municipal Code Section 9.14.060.

        G.    Food and drink is prohibited on the skating surface, including glass containers.

        H.    Smoking or alcoholic beverages are prohibited anywhere within twenty feet of the skate park facility.

        I.      Use of profanity and/or gestures or verbiage that would elicit a violent response is prohibited.

        J.      Organized events must be approved via permit issued by the city manager or designated staff.

        K.    Animals are prohibited inside the skate park facility.

        L.     The city manager is authorized to post additional rules that he or she determines are necessary for the safe operation of the designated skate park. (Ord. 2014-15 §1).

 

12.35.050 Violation and penalty.
        Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to be an infraction for the first offense. A second offense within one calendar year may be punishable by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars, and a third or subsequent infraction within a calendar year may be punishable by a fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars. Additionally, any person found by a preponderance of the evidence to have violated any provision of this chapter may lose his or her privilege to use the skate park facility for up to one year, or longer, depending on the severity of the offense.

        A.    In addition to the penalties so described, any police officer, code enforcement officer, or other person authorized to issue citations shall have the authority to impound any skateboard, bicycle, scooter or roller skates of a person found violating this chapter. Upon impoundment of any skateboard, bicycle, scooter, or roller skates as provided herein, the owner of such device shall be issued a receipt. Said receipt shall state the hours, location, time frame and manner for claiming the impounded skateboard bicycle, scooter, or roller skates, as provided in subsections (A)(1) and (2) of this section.

        1.     Upon presentation of the receipt, the owner may claim the impounded skateboard, bicycle, scooter, or roller skates at the sheriff’s department during business hours. If the owner is a minor, such owner may claim the impounded skateboard, bicycle, scooter, or roller skates if accompanied by a parent or guardian. A fee may be assessed on the owner, parent or guardian, and fees shall be set forth by resolution.

        2.     If the impounded skateboard, bicycle, scooter, or roller skates is/are not claimed within sixty days after the date of impoundment, the city may dispose of the item(s) by destruction or public sale at auction.

        B.     If a minor is personally unable to pay any fine or restitution levied for violating any provision of this chapter, the parent or legal guardian of the minor shall be liable for payment of the fine and restitution. (Ord. 2014-15 §1).

 

12.35.060 Negligence per se.
        Any person(s) who fails or refuses to comply with the provisions of this chapter and who is injured while using the skate park shall be deemed negligent per se. (Ord. 2014-15 §1).

 

12.35.070 Unsupervised skating venue and adult supervision of minor child.
        The city of Waterford skate park is an unsupervised skating venue. Skaters under twelve years of age shall be accompanied by an adult at least eighteen years of age. (Ord. 2014-15 §1).

Title 13 PUBLIC SERVICES
Chapter 13.08 UTILITY USER’S TAX
Chapter 13.12 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISES
Chapter 13.16 STATE VIDEO FRANCHISES
Chapter 13.18 UNDERGROUND SERVICES ALERT

Chapter 13.08 UTILITY USER’S TAX
13.08.010 Title.
        This tax shall be known as the “Utility User’s Tax of the City of Waterford.” (Ord. 83-1 §1, 1983).

 

13.08.020 Purpose.
        The purpose of this chapter is to impose a utilities tax to generate revenue to fund municipal operations and to establish a reasonable reserve. (Ord. 85-3 §1, 1985; Ord. 83-1 §2, 1983).

 

13.08.030 Definitions.
        The following words and phrases whenever used in this chapter shall be construed as defined in this section.

        A.    “Person” shall mean any domestic or foreign, corporation, firm, association, syndicate, joint stock company, partnership of any kind, joint venture, club, Massachusetts business or common law trust, society or individual.

        B.     “City” shall mean the city of Waterford.

        C.     “Telephone corporation,” “electrical corporation,” “gas corporation,” and “water corporation” shall have the same meanings as defined in Sections 234, 218, 222, and 241, respectively, of the Public Utilities Code of the state of California as said sections existed on January 1, 1983. “Electrical corporation” shall be construed to include any municipality, special district, private person or franchised agency engaged in the selling or supplying of electrical power to a service user.

        D.    “Tax administrator” shall mean the finance director or the city manager of the city.

        E.     “Service supplier” shall mean a person required to collect and remit a tax imposed by this chapter.

        F.     “Service user” shall mean a person required to pay a tax imposed by this chapter.

        G.    “Month” shall mean a calendar month. (Ord. 83-1 §3, 1983).

 

13.08.040 Constitutional exemptions.
        Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as imposing a tax upon any person when imposition of such tax upon that person would be in violation of the Constitution of the United States or that of the state of California. (Ord. 83-1 §4, 1983).

 

13.08.050 Tax rates.
        All of the taxes imposed by this chapter shall be at the following rate:

        A.    Six percent of the charges for utility services provided within the city by any telephone corporation, electrical corporation, gas corporation and water corporation. (Ord. 86-8 §2, 1986; Ord. 83-1 §5, 1983).

 

13.08.060 Telephone user’s tax.
        A.    There is imposed a tax on the amounts paid for any intrastate telephone services by every person in the city using such services. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the percentage rate set forth in Section 13.08.050 of the charges made for such services and shall be paid by the person paying for such services.

        B.     As used in this section, the term “charges” shall not include charges for services paid for by inserting coins in coin-operated telephones except that where such coin-operated service is furnished for a guaranteed amount, the amounts paid under such guarantee plus any fixed monthly or other periodic charge shall be included in the base for computing the amount of tax due; nor shall the term “charges” include charges for any type of service or equipment furnished by a service supplier subject to public utility regulation during any period in which the same or similar services or equipment are also available for sale or lease from persons other than a service supplier subject to public utility regulation; nor shall the words “telephone communication services” include land mobile services or maritime mobile services as defined in Section 2.1 of Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations, as said section existed on January 1, 1983. The term “telephone communication services” refers to that service which provides access to a telephone system and the privilege to telephonic quality communications with substantially all persons having telephone stations which are part of such telephone system. The telephone user’s tax is intended to, and does, apply to all charges billed to a telephone account having a situs in the city, irrespective of whether a particular communication service originates and/or terminates within the city.

        C.     The tax imposed by this section shall be collected from the service user by the person providing the intrastate telephone communication services. The amount of the tax collected in one month shall be remitted to the tax administrator on or before the last day of the following month.

        D.    Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A, the tax imposed under this section shall not be imposed upon any person for using intrastate telephone communication services to the extent that the amounts paid for such services are exempt from or not subject to the tax imposed under Division 2, Part 20 of the California Revenue and Taxation Code. (Ord. 83-1 §6, 1983).

 

13.08.070 Electricity user’s tax.
        A.    There is imposed a tax upon every person in the city using electrical energy in the city. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the percentage rate set forth in Section 13.08.050 of the charges made for such energy and shall be paid by the person paying for such energy. “Charges,” as used in this section, shall include charges made for: (1) metered energy, and (2) minimum charges for service, including customer charges, service charges, demand charges, standby charges, and annual and monthly charges.

        B.     As used in this section, the term “using electrical energy” shall not be construed to mean the storage of such energy by a person in a battery owned or possessed by him or her for use in an automobile or other machinery or device apart from the premises upon which the energy was received; provided, however, that the term shall include the receiving of such energy for the purpose of using it in the charging of batteries; nor shall the term include the mere receiving of such energy by an electric public utility or governmental agency at a point within the city, for resale; or the use of such energy in the production or distribution of water by a public utility or governmental agency.

        C.     The tax imposed in this section shall be collected from the service user by the person supplying such energy. The amount of tax collected in one month shall be remitted to the tax administrator on or before the last day of the following month. Remittance of tax may be predicted on a formula based upon the payment pattern of the supplier’s customers. (Ord. 83-1 §7, 1983).

 

13.08.080 Gas user’s tax.
        A.    There is imposed a tax upon every person in the city, other than a gas corporation or electrical corporation, using in the city gas which is delivered through mains or pipes. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the percentage rate set forth in Section 13.08.050 of the charges made for such gas and shall be paid by the person paying for such gas.

        B.     There shall be excluded from the base on which the tax imposed in this section is computed: (1) charges made for gas which is to be resold and delivered through mains or pipes; (2) charges made for gas sold for use in the generation of electrical energy or for the production or distribution of water by a public utility or governmental agency; and (3) charges made by a gas public utility for gas used and consumed in the conduct of the business of gas public utilities.

        C.     The tax imposed in this section shall be collected from the service user by the person selling the gas. The amount collected in one month shall be remitted to the tax administrator on or before the last day of the following month. (Ord. 83-1 §8, 1983).

 

13.08.090 Water user’s tax.
        A.    There is imposed a tax upon every person in the city using water which is delivered through mains or pipes. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the percentage rate set forth in Section 13.08.050 of the charges made for such water and shall be paid by the person paying for such water.

        B.     There shall be excluded from the base on which the tax imposed in this section is computed charges made for water which is to be resold and delivered through mains or pipes; and charges made by a municipal water department, public utility or a county or municipal water district for water used and consumed by such department, utility or district in the conduct of the business of such department, utility or district.

        C.     The tax imposed in this section shall be collected from the service user by the person supplying the water. The amount collected in one month shall be remitted to the tax administrator on or before the last day of the following month. (Ord. 83-1 §9, 1983).

 

13.08.100 Interest and penalty.
        A.    Taxes collected from a service user which are not remitted to the tax administrator on or before the due dates provided in this chapter are delinquent.

        B.     In addition to remitting the amount of the tax, any service supplier who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter within the time required, and upon ten day’s written notice to the service supplier of its failure to remit, shall pay a penalty of ten percent of the amount of the tax.

        C.     If the city clerk determines that the nonpayment by any service supplier of any remittance due under this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of twenty-five percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated above. (Ord. 83-1 §10, 1983).

 

13.08.110 Actions to collect.
        Any tax required to be paid by a service user under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the service user to the city. Any such tax collected from a service user which has not been remitted to the tax administrator shall be deemed a debt owed to the city by the person required to collect and remit. Any person owing money to the city under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the same of the city for the recovery of such amount. (Ord. 83-1 §11, 1983).

 

13.08.120 Duty to collect—Procedures.
        The duty to collect and remit the taxes imposed by this chapter shall be performed as follows:

        A.    The tax shall be collected insofar as practicable at the same time as and along with the charges made in accordance with the regular billing practices of the service supplier. Where the amount paid by a service user to a service supplier is less than the full amount of the charge and tax which has accrued for the billing period, a proportionate share of both the charge and the tax shall be deemed to have been paid except in those cases where a service user pays the full amount of the charges but notifies the service supplier of his or her refusal to pay the tax imposed on said charges.

        B.     The duty to collect tax from a service user shall commence with the beginning of the first full regular billing period applicable to the service user where all charges normally included in such regular billing are subject to the provisions of this chapter. Where a person receives more than one billing, one or more being for different periods than another, the duty to collect shall arise separately for each billing period. (Ord. 83-1 §12, 1983).

 

13.08.130 Additional powers and duties of tax administrators.
        A.    The tax administrator shall have the power and duty, and is directed to enforce each and all of the provisions of this chapter.

        B.     The tax administrator shall have power to adopt rules and regulations not inconsistent with provisions of this chapter for the purpose of carrying out and enforcing the payment collection and remittance of the taxes herein imposed. A copy of such rules and regulations shall be on file in the tax administrator’s office.

        C.     The tax administrator may make administrative agreements to vary the strict requirements of this chapter so that collection of any tax imposed here may be made in conformance with the billing procedures of a particular service supplier so long as said agreements result in collection of the tax in conformance with the general purpose and scope of this chapter. A copy of each such agreement shall be on file in the tax administrator’s office. (Ord. 83-1 §13, 1983).

 

13.08.140 Assessment—Administrative remedy.
        A.    The tax administrator may make an assessment for taxes not remitted by a person required to remit.

        B.     Whenever the tax administrator determines that a service user has deliberately withheld the amount of the tax owed by him or her from the amounts remitted to a person required to collect the tax, or that a service user has refused to pay the amount of the tax to such person, or whenever the tax administrator deems it in the best interest of the city, he or she may relieve such person of the obligation to collect taxes due under this chapter from certain named service users for specified billing periods.

        C.     The service supplier shall provide the city with amounts refused along with the names, addresses and reasons of the service users refusing to pay the tax imposed under provisions of this chapter.

        D.    The tax administrator shall notify the service user that he or she has assumed responsibility to collect the taxes due for the stated periods and demand payment of such taxes. The notice shall be served on the service user by handing it to him or her personally or by deposit of the notice in the United States mail, postage prepaid thereon, addressed to the service user at the address to which billing was made by the person required to collect the tax; or, should the service user have changed his or her address, to his or her last known address. If a service user fails to remit the tax to the tax administrator within fifteen days from the date of the service of the notice upon him or her, which shall be the date of mailing if service is not accomplished in person, a penalty of twenty-five percent of the amount of the tax set forth in the notice shall be imposed, but not less than five dollars. The penalty shall become part of the tax herein required to be paid. (Ord. 83-1 §14, 1983).

 

13.08.150 Records.
        It shall be the duty of every person required to collect and remit to the city any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of three years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he or she may have been liable for the collection of and remittance to the tax administrator, which records the tax administrator and/or any Waterford city councilperson shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times. (Ord. 83-1 §15, 1983).

 

13.08.160 Refunds.
        A.    Whenever the amount of any tax has been overpaid, or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the tax administrator under this chapter, it may be refunded as provided in this section.

        B.     Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (A) of this section, a service supplier may claim a refund or take as credit against taxes collected and remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once, or erroneously or illegally collected or received when it is established that the service user from whom the tax has been collected did not owe the tax; provided, however, that neither a refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has either been refunded to the service user or credited to charges subsequently payable by the service user to the person required to collect and remit. A service supplier that has collected any amount of tax in excess of the amount of tax imposed by this chapter and actually due from a service user, may refund such amount to the service user and claim credit for such overpayment against the amount of tax which is due upon any other monthly returns, providing such credit is claimed in a return dated no later than one year from the date the tax provided in this chapter is terminated.

        C.     No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant establishes his or her right thereto by written records showing entitlement thereto.

        D.    Notwithstanding other provisions of this section, whenever a service supplier, pursuant to an order of the California Public Utilities Commission or a court of competent jurisdiction, makes a refund to service users of charges for past utility services, the taxes paid pursuant to this chapter on the amount of such refunded service charges shall also be refunded to service users by the service supplier to the extent that the service supplier can claim credit for such refunded taxes against the amount of tax which is due upon any other monthly returns. In the event this chapter is repealed, amounts of any refundable taxes will be borne by the city. (Ord. 83-1 §16, 1983).

Chapter 13.12 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISES
13.12.010 Intent.
        A.    The city of Waterford, pursuant to Government Code Section 53066, is authorized to grant one or more nonexclusive franchises to construct, operate, maintain and reconstruct cable television systems within the city limits.

        B.     The city council finds that the development of cable television and communications systems has the potential of having great benefit and impact upon the residents of Waterford. Because of the complex and rapidly changing technology associated with cable television, the city council further finds that the public convenience, safety and general welfare can best be served by establishing regulatory powers which should be vested in the city of such persons as the city shall designate. It is the intent of this chapter and subsequent amendments to provide for and specify the means to attain the best possible cable television service to the public and any franchises issued pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed to include this finding as an integral part thereof. (Ord. 96-08 §2, 1996).

 

13.12.020 Definitions.
        For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. Words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning.

        A.    “Basic cable service” means any service tier which includes the transmission of local television broadcast signals.

        B.     “Cable television system,” “system” or “cable system” means a facility consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service, which includes video programming, FM radio service and other communications services, and which is provided to multiple subscribers within a community, but such term does not include:

        1.     A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more television broadcast stations;

        2.     A facility that serves subscribers without using any public right-of-way;

        3.     A facility of a common carrier which is subject to Title I of the Telecommunications Act of 1996, as amended, except that such facility shall be considered a cable system (other than for purposes of Section 621(c) (47 U.S.C. 541(b))) to the extent such a facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers; or

        4.     Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility system.

        C.     “Cable service” means the total of the following:

        1.     The one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or other programming service; and

        2.     Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or other programming service.

        D.    “Channel” or “cable channel” means a portion of the electromagnetic frequency spectrum which is used in a cable system and which is capable of delivering a television channel as defined by the Federal Communications Commission.

        E.     “Council” means the city council of the city of Waterford.

        F.     “Franchise” means an initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by the city council, whether such authorization is designated as a franchise, permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate, agreement or otherwise, which authorizes the construction or operation of a cable system.

        G.    “Franchise agreement” means a franchise grant ordinance or a contractual agreement, containing the specific provisions of the franchise granted, including references, specifications, requirements and other related matters.

        H.    “Franchise fee” means any tax, fee or assessment of any kind imposed by a franchising authority or other governmental entity on a grantee or cable subscriber, or both, solely because of their status as such. The term “franchise fee” does not include:

        1.     Any tax, fee or assessment of general applicability (including any such tax, fee or assessment imposed on both utilities and cable operators or their services, but not including a tax, fee or assessment which is unduly discriminatory against cable operators or cable subscribers);

        2.     Capital costs which are required by the franchise to be incurred by grantee for public, educational or governmental access facilities;

        3.     Requirements or charges incidental to the awarding or enforcing of the franchise, including payments for bonds, letters of credit, insurance, indemnification, penalties or liquidated damages; or

        4.     Any fee imposed under Title 17, United States Code.

        I.      “Franchise documents” means this chapter and the franchise agreement.

        J.      “Grantee” means any “person” receiving a franchise pursuant to this chapter and under the granting franchise ordinance or agreement, and its lawful successor, transferee or assignee.

        K.    “Grantor” or “city” means the city of Waterford as represented by the council or any delegate acting within the scope of its jurisdiction.

        L.     “Gross annual receipts” means the annual gross receipts received by a grantee during the calendar year from all sources of operations of the cable television system within the city utilizing the public streets and rights-of-way for which a franchise is required in order to deliver such cable service, excluding franchise fees, copyright fees, refundable deposits, amounts paid by subscribers into an escrow account, late or bad check fees, rebates or credits, and any sales, excise or other taxes or charges collected for direct payment or pass-through to local, state or federal government.

        M.    “Initial service area” means the area of the city which will receive service initially, as set forth in the franchise agreement.

        N.    “Installation” means the connection of the system to subscribers’ terminals and the provision of service.

        O.    “Person” means an individual, partnership, association, joint stock company, trust, corporation or governmental entity.

        P.     “Public, educational or government access facilities” or “PEG access facilities” means the total of the following:

        1.     Channel capacity designated for public, educational or governmental use; and

        2.     Facilities and equipment for the use of such channel capacity.

        Q.    “Sections” means any section, subsection or provision of this chapter.

        R.     “Service area” or “franchise area” means an entire geographic area within the city as it is now constituted or may in the future be constituted, unless otherwise specified in the agreement.

        S.     “Service tier” means a category of cable service or other services provided by a grantee and for which a separate rate is charged by the grantee.

        T.     “State” means the state of California.

        U.    “Street” means each of the following which have been dedicated to the public or are hereafter dedicated to the public and maintained under public authority or by others and located within the city limits: Streets, roadways, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, sidewalks, easements, rights-of-way and similar public property and areas that the grantor shall permit to be included within the definition of “street” from time to time.

        V.    “Subscriber” means any person who or which elects to subscribe to, for any purpose, a service provided by the grantee by means of or in connection with cable system. (Ord. 96-08 §2, 1996).

 

13.12.030 Franchise to install and operate.
        A franchise granted by the city under the provisions of this chapter shall encompass the following purposes:

        A.    To provide that grantee may engage in the business of providing cable television service, and such other services as may be permitted by law, to subscribers within the designated service area.

        B.     To provide that grantee may erect, install, construct, repair, rebuild, reconstruct, replace, maintain and retain cable, lines, related electronic equipment, supporting structures, appurtenances and other property in connection with the operation of a cable system in, on, over, under, upon, along and across streets or other public places within the designated service area.

        C.     To provide that grantee may maintain and operate a cable television system for the origination, reception, transmission, amplification and distribution of television and radio signals and for the delivery of cable services.

        D.    To set forth the obligations of a grantee under the franchise. (Ord. 96-08 §2, 1996).

 

13.12.040 Franchise required.
        It is unlawful for any person to construct, install or operate a cable television system in the city without a properly granted franchise awarded pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 96-08 §2, 1996).

 

13.12.050 Term of the franchise.
        A.    A franchise granted hereunder shall be for a term established in the franchise agreement, commencing on the grantor’s adoption of an ordinance or resolution authorizing the franchise. The first day of the term shall from time to time be referred to as the “effective date” of the franchise.

        B.     A franchise granted hereunder may be renewed upon application by the grantee pursuant to the provisions of applicable state and federal law and of this chapter. (Ord. 96-08 §2, 1996).

 

13.12.060 Franchise area.
        Any franchise shall be valid within all the territorial limits of the city, and within any area added to the city during the term of the franchise, unless otherwise specified in the franchise agreement. (Ord. 96-08 §2, 1996).

 

13.12.070 Federal or state jurisdiction.
        A.    This chapter shall be construed in a manner consistent with all applicable federal and state laws. Whenever any state or federal law has paramount jurisdiction over any specific provisions of this chapter, or when such paramount jurisdiction is exercised by an individual with standing, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) or Public Utilities Commission (PUC) of the state of California or any other federal or state agency, such paramount jurisdiction shall preempt or preclude the exercise of like jurisdiction by the city. Any modification of such federal or state law shall to the extent applicable be considered part of this chapter as of the effective date of such modification.

        B.     In the event that the state or federal government discontinues preemption in any area of cable communications over which it currently exercises jurisdiction in such manner as to expand rather than limit municipal authority, grantor may, if it so elects, adopt rules and regulations in these areas, provided that such rules and regulations shall not apply to any franchise issued pursuant to this chapter prior to the adoption of such rules and regulations to the extent they materially adversely affect such franchise, including without limitation, requirements with respect to system rebuilds, channel capacity, system design, construction and performance requirements, public, educational or governmental access facilities, support for any such facilities, interconnect commitments, activation of interactive capability or institutional networks.

        C.     This chapter shall apply to all franchises granted or renewed after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. It shall further apply to the extent permitted by applicable federal or state law to all existing franchises granted prior to the effective date of this chapter. (Ord. 96-08 §2, 1996).

 

13.12.080 Franchise non-transferable.
        A.    Grantee shall not sell, transfer, lease, assign, sublet or dispose of, in whole or in part, either by forced or involuntary sale, or by ordinary sale, contract, consolidation or otherwise, the franchise or any of the rights or privileges therein granted, without the prior consent of the city and then, only upon such terms and conditions as may be prescribed by the city, which consent shall not be unreasonably denied or delayed. Any attempt to sell, transfer, lease, assign or otherwise dispose of the franchise without the consent of the city shall be null and void. The granting of a security interest in any grantee assets, or any mortgage or other hypothecation, shall not be considered a transfer for the purposes of this section.

        B.     The requirements of subsection A shall apply to any change in the control of grantee. The word “control” as used herein is not limited to major stockholders or partnership interests, but includes actual working control in whatever manner exercised. In the event that grantee is a corporation, prior approval of the city shall be required where ownership or control of more than ten percent of the voting stock of grantee is acquired by a person or group of persons acting in concert, none of whom own or control the voting stock of grantee as of the effective date of the franchise, singularly or collectively.

        C.     Grantee shall notify grantor in writing of any foreclosure or any other judicial sale of all or a substantial part of the franchise property of the grantee or upon the termination of any lease or interest covering all or a substantial part of said franchise property. Such notifications shall be considered by grantor as notice that a change in control of ownership of the franchise has taken place and the provisions under this section governing the consent of grantor to such change in control ownership shall apply.

        D.    For the purpose of determining whether it shall consent to such change, transfer or acquisition of control, grantor may inquire into the qualifications of the prospective transferee or controlling party, and grantee shall assist grantor in any such inquiry. In seeking grantor’s consent to any change of ownership or control, grantee shall have the responsibility of insuring that the transferee completes an application in the form and substance reasonably satisfactory to grantor, which application shall include information required under subsections A through G of Section 13.12.130 of this chapter. Grantor may also request such reasonable additional information that it deems applicable. An application shall be submitted to grantor not less than sixty days prior to the date of transfer. The transferee shall be required to establish that it possesses the qualifications and financial and technical capability to operate and maintain the system and comply with all franchise requirements for the remainder of the term of the franchise. If, after considering the legal, financial, character, technical and other public interest qualities of the applicant and determining that they are satisfactory, the grantor finds that such transfer is acceptable, the grantor shall transfer and assign the rights and obligations of such franchise as may be in the public interest. The consent of the grantor to such transfer shall not be unreasonably withheld.

        E.     Any financial institution having a pledge of the grantee or its assets for the advancement of money for the construction and/or operation of the franchise shall have the right to notify the grantor that it or its designee satisfactory to the grantor shall take control of and operate the cable television system, in the event of a grantee defaulting in its financial obligations. Further, said financial institution shall also submit a plan for such operation within thirty days of assuming such control that will insure continued service and compliance with all franchise requirements during the term the financial institution exercises control over the system. The financial institution shall not exercise control over the system for a period exceeding one year unless extended by the grantor in its discretion and during said period of time it shall have the right to petition the grantor to transfer the franchise to another grantee.

        F.     The requirements of this section do not apply to the restructuring of debt or ownership interests among existing equity participants in Charter Communications, Inc. and/or its affiliates or the sale of capital stock by grantee, or by any of grantee’s affiliated companies, in a transaction commonly known as an “initial public offering,” provided that:

        1.     Grantee shall provide written notice within thirty days of the transaction; and,

        2.     Grantee represents in writing to grantor that such transaction will have no foreseeable effect on the agreement between grantee and Charter Communications, Inc., relating to the management and operation of grantee’s cable system in the franchise service area. (Ord. 98-02 §2, 1998; Ord. 96-08 §2, 1996).

 

13.12.090 Geographical coverage.
        A.    Grantee shall design, construct and maintain the cable television system to have the capability to pass every dwelling unit in the city, subject to any service area line extension requirements of the franchise documents.

        B.     After service has been established by activating trunk and/or distribution cables for any service area, grantee shall provide service to any requesting subscriber within that service area within thirty days from the request, provided that the grantee is able to secure all rights-of-way and encroachment permits necessary to extend service to such subscriber within such thirty-day period on reasonable terms and conditions mutually acceptable to grantee and such subscriber. (Ord. 96-08 §2, 1996).

 

13.12.100 Nonexclusive franchise.
        Any franchise granted shall be nonexclusive. The grantor specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional franchises for a cable television system or any component thereof, as it deems appropriate, subject to applicable state and federal law. (Ord. 96-08 §2, 1996).

 

13.12.110 Multiple franchises.
        A.    Grantor may grant any number of franchises in the service area. Grantor may limit the number of franchises granted, based upon, but not necessarily limited to, the requirements of applicable law and specific local considerations, such as:

        1.     The capacity of the public rights-of-way to accommodate multiple coaxial cables in addition to the cables, conduits and pipes of the utility systems, such as electrical power, telephone, gas and sewerage;

        2.     The benefits that may accrue to cable subscribers as a result of cable system competition, such as lower rates and improved service; and

        3.     The disadvantages that may result from cable system competition, such as the requirement for multiple pedestals on residents’ property, and the disruption arising from numerous excavations of the rights-of-way.

        B.     Each grantee awarded a franchise to serve the entire city shall offer service to all residences in the city, in accordance with construction and service schedules mutually agreed upon between grantor and grantee, and consistent with applicable law.

        C.     Grantor may require that any new grantee be responsible for its own underground trenching and the costs associated therewith, if, in grantor’s opinion, the rights-of-way in any particular area cannot feasibly accommodate additional cables. (Ord. 96-08 §2, 1996).

 

13.12.120 Franchise applications.
        Any person desiring a franchise for a cable television system shall file an application with the city. A reasonable nonrefundable application fee established by the city shall accompany the application to cover all costs associated with processing and reviewing the application, including without limitation, costs of administrative review, financial, legal and technical evaluation of the applicant, consultants (including technical and legal experts and all costs incurred by such experts), notice and publication requirements with respect to the consideration of the application and document preparation expenses. In the event such costs exceed the application fee, the selected applicant(s) shall pay the difference to the city within thirty days following receipt of an itemized statement of such costs. (Ord. 96-08 §2, 1996).

 

13.12.130 Application—Contents.
        An application for a franchise for a cable television system shall contain, where applicable:

        A.    A statement as to the proposed franchise and service area;

        B.     Resume of prior history of applicant, including the expertise of applicant in the cable television field;

        C.     List of partners, general and limited, of the applicant, if a partnership, or the percentage of stock owned or controlled by each shareholder, if a corporation;

        D.    List of officers, directors and managing employees of applicant, together with a description of the background of each such person;

        E.     The names and addresses of any parent or subsidiary of applicant or any other business entity owning or controlling applicant in whole or in part, or owned or controlled in whole or in part by applicant;

        F.     A current financial statement of applicant verified by a CPA audit or otherwise certified to be true, complete and correct to the reasonable satisfaction of the city;

        G.    Proposed construction and service schedule; and

        H.    Any reasonable additional information that the city deems applicable. (Ord. 96-08 §2, 1996).

 

13.12.140 Consideration of applications.
        A.    Upon receipt of any application for a franchise, the city manager shall prepare a report and make his or her recommendations respecting such application to the city council.

        B.     A public hearing shall be set prior to any franchise grant, at a time and date approved by the council. Within thirty days after the close of the hearing, the council shall make a decision based upon the evidence received at the hearing as to whether or not the franchise(s) should be granted, and if granted, subject to what conditions. The council may grant one or more franchises, or may decline to grant any franchise. (Ord. 96-08 §2, 1996).

 

13.12.150 Franchise renewal.
        Franchise renewals shall be in accordance with applicable law, including, but not necessarily limited to, the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as amended. Grantor and grantee, by mutual consent, may enter into renewal negotiations at any time during the term of the franchise. Grantee shall have no obligation to reimburse grantor for costs associated with processing and reviewing the application for renewal except as required by law. To the extent allowed by law, grantee may offset any reimbursement against its franchise fees liability and/or may pass-through the cost of the reimbursement to subscribers. (Ord. 96-08 §2, 1996).

 

13.12.160 Minimum consumer protection and service standards.
        A.    Except as otherwise provided in the franchise agreement, grantee shall maintain an office in close proximity to the city of Waterford to provide the necessary facilities, equipment and personnel to comply with the following consumer protection and standards under normal conditions of operation:

        1.     Sufficient toll-free telephone line capacity during normal business hours to assure that a minimum of ninety-five percent of all calls will be answered before the fourth ring;

        2.     Emergency toll-free telephone capacity on a twenty-four hour basis, including weekends and holidays;

        3.     An emergency system maintenance and repair staff, capable of responding to and repairing major system malfunction on a twenty-four hour per day basis; receipt of request, in all areas where trunk and feeder cable have been activated; and

        4.     Grantee shall schedule, within a specified four-hour time period, all appointments with subscribers for installation or service.

        B.     Grantee shall render efficient service, make repairs promptly, and interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible. Scheduled interruptions, insofar as possible, shall be preceded by notice and shall occur during a period of minimum use of the system, preferably between midnight and six a.m.

        C.     Grantee shall maintain a written log, or an equivalent stored in computer memory and capable of access and reproduction in printed form, for all service interruptions and requests for cable service that result in a service call.

        D.    The grantee shall maintain a repair force of technicians generally capable of responding to subscriber requests for service within the following timeframes:

        1.     For a System Outage. Within two hours, including weekends, of receiving subscriber calls or request for service which by number identify a system outage of sound or picture of one or more channels, affecting at least ten percent of the subscribers of the system.

        2.     For an Isolated Outage. Within twenty-four hours, including weekends, of receiving requests for service identifying an isolated outage of sound or picture for one or more channels.

        3.     For Inferior Signal Quality. Within forty-eight hours, including weekends, of receiving a request for service identifying a problem concerning picture or sound quality.

        Grantee shall be deemed to have responded to a request for service under the provisions of this section when a technician arrives at the service location and begins work on the problem. In the case of a subscriber not being home when the technician arrives, the technician shall leave written notification of arrival. Three successive subscriber failures to be present at an appointed time shall excuse grantee of duty to respond.

        No charge shall be made to the subscriber for any service call unless the service request can be demonstrated to be unrelated to the portions of the cable system owned by grantee or to involve subscriber negligence or damage to grantee’s property by the subscriber.

        E.     Unless excused, grantee shall determine the nature of the problem within forty-eight hours of beginning work and resolve all cable system related problems within five business days unless technically unfeasible.

        F.     Upon five days’ notice, grantee shall establish its compliance with any or all of the standards required above. Grantee shall provide sufficient documentation to permit grantor to verify the compliance.

        G.    A repeated and verifiable pattern of material non-compliance with the consumer protection standards of subsections A through E above, after grantee’s receipt of due notice and an opportunity to cure, may be deemed a material breach of the franchise agreement.

        H.    Grantee shall establish written procedures for receiving, acting upon and resolving subscriber complaints without the intervention by the grantor. The written procedures shall prescribe the manner in which a subscriber may submit a complaint either orally or in writing specifying the subscriber’s grounds for dissatisfaction. Grantee shall file a copy of these procedures with grantor.

        I.      Grantor may determine, upon review of a subscriber complaint and the grantee’s decision, if any, whether further action is warranted.

        J.      The grantor may establish an escrow account wherein a subscriber may deposit a disputed portion of the subscriber’s monthly service charge. If a subscriber either continues to make full and timely payment of all monthly service charges to grantee or deposit any disputed portion of such monthly service charges into said escrow account, grantee shall not discontinue service during the pendency of complaint submitted under the provisions of this chapter. Any amount deposited in the escrow account shall be paid to the grantee or subscriber in accordance with a final determination of a complaint.

        K.    It shall be the right of all subscribers to continue receiving service insofar as their financial and other obligations to the grantee are honored. In the event that the grantee elects to rebuild, modify or sell the system, or the grantor gives notice of intent to terminate or not to renew the franchise, the grantee shall act so as to insure that all subscribers receive service so long as the franchise remains in force.

        In the event of a change of grantee, or in the event a new operator acquires the systems, the original grantee shall cooperate with the grantor, new grantee or operator in maintaining continuity of service to all subscribers. During such period, grantee shall be entitled to the revenues for any period during which it operates the system.

        L.     In the event grantee fails to operate the system for seven consecutive days without prior approval or subsequent excusal of the grantor, the grantor may, at its option, operate the system or designate an operator until such time as grantee restores service under conditions acceptable to the grantor or a permanent operator is selected. If the grantor should fulfill this obligation for the grantee, then during such period as the grantor fulfills such obligation, the grantor shall be entitled to collect all revenues from the system, and the grantee shall reimburse the grantor for all reasonable costs or damages in excess of the revenues collected by the grantor that are the result of the grantee’s failure to perform.

        M.    All officers, agents or employees of the grantee or its contractors or subcontractors who in the normal course of work require entry onto subscribers’ premises shall carry a photo-identification card in a form approved by grantor. Grantor shall account for all identification cards at all times. Every vehicle of the grantee utilized for field maintenance shall be clearly identified as working for grantee. All such identification shall be returned on termination of service or permanently defaced on sale of vehicle. (Ord. 96-08 §2, 1996).

 

13.12.170 Additional service standards.
        Additional service standards and standards governing consumer protection and response by grantee to subscriber complaints not otherwise provided for in this chapter may be established in the franchise agreement, and the grantee shall comply with such standards in the operation of the cable television system. A verified and continuing pattern of material noncompliance may be deemed a material breach of the franchise. (Ord. 96-08 §2, 1996).

 

13.12.180 Franchise fee.
        A.    Following the issuance and acceptance of the franchise, grantee shall pay to the grantor a franchise fee in the amount set forth in the franchise agreement.

        B.     The grantor, on an annual basis, shall be furnished a statement within sixty days of the close of the calendar year, either audited or certified by an independent certified public accountant, reflecting the total amounts of gross annual receipts and all payments, deductions and computations for the period covered by the payment. Upon ten days’ prior written notice, grantor shall have the right to conduct an independent audit of grantee’s records for the three-year period immediately preceding said notice, in accordance with generally accepted auditing standards, and if such audit indicates a franchise fee underpayment of two percent or more, the grantee shall assume all reasonable costs of such an audit.

        C.     No acceptance of any payment by the grantor shall be construed as a release or as an accord and satisfaction of any claim the grantor may have for further or additional sums payable as a franchise fee under this chapter or for the performance of any other obligation of the grantee.

        D.    In the event that any franchise payment or recomputed amount is not made on or before the dates specified in the franchise agreement, grantee shall pay as additional compensation:

        1.     An interest charge, computed from such due date, at an annual rate equal to the average rate of return on invested funds of the grantor during the period for which payment was due; and

        2.     If the payment is late for forty-five days or more, a sum of money equal to five percent of the amount due in order to defray those additional expenses and costs incurred by the grantor by reason of delinquent payment.

        E.     Franchise fee payments shall be made in accordance with the schedule indicated in the franchise agreement. (Ord. 96-08 §2, 1996).

 

13.12.190 Design and construction requirements.
        A.    Grantee shall not construct any cable system facilities until grantee has secured necessary permits from grantor, and other applicable public agencies.

        B.     In those areas of the city where transmission or distribution facilities of the public utilities providing telephone and electric power service or the facilities of cable service provider(s) are underground as of the effective date of this chapter, the grantee likewise shall continue to construct, operate and maintain its transmission and distribution facilities underground. For the purposes of this subsection, “underground” shall include a partial underground system, e.g., streamlining. Amplifiers and other equipment in grantee’s transmission and distribution lines may be placed in appropriate housings upon the surface of the ground. The city shall not in any manner be responsible for any costs or liabilities incurred by grantee in placing grantee’s facilities underground or obtaining any easements therefor.

        C.     In those areas of the city where grantee’s cables are located on the above-ground transmission or distribution facilities of the public utility providing telephone or electric power service, and in the event that the facilities of both such public utilities subsequently are placed underground at such public utilities’ cost, then the grantee likewise shall reconstruct, operate and maintain its transmission and distribution facilities underground, at grantee’s cost. Certain of grantee’s equipment, such as pedestals, amplified and power supplies, which normally are placed above-ground, may continue to remain in above-ground enclosures.

        D.    In the event of a single franchisee or multiple franchisees desiring to serve new residential developments in which the electric power and telephone utilities are underground easements:

        1.     The developer shall be responsible for contacting and surveying all franchised cable operators to ascertain which operators desire to provide cable television service to that development. The developer may establish a reasonable deadline to receive cable operator responses. The final map shall indicate the cable operators that have agreed to serve the development.

        2.     If one or two cable operators wish to provide service, they shall be accommodated in the joint utilities trench on a nondiscriminatory basis.

        3.     Cost of trenching, installing conduit and aerial lines and obtaining easements shall be the responsibility of the property owner.

        4.     The developer shall provide at least ten working days’ notice of the date that utility trenches will be open to the cable operators that have agreed to serve the development. When the trenches are open, cable operators shall have two working days to begin the installation of their cables and five working days after beginning installation to complete installation.

        5.     The final development map shall not be approved until the developer submits evidence that:

        a.     It has notified each grantee that underground utility trenches are to open as of an estimated date, and that each grantee will be allowed access to such trenches, including trenches from proposed streets to individual homes or home sites, on specified nondiscriminatory terms and conditions;

        b.     It has received a written notification from each grantee that the grantee intends to install its facilities during the open trench period on the specified terms and conditions, or such other terms and conditions as are mutually acceptable to the developer and grantee, or has received no reply from a grantee within ten days after its notification to such grantee, in which case the grantee will be deemed to have waived its opportunity to install its facilities during the open trench period.

        6.     Sharing the joint utilities trench shall be subject to compliance with Public Utilities Commission and utility standards. If such compliance is not possible, the developer shall provide a separate trench for the cable television cables. With the concurrence of the developer, the affected utilities and the cable operators, alternative installation procedures, such as use of deeper trenches, may be utilized, subject to applicable law.

        7.     If a developer has complied with the terms of this chapter, then any cable operator wishing to serve an area where the trenches have been closed shall be responsible for its own trenching and associated costs.

        8.     In the event that more than one franchise is awarded, the city reserves the right to limit the number of drop cables and/or pedestals per residence.

        9.     The city reserves the right to grant an encroachment permit to a cable franchise applicant to install conduit and/or cable in anticipation of the granting of a franchise. Such installations shall be at the applicant’s risk, with no recourse against the city in the event the pending franchise application is not granted. The city may require an applicant to provide a separate trench for its conduit and/or cable, at the applicant’s cost. The construction of such a separate trench, if provided, shall be coordinated with, and subject to, the developer’s overall construction schedule. (Ord. 96-08 §2, 1996).

 

13.12.200 Service connections.
        A.    The grantee shall extend cable service to any premises located in the service area served by grantee’s energized distribution cable which requires only the connection of a standard drop or tap to make such service available, including those premises serviced by underground utilities, at a standard rate if the owner or occupant of the premises requests such service.

        B.     The grantee shall provide connection to its service at no charge for the initial two hundred fifty feet of aerial drop line, other than the grantee’s standard installation fee. The grantee may charge any new subscriber for the grantee’s actual cost of all labor, equipment and materials for:

        1.     That portion of any new aerial service connection in excess of two hundred fifty feet;

        2.     The length of any new service connection installed underground; and

        3.     The entire length of any new service connection to remote or relatively inaccessible subscribers.

        Prior to installing any service connection for which the grantee will charge a potential subscriber on a time and materials basis, the grantee must present the prospective subscriber with a written statement of its estimated costs for the service connection. (Ord. 96-08 §2, 1996).

 

13.12.210 Line extensions.
        The grantee shall be required to extend energized trunk cable from any existing terminus of the cable system to any area within the franchise area having a density of at least ten existing and completed dwelling units within any one quarter linear mile, provided that the dwelling unit nearest to the existing terminus of the cable system in such one quarter linear mile is within one half mile of the existing terminus of the cable system. Within thirty days after grantee has confirmed the existence of the density provided above, grantee shall proceed with due diligence to obtain all necessary permits and authorizations which are required for the extension of such trunk cable, including any utility joint use agreements and any permits, licenses and authorizations to be granted by duly constituted regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over the operation of the cable system. Within thirty days following completion of such line extension construction, the grantee shall proceed to render service provided, however, that any such subscriber requesting service from the extension of the energized trunk cable shall be subject to the provisions of Section 13.12.200 herein. (Ord. 96-08 §2, 1996).

 

13.12.220 Technical standards.
        The grantee shall construct, install, operate and maintain its system in a manner consistent with all applicable laws, ordinances, construction standards, governmental requirements, FCC technical standards and any detailed standards set forth in its franchise agreement. In addition, the grantee shall provide to the grantor, upon request, a written report of the results of the grantee’s periodic proof of performance test conducted pursuant to FCC and franchise standards and guidelines. Failure to maintain specified technical standards shall constitute a material breach of the franchise. (Ord. 96-08 §2, 1996).

 

13.12.230 Service to public facilities.
        With the city’s reasonable cooperation, grantee shall, without charge to grantor, within six months of the effective date of any franchise hereunder, fully wire with, one outlet and provide all legally and contractually allowable subscribers services of its system to all public and nonprofit private schools, city police and fire stations, city recreation centers, library, City Hall, and such other buildings owned or controlled by the city, provided that such buildings shall be located within the franchise area. Grantee shall have no obligation to provide such service to buildings owned or controlled by the city if the primary purpose for such buildings is to house equipment, store records or provide residential housing. (Ord. 96-08 §2, 1996).

 

13.12.240 Hold harmless.
        Grantee shall indemnify, defend and hold grantor, its officers, agents and employees harmless from any liability, claims, damages, costs or expenses, including reasonable attorney’s fees, arising from injury to persons or damages to property to the extent caused by any conduct undertaken by the grantee, its officers, agents or employees, by reason of the franchise; grantee shall at its sole cost and expense, upon demand of grantor, appear in and defend any and all suits, actions or other legal proceedings, whether judicial, quasi-judicial, administrative, legislative or otherwise, brought or instituted or had by third persons or duly constituted authorities, against or affecting grantor, its officers, agents or employees, and arising out of or pertaining to the granting of the franchise to the grantee and/or any conduct of the grantee, its agents or employees which is within the scope of this indemnity. (Ord. 96-08 §2, 1996).

 

13.12.250 Insurance.
        A.    On or before commencement of franchise operations, the grantee shall obtain policies of liability, Workers’ Compensation and property insurance from companies authorized to transact business in California by the Insurance Commissioner of California.

        B.     The policy of liability insurance shall:

        1.     Be issued to grantee and name grantor, its officers, agents and employees as additional insureds;

        2.     Indemnify for all liability for personal and bodily injury, death and damage to property arising from activities conducted and premises used pursuant to this chapter by providing coverage therefor, including, but not limited to, coverage for:

        a.     Negligent acts or omissions of grantee and its agents, servants and employees, committed in the conduct of franchise operations; and/or

        b.     Use of motor vehicles;

        3.     Provide a combined single limit for comprehensive general liability and comprehensive automobile liability insurance in the amount provided for in the franchise agreement. Such insurance policy shall be subject to the review and approval of grantor’s legal counsel; and

        4.     Be noncancellable without thirty days’ prior written notice thereof directed to grantor.

        C.     The policy of Workers’ Compensation insurance shall:

        1.     Have been previously approved as to substance and form by the California Insurance Commissioner;

        2.     Cover all employees of grantee who in the course and scope of their employment are to conduct the franchise operations;

        3.     Provide for every benefit and payment presently or hereinafter conferred by Division 4 of the Labor Code of the state upon an injured employee, including vocational rehabilitation and death benefits; and

        4.     Waive all rights of subrogation against the grantor, its officers, officials, employees and volunteers for losses paid under the terms of the policy which arise from work performed by the named insured for the grantor.

        D.    The policy of property insurance shall provide fire insurance with extended coverage on the franchise property used by grantee in the conduct of franchise operations in an amount adequate to enable grantee to resume franchise operations following the occurrence of any risk covered by this insurance.

        E.     Grantee shall file with grantor prior to commencement of franchise operations the required endorsements and either certified copies of these insurance policies or a certificate of insurance for each of the required policies executed by the company issuing the policy or by a broker authorized to issue such a certificate, certifying that the policy is in force and providing the following information with respect to said policy:

        1.     The policy number;

        2.     The date upon which the policy will become effective and the date upon which it will expire;

        3.     The names of the named insureds and any additional insured required by this chapter or the franchise agreement;

        4.     The subject of the insurance;

        5.     The type of coverage provided by the insurance; and

        6.     Amount or limit of coverage provided by the insurance.

        F.     Conduct of franchise operations shall not commence until grantee has complied with aforementioned provisions of this section.

        G.    In the event grantee fails to maintain any of the above-described policies in full force and effect, grantor shall, upon forty-eight hours’ notice to grantee, have the right to procure the required insurance and recover the cost thereof from grantee. Grantor shall also have the right, upon forty-eight hours’ notice to grantee, to suspend the franchise during any period that grantee fails to maintain said policies in full force and effect.

        H.    No more than once during any three-year period, grantor shall have the right to order grantee to increase the amounts of the insurance coverage provided herein. Such order may be made by grantor after complying with the hearing procedure provided for in Section 13.12.340 herein. Increases in insurance coverage shall be based upon current prudent business practices of like enterprises involving the same or similar risks. (Ord. 96-08 §2, 1996).

 

13.12.260 Performance bond.
        No later than the effective date of any franchise granted hereunder, the grantee shall establish and provide to the city a corporate surety bond (the “surety bond”) in a form reasonably acceptable to the city and its counsel in the sum of ten thousand and dollars as security for the faithful performance by the grantee of specified provisions of the franchise agreement. The surety bond shall remain at this level throughout the term of the franchise. (Ord. 96-08 §2, 1996).

 

13.12.270 Records required and grantor’s right to inspect.
        A.    Grantee shall at all times maintain:

        1.     A record of all complaints received and interruptions or degradation of service experienced for the preceding two years, provided that such complaints result in or require a service call.

        2.     A full and complete set of plans, records and “as built” maps showing the location of the cable television system installed or in use in the city, exclusive of subscriber service drops and equipment provided in subscribers’ homes. Said plans, records and maps are trade secrets of grantee and, as such, are exempt from disclosure to members of the public under the Public Records Act (Government Code Section 6250, et. seq.), including Section 6254(n). Grantor will not disclose any such records in response to a public records request without first allowing the grantee the opportunity to demonstrate that the plans, records and maps are exempt under express provisions of the Public Records Act or that on the facts of the particular case, the public interest served by not making the plans, records or maps public clearly outweighs the public interest served by disclosure of the plans, maps or records. Grantor shall provide grantee with prompt notice of any request grantor receives for public records that would include said plans, records or maps.

        3.     If requested by grantor, a summary of service calls, identifying the number, general nature and disposition of such calls, on a monthly basis. A summary of such service calls shall be submitted to the grantor within thirty days following the end of each month in a form reasonably acceptable to the grantor.

        B.     The grantor may impose reasonable requests for additional information, records and documents from time to time, provided they reasonably relate to the scope of the city’s rights under this chapter or the grantee’s franchise agreement. Grantee shall have no obligation to provide information, records or documents which contain trade secrets of grantee or which are otherwise of a confidential or proprietary nature to grantee unless it receives satisfactory assurances from grantor that such information can and will be held in strictest confidence by the grantor.

        C.     Upon reasonable notice and during normal business hours, grantee shall permit examination by any duly authorized representative of the grantor, of all franchise property and facilities, together with any appurtenance property and facilities of grantee situated within or without the city, and all records relating to the franchise, provided they reasonably relate to the scope of the grantor’s rights under this chapter or the franchise agreement. (Ord. 96-08 §2, 1996).

 

13.12.280 Annual reports.
        Within ninety days after the end of the calendar year, at the request of grantor in writing by December 31st of said calendar year, grantee shall submit a written annual report to grantor with respect to the preceding calendar year in a form approved by grantor, including, but not limited to, the following information:

        A.    A summary of the previous year’s (or in the case of the initial reporting year, the initial year’s) activities in development of the cable system, including but not limited to, services begun or discontinued during the reporting year;

        B.     A list of grantee’s officers, members of its board of directors and other principals of grantee;

        C.     A list of stockholders or other equity investors holding five percent or more of the voting interest in grantee;

        D.    A list or description of any residences in grantee’s service area where service is not available, and subject to applicable line extension policies, a schedule for providing service;

        E.     Information as to the number of homes passed, subscribers, additional television outlets, and penetration of basic and pay service in the service area;

        F.     Any other information which the grantor shall reasonably request; and

        G.    Notwithstanding any of the foregoing, grantee shall have no obligation to include information in its annual report to grantor which is a trade secret of grantee or is otherwise of a confidential or proprietary nature to grantee unless it receives satisfactory assurances from grantor that such information can and will be held in strictest confidence by the grantor. (Ord. 96-08 §2, 1996).

 

13.12.290 Copies of federal and state communications.
        A.    Grantee shall submit to grantor copies of all pleadings, applications and reports submitted by grantee to any federal, state or local court, agency or governmental body, as well as copies of all decisions, correspondence and actions by any such federal, state or local court, regulatory agency or other governmental body which are non-routine in nature and which will materially affect its cable television operations within the franchise area. Grantee shall submit such documents to grantor simultaneously with its submission to such court, agency and/or body; or within five days after its receipt from such court, agency and/or body. Information otherwise confidential by law and so designated by grantee, which is submitted to grantor, shall be retained in confidence by grantor and its authorized agents and shall not be made available for public inspection.

        B.     Notwithstanding the foregoing, grantee shall have no obligation to provide copies of documents to grantor which contain trade secrets of grantee or which are otherwise of a confidential or proprietary nature to grantee unless it receives satisfactory assurances from grantor that such information can and will be held in strictest confidence by the grantor. To the extent possible, grantee will provide grantor with summaries of any required documents or copies thereof with trade secrets and confidential and proprietary matters deleted therefrom. (Ord. 96-08 §2, 1996).

 

13.12.300 Public reports.
        If grantee is publicly held, a copy of each of grantee’s annual and other periodic reports and those of its parent, shall be submitted to grantor within forty-five days of its issuance. (Ord. 96-08 §2, 1996).

 

13.12.310 Complaint report and opinion survey.
        A.    The grantee shall furnish to the grantor the results of any opinion survey conducted by the grantee which identifies satisfaction or dissatisfaction among subscribers within the city with the grantee’s cable service. The results of such survey shall be furnished to the grantor within thirty days following completion of the survey.

        B.     Upon request of the grantor, but not more than once every three years, the grantee shall conduct a subscriber satisfaction survey pertaining to quality of service, which may be transmitted to subscribers in subscriber statements for cable service. The form and content of such survey shall be reasonably acceptable to the grantor. The cost of such survey shall be borne by the grantee. (Ord. 96-08 §2, 1996).

 

13.12.320 Privacy report.
        Upon grantor’s request, but no more often than annually, grantee shall submit to grantor a report indicating the degree of compliance with the privacy provisions contained in Section 13.12.450 herein and all steps taken to assure that the privacy rights of individuals have been protected. (Ord. 96-08 §2, 1996).

 

13.12.330 Reports—General.
        A.    All reports required under this chapter, except those which the grantee has agreed to keep confidential, shall be available for public inspection in the grantor’s offices during normal business hours.

        B.     All reports and records required under this chapter shall be furnished at the sole expense of grantee, except as otherwise provided in this chapter or the franchise agreement.

        C.     The willful refusal, failure or neglect of grantee to file any of the reports required as and when due under this chapter, may be deemed a material breach of the franchise agreement if such reports are not provided to grantor within thirty days after written request thereof, and may subject the grantee to all remedies, legal or equitable, which are available to grantor under the franchise or otherwise.

        D.    Any materially false or misleading statement or representation made knowingly and willfully by the grantee in any report required under this chapter or under the franchise agreement may be deemed a material breach of the franchise and may subject grantee to all remedies, legal or equitable, which are available to grantor under the franchise or otherwise. (Ord. 96-08 §2, 1996).

 

13.12.340 Review of system performance.
        Every fifth year throughout the term of the franchise, if requested by the grantor, grantor and grantee shall meet publicly to review system performance and quality of service. The various reports required pursuant to this chapter, results of technical performance tests, the record of subscriber complaints and grantee’s response to complaints, and the information acquired in any subscriber surveys, shall be utilized as the basis for review. In addition, any subscriber may submit comments or complaints during the review meetings, either orally or in writing, and these shall be considered. Within thirty days after conclusion of a system performance review meeting, grantor may issue findings with respect to the cable system’s franchise compliance and quality of service.

        If grantor determines that grantee is not in compliance with the requirements of this chapter or the grantee’s franchise, grantor may direct grantee to correct the area of noncompliance within a reasonable period of time. Failure of grantee, after due notice, to correct the area of noncompliance within the period specified therefor or to commence compliance within such period and diligently achieve compliance thereafter, shall be considered a material breach of the franchise, and grantor may exercise any remedy within the scope of this chapter and the franchise agreement considered appropriate. (Ord. 96-08 §2, 1996).

 

13.12.350 Special review of system performance.
        When there have been complaints made or where there exists other evidence which, in the judgment of the grantor, casts reasonable doubt on the reliability or quality of cable service to the effect that the grantee is not in compliance with the requirements of this chapter or its franchise, the grantor shall have the right to compel the grantee to test, analyze and report on the performance of the system in order to assure compliance with this chapter and the franchise agreement. Grantor may not compel grantee to provide such tests or reports unless and until grantor has provided grantee with at least thirty days’ notice of its intention to exercise its rights under this section and has provided grantee with an opportunity to be heard prior to its exercise of such rights. Such test or tests shall be made and the report thereof shall be delivered to the grantor no later than thirty days after the grantor notifies the grantee that it is exercising such right, and shall be made at grantee’s sole cost. Such report shall include the following information: The nature of the complaints which precipitated the special tests; what system component was tested; the equipment used and procedures employed in said testing; the results of such tests and the method by which such complaints were resolved. Any other information pertinent to the special test shall be recorded. (Ord. 96-08 §2, 1996).

 

13.12.360 Remedies for franchise violations.
        If a grantee fails to perform in a timely manner any obligation required by this chapter or a franchise granted hereunder, following notice from the grantor and opportunity to be heard by the council, and an opportunity to cure such nonperformance in accordance with the provisions of Section 13.12.380 or this chapter, grantor may at its option and in its sole discretion:

        A.    Cure the violation and recover the actual costs thereof from the surety bond established herein if such violation is not cured within thirty days after the council directs the grantee, under Section 13.12.380, of the need to cure and of grantor’s intention to cure and assess the surety bond if the violation is not cured within such thirty-day period.

        B.     For violations of consumer service standards of this chapter or the franchise agreement which have materially degraded the quality of service, grantor may order and direct grantee to issue credits to subscribers, in an amount to be determined by grantor to be reasonably related to the nature of the degradation in service and measured by the period of the degradation, to provide monetary relief substantially equal to the reduced quality of service resulting from grantee’s failure to perform. (Ord. 96-08 §2, 1996).

 

13.12.370 Grantor’s power to revoke.
        Grantor reserves the right to revoke any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter and rescind all rights and privileges associated with it in the following circumstances, each of which shall represent a default by grantee and material breach under the franchise grant:

        A.    If grantee shall default in the performance of its material obligations under this chapter or the franchise agreement and shall continue such default after receipt of due notice, an opportunity to be heard and a reasonable opportunity to cure the default;

        B.     If grantee shall fail to provide or maintain in full force and effect the insurance coverage or surety bond as required herein;

        C.     If grantee shall violate any order or ruling of any regulatory body having jurisdiction over the grantee relative to the grantee’s franchise, unless such order or ruling is being contested by grantee by appropriate proceedings conducted in good faith;

        D.    If grantee attempts to unlawfully evade any provision of this chapter or practices any fraud or deceit upon grantor;

        E.     If grantee persistently fails to remedy defaults for which lesser penalties have previously been imposed; or

        F.     If grantee becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its debts, or is adjudged as bankrupt.

        The termination and forfeiture of the grantee’s franchise shall in no way affect any right of grantor to pursue any remedy under the franchise or any provision of law. (Ord. 96-08 §2, 1996).

 

13.12.380 Procedure for remedying franchise violations.
        Prior to imposing any remedy or other sanction against grantee specified in this chapter, grantor shall give grantee notice and opportunity to be heard on the matter, in accordance with the following procedures:

        A.    Grantor shall first notify grantee of the violation in writing by personal delivery or registered or certified mail, and demand correction within reasonable time, which shall not be less than five days in the case of failure of the grantee to pay any sum or other amount due the grantor under this chapter or the grantee’s franchise and thirty days in all other cases. If grantee fails to correct the violation within the time prescribed or if grantee fails to commence correction of the violation within the time prescribed and diligently remedy such violation thereafter, the grantor shall then give written notice of not less than twenty days of a public hearing to be held before the council. Said notice shall specify the violations alleged to have occurred.

        B.     At the public hearing, the council shall hear and consider all relevant evidence, and thereafter render findings and its decision.

        C.     In the event the council finds that grantee has corrected the violation or has diligently commenced correction of such violation after notice thereof from grantor and is diligently proceeding to fully remedy such violation, or that no violation has occurred, the proceeding shall terminate and no penalty or other sanction shall be imposed.

        D.    In the event the council finds that the alleged violations exist and that grantee has not corrected the same in a satisfactory manner or has not diligently commenced corrections of such violation after notice thereof from grantor and is not diligently proceeding to fully remedy such violation, the council may impose one or more of the remedies specified herein as it, in its discretion, deems appropriate under the circumstance. (Ord. 96-08 §2, 1996).

 

13.12.390 Force majeure; grantee’s inability to perform.
        In the event grantee’s performance of any of the terms, conditions or obligations required by this chapter or a franchise granted hereunder is prevented by a cause or event not within grantee’s control, such inability to perform shall be deemed excused and no penalties or sanctions shall be imposed by Section 13.12.360(B) of this chapter. Causes or events not within the control of grantee shall include, without limitation, acts of God, strikes, sabotage, riots or civil disturbances, restraints imposed by order of a governmental agency or court, explosions, acts of public enemies and natural disasters such as floods, earthquakes, landslides and fires but shall not include financial inability of the grantee to perform or failure of the grantee to obtain any necessary permits or licenses from other governmental agencies or the right to use the facilities of any public utility where such failure is due solely to the acts or omissions of grantee, or the failure of the grantee to secure supplies, services or equipment necessary for the installation, operation, maintenance or repair of the cable system where the grantee has failed to exercise reasonable diligence to secure such supplies, services or equipment. (Ord. 96-08 §2, 1996).

 

13.12.400 Abandonment or removal of franchise property.
        A.    In the event that use of any franchise property or a portion thereof is discontinued for a continuous period of twelve months, grantee shall be deemed to have abandoned that franchise property. Any part of the cable system that is intended for use only when needed because it is parallel or redundant to other parts of the system, shall not be deemed to have been abandoned because of its lack of use.

        B.     Grantor, upon such terms as grantor may impose, may give grantee permission to abandon, without removing, any system facility or equipment laid, directly constructed, operated or maintained under the franchise. Unless such permission is granted unless otherwise provided in this chapter, the grantee shall remove all abandoned above-ground facilities and equipment upon receipt of written notice from grantor and shall restore any affected street to its former state at the time such facilities and equipment were installed, so as not to impair its usefulness. In removing its plant, structures and equipment, grantee shall refill, at its own expense, any excavation that shall be made by it and shall leave all public ways and places in as good condition as that prevailing prior to such removal without materially interfering with any electrical or telephone cable or other utility wires, poles or attachments. Grantor shall have the right to inspect and approve and condition of the public ways, public places, cables, wires, attachments and poles prior to and after such removal. The liability, indemnity and insurance provisions of this chapter and the surety bond provided herein shall continue in full force and effect during the period of removal and until full compliance by grantee with the terms and conditions of this section.

        C.     Upon abandonment of any franchise property in place, the grantee, if required by the grantor, shall submit to the grantor any instrument, satisfactory in form to the grantor, transferring to the grantor ownership of the franchise property abandoned.

        D.    At the expiration of the term for which the franchise is granted, or upon its revocation or earlier expiration, as provided for herein, in any such case without renewal, extension or transfer, the grantor shall have the right to require grantee to remove, at its own expense, all above-ground portions of the cable television system from all streets and public ways within the city within a reasonable period of time, which shall not be less than one hundred eighty days.

        E.     Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in this chapter, the grantee may abandon any underground franchise property in place so long as it does not materially interfere with the use of the street or public rights-of-way in which such property is located or with the use thereof by any public utility or other cable grantee. (Ord. 96-08 §2, 1996).

 

13.12.410 Restoration by grantor; reimbursement of costs.
        In the event of a failure by grantee to complete any work required herein or by any other law or ordinance, and if such work is not completed within thirty days after receipt of written notice thereof from grantor or, if more than thirty days are reasonably required therefor, if grantee does not commence such work within such thirty-day period and diligently complete the work thereafter (except in cases of emergency constituting a threat to public health, safety or welfare), grantor may cause such work to be done and grantee shall reimburse grantor for the costs thereof within thirty days after receipt of an itemized list of such costs, or grantor may recover such costs through the surety bond provided by grantee. (Ord. 96-08 §2, 1996).

 

13.12.420 Extended operation and continuation of services.
        Upon either expiration or revocation of the franchise, the grantor shall have discretion to permit grantee to continue to operate the cable television system for an extended period of time not to exceed twelve months from the date of such expiration or revocation, unless extended by resolution of grantor. Grantee shall, as trustee for its successor-in-interest, continue to operate the system under the terms and conditions of this chapter and the franchise and to provide the regular subscriber service and any and all of the services that may be provided at that time. The grantee shall use reasonable efforts to provide continuous, uninterrupted service to its subscribers, including operation of the system during transitional periods following franchise expiration or termination. (Ord. 96-08 §2, 1996).

 

13.12.430 Receivership and foreclosure.
        A.    A franchise granted hereunder shall, at the option of grantor, cease and terminate one hundred twenty days after appointment of a receiver or receivers, or trustee or trustees, to take over and conduct the business of grantee, whether in receivership or reorganization, bankruptcy or other action or proceeding, unless such receivership or trusteeship shall have been vacated prior to the expiration of said one hundred twenty days, or unless:

        1.     Such receivers or trustees shall have, within one hundred twenty days after their election or appointment, fully complied with all the terms and provisions of this chapter and the franchise granted pursuant hereto, and the receivership or trustees within said one hundred twenty days shall have remedied all the faults under the franchise or provided a plan for the remedy of such faults which is satisfactory to the grantor; and

        2.     Such receivers or trustees shall, within said one hundred twenty days, execute an agreement duly approved by the court having jurisdiction in the premises, whereby such receivers or trustees assume and agree to be bound by each and every term, provision and limitation of the franchise granted.

        B.     In the case of a foreclosure or other judicial sale of the franchise property, or any material part thereof, grantor may serve notice of termination upon grantee and the successful bidder at such sale, in which event the franchise granted and all rights and privileges of the grantee hereunder shall cease and terminate days after service of such notice, unless:

        1.     Grantor shall have approved the transfer of the franchise, as and in the manner that this chapter provides; and

        2.     Such successful bidder shall have covenanted and agreed with grantor to assume and be bound by all terms and conditions of the franchise. (Ord. 96-08 §2, 1996).

 

13.12.440 Rights reserved to grantor.
        A.    In addition to any rights specifically reserved to the grantor by this chapter, the grantor reserves to itself every right and power which is required to be reserved by a provision of any ordinance or under the franchise, and the grantee by accepting a franchise hereunder agrees to be bound thereby and to comply with any action or requirement of the grantor in its exercise of any such right or power.

        B.     The grantor shall have the right to waive any provision of any ordinance or under the franchise, and the grantee by accepting a franchise hereunder agrees to be bound thereby and to comply with any action or requirement of the grantor in its exercise of any such right or power.

        C.     The grantor shall have the right to waive any provision of the franchise, except those required by federal or state law, if the grantor determines: (1) that it is in the public interest to do so, and (2) that the enforcement of such provision will impose an undue hardship on the grantee or the subscribers. To be effective, such waiver shall be evidenced by a statement in writing signed by a duly authorized representative of the grantor. Waiver of any provision in one instance shall not be deemed a waiver of such provision subsequent to such instance and shall not be deemed a waiver of any other provision of the franchise unless the statement so relies. (Ord. 96-08 §2, 1996).

 

13.12.450 Rights of individuals.
        A.    Grantee shall not deny service, deny access or otherwise discriminate against subscribers, channel users or general citizens on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, age or sex. Grantee shall comply at all times with all other applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations, and all executive and administrative orders, relating to nondiscrimination, including without limitation, Section 51 of the California Civil Code which is incorporated in this section by reference.

        B.     Grantee shall adhere to the applicable equal employment opportunity requirements of the FCC, state and local regulations, as now written or as amended from time to time.

        C.     Neither grantee, nor any person, agency or entity shall, without the subscriber’s consent, tap, or arrange for the tapping, of any cable, line or signal input device or subscriber outlet or receiver for any purpose except routine maintenance of the system, detection of unauthorized service, polling with audience participating or audience viewing surveys to support advertising research regarding viewers where individual viewing behavior cannot be identified.

        D.    In the conduct of providing its services or in pursuit of any collateral commercial enterprise resulting therefrom, grantee shall take reasonable steps to prevent the invasion of a subscriber’s or general citizen’s right of privacy or other personal rights through the use of the system as such rights are delineated or defined by applicable law. Grantee shall not without lawful court order or other applicable valid legal authority utilize the system’s interactive two-way equipment or capability for unauthorized personal surveillance of any subscriber or general citizen.

        E.     No cable line, wire, amplified, converter or other piece of equipment owned by grantee shall be installed by grantee in the subscriber’s premises, other than in appropriate easements, without first securing any required consent. If a subscriber requests service, permission to install upon subscriber’s property shall be presumed.

        F.     The grantee, or any of its agents or employees, shall not sell, or otherwise make available to any party for any purpose other than the operation or transfer of the cable system without consent of the subscriber pursuant to state and federal privacy laws:

        1.     Any list of the names and addresses of subscribers containing the names and addresses of subscribers who request in writing to be removed from such list; and

        2.     Any list which identifies the viewing habits of individual subscribers, without the prior written consent of such subscribers. This does not prohibit the grantee from providing composite ratings of subscriber viewing to any party. (Ord. 96-08 §2, 1996).

 

13.12.460 Separability.
        If any provision of this chapter is held by any court or by any federal or state agency of competent jurisdiction, to be invalid as conflicting with any federal or state law, rule or regulation now or hereafter in effect, or is held by such court or agency to be modified in any way in order to conform to the requirements of any such law, rule or regulation, such provision shall be considered a separate, distinct and independent part of this chapter, and such holding shall not affect the validity and enforceability of all other provisions hereof. In the event that such law, rule or regulation is subsequently repealed, rescinded, amended or otherwise changed, so that the provision hereof which had been held invalid or modified is no longer in conflict with such law, rule or regulation, said provision shall thereupon return to full force and effect and shall thereafter be binding on grantor and grantee, provided that grantor shall give grantee thirty days’ written notice of such change before requiring compliance with said provision or such longer period of time as may be reasonably required for grantee to comply with such provision. (Ord. 96-08 §2, 1996).

Chapter 13.16 STATE VIDEO FRANCHISES
13.16.010 Purpose and authority.
        This chapter implements the Digital Infrastructure and Video Competition Act of 2006, set forth at Public Utilities Code Section 5800 et seq. (the “Act”; AB 2987). The Act creates a process for the state to grant video service franchises. It will be administered by the California Public Utilities Commission (CPUC).

        Under the Act, local cities have retained certain authorities. It is the purpose of this chapter to implement that local authority in the city of Waterford. (Ord. 09-01 §1, 2009).

 

13.16.020 Definitions.
        The terms “video service,” “video franchise,” and “holder” shall have the same meaning as those terms are defined in the Public Utilities Code Section 5830.

        “Gross revenue” has the meaning set forth in California Public Utilities Code Section 5860(d).

        Terms not defined here shall have the same meaning as established in (in order of priority): (1) the California Public Utilities Code; (2) commission rules implementing the California Public Utilities Code; and (3) Title 47 United States Code Title VI. (Ord. 09-01 §1, 2009).

 

13.16.030 State video franchise applications.
        A.    Copy of Application to City. An applicant for a state video franchise within the city must concurrently provide a complete copy to the city manager of any application or amendments to an application filed with the California Public Utilities Commission (CPUC). (PUC Section 5840(n).)

        B.     City manager Comments to CPUC. Within thirty days of receipt, the city manager will provide any appropriate comments to the CPUC regarding an application or an amendment to an application for a state video franchise. (Ord. 09-01 §1, 2009).

 

13.16.040 State video franchise and PEG fees.
        A.    Franchise Fee. Any state video franchise holder operating within the city shall pay a fee to the city equal to five percent of the gross revenues of that state video franchise holder derived from the operation of its franchise within the city (PUC Section 5840(q)). A state video franchise holder shall pay the franchise fee to the city quarterly, within forty-five days after the end of each calendar quarter. Each payment shall be accompanied by a summary explaining the basis for the calculation of the fee.

        B.     Public, Educational or Governmental (PEG) Fees.

        1.     Fee to take effect upon expiration of incumbent operator’s franchise. Any state video franchise holder operating within the city upon the expiration of the incumbent operator’s franchise shall pay a PEG fee to the city equal to one percent of the gross revenue of that state video franchise holder derived from the operation of its franchise within the city. A state video franchise holder shall pay the PEG fee to the city quarterly, within forty-five days after the end of each calendar quarter. The city will use the receipts of the PEG fee for purposes consistent with state and federal law. (PUC Section 5870(n).)

        2.     PEG Channel Capacity. A state video franchise holder that uses the public rights-of-way shall designate sufficient capacity on its network to enable the carriage of at least two PEG access channels.

        a.     PEG access channels shall be for the exclusive use of the city or its designees to provide public, educational, or governmental programming.

        b.     Advertising, underwriting, or sponsorship recognition may be carried on the PEG access channels for the purpose of funding PEG related activities.

        c.     The PEG access channels shall be carried on the basic service tier; provided, however, that if the technology used eliminates the basic service tier, then all PEG access channels shall be placed on the cable system in a manner equivalent to local over-the-air broadcast stations.

        d.     To the extent feasible, the PEG access channels shall not be separated numerically from other channels carried on the basic service tier, and the channel numbers for the PEG access channels shall be the same channel numbers used by the incumbent cable operator unless prohibited by federal law.

        e.     After the initial designation of PEG access channel numbers, the channel numbers shall not be changed without the prior written consent of the city, unless the change is required by federal law.

        f.      Each PEG access channel shall be capable of carrying a National Television System Committee television signal.

        C.     Interconnection. Where technically feasible, a state video franchise holder and an incumbent cable operator shall negotiate in good faith to interconnect their networks for the purpose of providing PEG access channel programming. Interconnection may be accomplished by direct cable, microwave link, satellite, or other reasonable method of connection. State video franchise holders and incumbent cable operators shall provide interconnection of the PEG access channels on reasonable terms and condition and may not withhold the interconnection. If a state video franchise holder and an incumbent cable operator cannot reach a mutually acceptable interconnection agreement, the city may require the incumbent cable operator to allow the state video franchise holder to interconnect its network with the incumbent’s network at a technically feasible point on the holder’s network as identified by the holder. If no technically-feasible point for interconnection is available to the channel originator and shall provide the facilities necessary for the interconnection. The cost on any interconnection shall be borne by the state video franchise holder requesting the interconnection unless otherwise agreed to by the parties.

        D.    Emergency Alert System and Emergency Overrides. A state video franchise holder must comply with the Emergency Alert System requirements of the Federal Communications Commission in order that the emergency messages may be distributed over the holder’s network. Provisions in the city-issued franchise authorizing the city to provide local emergency notifications shall remain in effect, and shall apply to all state video franchise holders in the city for the duration of the city-issued franchise, or until the term of the franchise would have expired had it not been terminated pursuant to subdivision (o) of Section 5840 of the California Public Utilities Code or until January 1, 2009, whichever is later.

        E.     Authority to Examine Records. The city manager may examine business records of a holder of a state video franchise to ensure compliance with this section. The city may conduct such an examination not more than once each year. (PUC Section 5860(i).) (Ord. 09-01 §1, 2009).

 

13.16.050 Customer service penalties.
        A.    Compliance with Customer Service and Protection Standards. The holder of a state video franchise shall comply with all applicable state and federal customer service and protection standards pertaining to the provision of video service in the city. (PUC Section 5900(a) and (b).)

        B.     City Monitoring—Notice of Violation—Penalties. The city manager has authority to monitor the compliance of state video franchise holders with respect to state and federal customer service and protection standards. The city manager will provide the state video franchise holder written notice of any material breaches of applicable customer service standards, and will allow the state video franchise holder thirty days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material breach. A material breach not remedied within the thirty-day time period will be subject to the following city penalties:

        1.     For the first occurrence of a violation, a fine of five hundred dollars shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed one thousand five hundred dollars for each violation.

        2.     For a second violation of the same nature within twelve months, a fine of one thousand dollars shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed three thousand dollars for each violation.

        3.     For a third or further violation of the same nature within twelve months, a fine of two thousand five hundred dollars shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed seven thousand five hundred dollars for each violation. (PUC Section 5900(c) and (d).)

        C.     Appeal. A state video franchise holder may appeal a penalty assessed by the city manager to the city council within sixty days of the initial assessment. The city council shall set the matter for public hearing and hear all evidence and relevant testimony. The council may uphold, modify, or vacate the denial. The city council’s decision on the imposition of a penalty is final. (Ord. 09-01 §1, 2009).

 

13.16.060 Public rights-of-way.
        A.    A state video franchise holder is required to obtain an encroachment permit under Waterford Municipal Code, Chapter 12.24, before constructing, operating, maintaining, or repairing its facilities within the public right-of-way.

        B.     The city shall either approve or deny an encroachment permit application within ten days of receiving a completed application. An application is considered complete when the applicant has complied with all statutory requirements, including the California Environmental Quality Act (Public Resources Code Section 21000 and following).

        C.     If the city denies the encroachment permit, it shall provide the applicant with a detailed explanation of the reason for the denial. A determination regarding the encroachment permit by the public works director may be appealed to the city council. (Ord. 09-01 §1, 2009).

Chapter 13.18 UNDERGROUND SERVICES ALERT
13.18.010 Underground services alert.
        Each public or private utility agency shall be a member of the regional notification center for subsurface installations (underground services alert) and shall field mark, at its sole cost and expense, the locations of its underground network facilities upon notification in accordance with the requirements of Section 4216 of the California Government Code, and any other applicable law. (Ord. 2015-09 §1).

Title 14 (RESERVED)

Title 15 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
Chapter 15.04 CALIFORNIA BUILDING CODES
Chapter 15.28 MOVING BUILDINGS
Chapter 15.32 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Chapter 15.40 DWELLING UNIT MAINTENANCE
Chapter 15.42 PUBLIC NUISANCE
Chapter 15.46 WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPING STANDARDS

Chapter 15.04 CALIFORNIA BUILDING CODES
15.04.010 Definitions.
        Certain words and phrases are defined in this section to clarify their use in this chapter and in the California Building Codes. Where a definition is not given or where a question of interpretation arises, the definition that shall control is the normal meaning of the word within the context of its use.

        A.    “Building official” or “building inspector” means and includes the building official and building inspector of the city and authorized representatives.

        B.     “Building site” means and includes the land occupied or to be occupied by a structure or accessory structure, together with any minimum distance between buildings and property lines required by this chapter or this code.

        C.     “Chief” or “chief of the fire department” or “fire chief” means and includes the chief of the Stanislaus Consolidated Fire Protection District and authorized representatives.

        D.    “Chief of police” or “police department” means and includes the chief of police of the city and authorized representatives.

        E.     “City” or “jurisdiction” or “municipality” means the city of Waterford.

        F.     “Code” means and includes, depending upon the context of its use, the Waterford Municipal Code, or any statute, or any published compilation of rules, regulations, or standards adopted by the federal government or the state of California, or by any agency of either of them. Code shall include any nationally recognized or approved published compilations or proposed rules, regulations, or standards of any private organization or institution that has been in existence for a period of at least three years.

        G.    “Fire department” means the Stanislaus Consolidated Fire Protection District.

        H.    “Health officer” means and includes the county health officer for Stanislaus County and his or her authorized representatives.

        I.      “Primary code” means and includes any code that is directly adopted by reference, in whole or in part, by this chapter.

        J.      “Published” means issued in print, lithographed, multigraphed, mimeographed, or similar form.

        K.    “Secondary code” means and includes any code that is incorporated by reference, directly or indirectly, in any primary code or in any secondary code.

        L.     “California Administrative Code” means that certain document in book form entitled “California Administrative Code, 2019 Edition,” published by the International Code Council, copyright by California Building Standards Commission.

        M.    “California Building Code” means that certain document in book form entitled “California Building Code, 2019 Edition,” published by the International Code Council, copyright by California Building Standards Commission. “California Building Code” shall include all appendices thereof.

        N.    “California Building Code Standards” means that certain document in book form entitled “California Building Code Standards, 2019 Edition,” published by the International Code Council, copyright by California Building Standards Commission.

        O.    “California Building Codes” means and includes all of the following primary codes:

        1.     2019 California Building Code, Part 2;

        2.     2019 California Residential Code, Part 2.5;

        3.     2019 California Electrical Code, Part 3;

        4.     2019 California Mechanical Code, Part 4;

        5.     2019 California Plumbing Code, Part 5;

        6.     2019 California Energy Code, Part 6;

        7.     2019 California Fire Code, Part 9;

        8.     2019 California Existing Building Code, Part 10;

        9.     2019 California Green Building Standards Code (CALGreen), Part 11.

        P.     “California Fire Code” means that certain document in book form entitled “California Fire Code, 2019 Edition,” published by the International Code Council, copyright by California Building Standards Commission.

        Q.    “California Fire Code Standards” means that certain document in book form entitled “California Fire Code Standards, 2019 Edition,” published by the International Code Council, copyright by California Building Standards Commission.

        R.     “California Mechanical Code” means that certain document in book form entitled “California Mechanical Code, 2019 Edition,” published by the International Code Council, copyright by California Building Standards Commission.

        S.     “California Plumbing Code” means that certain document in book form entitled “California Plumbing Code, 2019 Edition,” published by the California Building Standards Commission. (Ord. 2019-09 §1; Ord. 2014-01 §1; Ord. 2011-01 §1; Ord. 07-10 §1; Ord. 02-04 §1; Ord. 99-04 §1, 1999; Ord. 96-07 §1, 1996; Ord. 96-01 §1, 1996; Ord. 93-03 §1, 1993; Ord. 86-6 §2, 1986).

 

15.04.020 California Building Codes adopted.
        The 2019 California Administrative Code, Part 1; 2019 California Building Code, Part 2; 2019 California Residential Code, Part 2.5; 2019 California Electrical Code, Part 3; 2019 California Mechanical Code, Part 4; 2019 California Plumbing Code, Part 5; 2019 California Energy Code, Part 6; California Historical Building Code, Part 8; 2019 California Fire Code, Part 9; 2019 California Existing Building Code, Part 10; 2019 California Green Building Standards Code (CALGreen), Part 11; and California Referenced Standards Code, part 12. (Ord. 2019-09 §1; Ord. 2018-01 §1; Ord. 2011-01 §1; Ord. 07-10 §1; Ord. 02-04 §1; Ord. 99-04 §1, 1999; Ord. 96-07 §1, 1996; Ord. 96-01 §1, 1996; Ord. 2014-01 §1; Ord. 93-03 §1, 1993; Ord. 86-6 §2, 1986).

 

15.04.030 Copies on file.
        At least one copy of each primary code, and of each secondary code pertaining thereto, all certified to be true copies by the city clerk, shall be filed in the city clerk’s office and shall be kept there for public inspection during regular business hours. The city clerk shall at all times maintain a reasonable supply of copies of each primary code, and of each secondary code pertaining thereto, available for purchase by the public at a moderate price, not to exceed the actual cost thereof to the city. (Ord. 2014-01 §1; Ord. 93-03 §1, 1993; Ord. 86-6 §2, 1986).

 

15.04.040 Conflicting provisions deleted.
        Any provision of the California Building Codes, or of any secondary codes pertaining thereto, that are in conflict or inconsistent with, or the subject matter of which is regulated by, the laws of the state are deleted therefrom and are not adopted. (Ord. 2014-01 §1; Ord. 93-03 §1, 1993; Ord. 86-6 §2, 1986).

 

15.04.050 Amendments to the California Building Codes.
        A.    The section entitled “Permit Fees” of the California Electrical Code is amended to read as follows:

 

Permit Fees. The fee for each permit shall be in an amount as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges for building and construction related services established by the City Council from time to time by resolution.

 

        B.     The section entitled “Permit Fees” of the California Administrative Code is amended to read as follows:

 

Permit Fees. The fee for each permit shall be in an amount as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges for building and construction related services established by the City Council from time to time by resolution. The determination of value or valuation under any of the provisions of these codes shall be made by the Building Official. The value to be used in computing the building permit and building plan review fees shall be the total value of all construction work for which the permit is issued as well as all finish work, painting, roofing, electrical, plumbing, heating, air conditioning, elevators, fire extinguishing systems, and any other permanent equipment. The Building Official shall use as a reference for determining valuation the most current schedule of building valuation data published from time to time in the International Code Council, copyright by California Building Standards Commission publication California Referenced Standards Commission. A copy of such schedule shall be posted in the Office of the Building Official for public inspection during regular business hours.

 

        C.     The section entitled “Permit Fees” of the California Building Code is amended to read as follows:

 

Permit Fees. The fee for each permit shall be in an amount as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges for building and construction related services established by the City Council from time to time by resolution. The determination of value or valuation under any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by the Building Official. The value to be used in computing the building permit and building plan review fees shall be the total value of all construction work for which the permit is issued as well as all finish work, painting, roofing, electrical, plumbing, heating, air conditioning, elevators, fire extinguishing systems, and any other permanent equipment. The Building Official shall use as a reference for determining valuation the most current schedule of building valuation data published from time to time in the International Code Council, copyright by California Building Standards Commission publication California Referenced Standards Code. A copy of such schedule shall be posted in the Office of the Building Official for public inspection during regular business hours.

 

        D.    The introductory sentence of Part 2 is amended to read as follows:

 

Part 2. A permit shall be obtained from both the Building Official and the Fire Chief prior to engaging in the following activities, operations, practices, or functions.

 

        E.     The section entitled “Liquefied Petroleum Gases” of the California Fire Code is amended to read as follows:

 

Liquefied Petroleum Gases. Except for portable containers of less than five gallons water capacity, to install or maintain any LP gas container or to operate any tank vehicle which is used for the transportation of LP gas. Where a single container or the aggregate capacity of interconnected containers is over five gallons water capacity, the installer shall submit plans for such permits. Except for portable containers of less than five gallons water capacity, the installation or use of any LP gas container for domestic purposes is prohibited in the City, except as otherwise permitted by State law. See Article 82.

 

        F.     The section entitled “Permit Fees” of the California Mechanical Code is amended to read as follows:

 

Permit Fees. The fee for each permit shall be in an amount as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges for building and construction related services established by the City Council from time to time by resolution.

 

        G.    Part 5 of the California Plumbing Code is amended to read as follows:

 

Part 5. Every applicant for a permit to do work regulated by this Code shall state in writing, on the application form provided for that purpose, the character of work proposed to be done and the amount and kind in connection therewith, together with such information, pertinent thereto, as may be required.

 

Such applicant shall pay for each permit, at the time of issuance, a fee in an amount as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges for building and construction related services established by the City Council from time to time by resolution.

 

Any person who shall commence any work for which a permit is required by this Code without first having obtained a permit, pay double the permit fees fixed by the City Council for such work, provided, however, that this provision shall not apply to emergency work when it shall be proved to the satisfaction of the Building Official that such work was urgently necessary and that it was not practical to obtain a permit therefore before commencement of the work. In all such cases, a permit must be obtained as soon as it is practical to do so, and if there be an unreasonable delay in obtaining such permit, a double fee as herein provided shall be charged.

 

For the purpose of this section, a sanitary plumbing outlet on or to which a plumbing fixture or appliance may be set or attached shall be construed to be a fixture. Fees for reconnection and retest of plumbing systems in relocated buildings shall be based on the number of plumbing fixtures, gas systems, water heaters, etc., involved.

 

Where interceptor traps or mobile home site traps are installed at the same time as a building sewer on any lot, no sewer permit shall be required for the connection of any such trap to an appropriate inlet fitting provided in the building sewer by the permittee constructing such sewer.

 

When a permit has been obtained to connect an existing building or existing work to the public sewer or to connect to a new private disposal facility, backfilling of private sewage disposal facilities abandoned consequent to such connection is included in the permit.

(Ord. 2014-01 §1; Ord. 2011-01 §1; Ord. 07-10 §1; Ord. 96-01 §1, 1996; Ord. 93-03 §1, 1993; Ord. 86-6 §2, 1986).

 

15.04.060 Enforcement—In general.
        The building official, and authorized representatives, are empowered, and it shall be their duty, to enforce the provisions of the California Building Codes of this chapter. It shall be the duty of the fire chief, in conjunction with the building official, to enforce the provisions of the Uniform Fire Code and all other laws, ordinances, or regulations concerning fire prevention within the city. The health officer shall assist in the enforcement of the provisions of the California Building Codes and this chapter when requested to do so in writing by the building official. (Ord. 2014-01 §1; Ord. 93-03 §1, 1993; Ord. 86-6 §2, 1986).

 

15.04.070 Enforcement—Right of entry.
        Any person whose duty it is to enforce the provisions of the California Building Codes and of this chapter may, at any reasonable time, enter upon private property for such purpose. It is unlawful for any person to interfere with, oppose, or resist any authorized person enforcing the provisions of the California Building Codes and of this chapter. (Ord. 2014-01 §1; Ord. 93-03 §1, 1993; Ord. 86-6 §2, 1986).

 

15.04.080 Enforcement—Arrest powers.
        Pursuant to the provisions of California Penal Code Section 836.5, the building official, and authorized representatives, are authorized to arrest without a warrant and issue a written notice to appear whenever they have reasonable cause to believe that the person to be arrested has committed a misdemeanor in their presence which is a violation of this chapter or a violation of any other ordinance or statute which they have a duty to enforce. (Ord. 2014-01 §1; Ord. 93-03 §1, 1993; Ord. 86-6 §2, 1986).

 

15.04.090 Violation—Penalty.
        Any person who violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of the  California Building Codes or of this chapter, or who violates or fails to comply with any order or regulation made thereunder, or who acts in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or who violates any provisions of a certificate or permit issued thereunder, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor for the second and any further violations within twenty-four months of the first violation. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time, and when not otherwise specified in any citation or notice of violations, each day or portion thereof that such violations or defects continue shall constitute a separate offense. The application of the provisions of this section shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. (Ord. 2014-01 §1; Ord. 93-03 §1, 1993; Ord. 86-6 §2, 1986).

 

15.04.100 Small residential rooftop solar energy system.
        A.    Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide minimum standards for an expedited, streamlined permitting process for small residential rooftop solar energy systems within the corporate limits of the city.

        B.     Definitions. The following words and phrases as used in this section are defined as follows:

        1.     “Electronic submittal” means the utilization of one or more of the following:

        a.     E-mail;

        b.     The Internet;

        c.     Facsimile.

        2.     “Small residential rooftop solar energy system” means all of the following:

        a.     A solar energy system that is no larger than ten kilowatts alternating current nameplate rating or thirty kilowatts thermal.

        b.     A solar energy system that conforms to all applicable state fire, structural, electrical, and other building codes as adopted or amended by the city and paragraph (iii) of subdivision (c) of Section 714 of the Civil Code, as such section or subdivision may be amended, renumbered, or redesignated from time to time.

        c.     A solar energy system that is installed on a single- or duplex-family dwelling.

        d.     A solar panel or module array that does not exceed the maximum legal building height as defined by the authority having jurisdiction.

        3.     “Solar energy system” has the same meaning set forth in paragraphs (1) and (2) of subdivision (a) of Section 801.5 of the Civil Code, as such section or subdivision may be amended, renumbered, or redesignated from time to time. Section 65850.5 of the California Government Code provides that, on or before September 30, 2015, every city, county, or city and county shall adopt an ordinance that creates an expedited, streamlined permitting process for small residential rooftop solar energy system.

        C.     Checklist. Section 65850.5 of the California Government Code provides that in developing an expedited permitting process, the city, county, or city and county shall adopt a checklist of all requirements with which small rooftop solar energy systems shall comply to be eligible for expedited review. The building official is hereby authorized and directed to develop and adopt such checklist. The checklist shall be published on the city’s Internet website. The applicant may submit the permit application and associated documentation to the city’s building division by personal, mailed, or electronic submittal together with any required permit processing and inspection fees. In the case of electronic submittal, the electronic signature of the applicant on all forms, applications, and other documentation may be used in lieu of a wet signature.

        D.    Prior to Application. Prior to submitting an application, the applicant shall:

        1.     Verify to the applicant’s reasonable satisfaction through the use of standard engineering evaluation techniques that the support structure for the small residential rooftop solar energy system is stable and adequate to transfer all wind, seismic, and dead and live loads associated with the system to the building foundation; and

        2.     At the applicant’s cost, verify to the applicant’s reasonable satisfaction using standard electrical inspection techniques that the existing electrical system including existing line, load, ground and bonding wiring as well as main panel and subpanel sizes are adequately sized, based on the existing electrical system’s current use, to carry all new photovoltaic electrical loads.

        E.     Inspections. For a small residential rooftop solar energy system eligible for expedited review, only one inspection shall be required, which shall be done in a timely manner and may include a consolidated inspection by the building official and fire chief. (Note: A separate fire inspection may be performed if your city does not have an agreement in place with your local fire authority to conduct a fire safety inspection on behalf of the fire authority.) If a small residential rooftop solar energy system fails inspection, a subsequent inspection is authorized; however, the subsequent inspection need not conform to the requirements of this section.

        F.     Incomplete Application. An application that satisfies the information requirements in the checklist, as determined by the building official, shall be deemed complete. Upon receipt of an incomplete application, the building official shall issue a written correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance.

        G.    Application Approval. Upon confirmation by the building official of the application and supporting documentation being complete and meeting the requirements of the checklist, the building official shall administratively approve the application and issue all required permits or authorizations. Such approval does not authorize an applicant to connect the small residential rooftop energy system to the local utility provider’s electricity grid. The applicant is responsible for obtaining such approval or permission from the local utility provider. (Ord. 2018-01 §1).

 

15.04.110 Electric vehicle charging station permitting.
        A.    Purpose. The purpose of this section is to promote and encourage the use of electric vehicles by creating an expedited, streamlined permitting process for electric vehicle charging stations while promoting public health and safety and preventing specific adverse impacts in the installation and use of such charging stations. This chapter is also purposed to comply with California Government Code Section 65850.7.

        B.     Definitions. The following words and phrases as used in this section are defined as follows:

        1.     “Electric vehicle charging station” or “charging station” means any level of electric vehicle supply equipment station that is designed and built in compliance with Article 625 of the California Electrical Code, as it reads on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, and delivers electricity from a source outside an electric vehicle into a plug-in electric vehicle.

        2.     “Electronic submittal” means the utilization of one or more of the following:

        a.     Electronic mail or e-mail.

        b.     The Internet.

        c.     Facsimile.

        3.     “Specific, adverse impact” means a significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, and written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete.

        C.     Expedited Permitting Process. Consistent with Government Code Section 65850.7, the building official shall implement an expedited, streamlined permitting process for electric vehicle charging stations, and adopt a checklist of all requirements with which electric vehicle charging stations shall comply with in order to be eligible for expedited review. The expedited, streamlined permitting process and checklist may refer to the recommendations contained in the most current version of the “Plug-In Electric Vehicle Infrastructure Permitting Checklist” of the “Zero-Emission Vehicles in California: Community Readiness Guidebook” as published by the Governor’s Office of Planning and Research. The city’s adopted checklist shall be published on the city’s website.

        1.     Permit Application Processing.

        a.     Prior to submitting an application for processing, the applicant shall verify that the installation of an electric vehicle charging station will not have specific, adverse impact to public health and safety and building occupants. Verification by the applicant includes, but is not limited to: electrical system capacity and loads; electrical system wiring, bonding and overcurrent protection; building infrastructure affected by charging station equipment and associated conduits; areas of charging station equipment and vehicle parking.

        b.     A permit application that satisfies the information requirements in the city’s adopted checklist shall be deemed complete and be promptly processed. Upon confirmation by the building official that the permit application and supporting documents meet the requirements of the city adopted checklist, and is consistent with all applicable laws and health and safety standards, the building official shall, consistent with Government Code Section 65850.7, approve the application and issue all necessary permits. Such approval does not authorize an applicant to energize or utilize the electric vehicle charging station until approval is granted by the county. If the building official determines that the permit application is incomplete, he or she shall issue a written correction notice to the applicant, detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance.

        c.     Consistent with Government Code Section 65850.7, the building official shall allow for electronic submittal of permit applications covered by this section and associated supporting documentations. In accepting such permit applications, the building official shall also accept electronic signatures on all forms, applications, and other documentation in lieu of a wet signature by any applicant.

        2.     Technical Review.

        a.     It is the intent of this section to encourage the installation of electric vehicle charging stations by removing obstacles to permitting for charging stations so long as the action does not supersede the building official’s authority to address higher priority life-safety situations. If the building official makes a finding based on substantial evidence that the electric vehicle charging station could have a specific adverse impact upon the public health or safety, as defined in this chapter, the city may require the applicant to apply for a use permit.

        b.     In the technical review of a charging station, consistent with Government Code Section 65850.7, the building official shall not condition the approval for any electric vehicle charging station permit on the approval of such a system by an association, as that term is defined by Civil Code Section 4080.

        3.     Electric Vehicle Charging Station Installation Requirements.

        a.     Electric vehicle charging station equipment shall meet the requirements of the California Electrical Code, the Society of Automotive Engineers, the National Electrical Manufacturers Association, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories, and rules of the Public Utilities Commission or a Municipal Electric Utility Company regarding safety and reliability.

        b.     Installation of electric vehicle charging stations and associated wiring, bonding, disconnecting means and overcurrent protective devices shall meet the requirements of Article 625 and all applicable provisions of the California Electrical Code.

        c.     Installation of electric vehicle charging stations shall be incorporated into the load calculations of all new or existing electrical services and shall meet the requirements of the California Electrical Code. Electric vehicle charging equipment shall be considered a continuous load.

        d.     Anchorage of either floor-mounted or wall-mounted electric vehicle charging stations shall meet the requirements of the California Building or Residential Code as applicable per occupancy, and the provisions of the manufacturer’s installation instructions. Mounting of charging stations shall not adversely affect building elements. (Ord. 2018-01 §1).

Chapter 15.28 MOVING BUILDINGS
15.28.010 Permit—Required.
        No building or structure shall be moved from one lot or premises to another, or within a single lot or premises, unless and until the person desiring to move such building or structure has obtained a permit from the building department of the city pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 72-1 §2, 1972).

 

15.28.020 Permit—Application—Information required.
        An application for a permit under this chapter shall be made on a form prescribed for such purpose by the city. The following information shall be filed with the planning commission at the time the application is made:

        A.    The location and address of the existing structure;

        B.     The location and address of the proposed new site;

        C.     The plot plan of the new site, showing the proposed location of the building to be located, as well as an indication of all existing structures and improvements on the lot and on the adjacent lots on all sides;

        D.    Plans and specifications for the proposed improvements of the building, including landscape treatment;

        E.     Photographs of all elevations of the structure to be moved and photographs of buildings on property adjacent to the proposed site. (Ord. 72-1 §3, 1972).

 

15.28.030 Permit—Application—Fee.
        An application for a permit for moving a building pursuant to this chapter shall be accompanied by a filing fee, no part of which is refundable, computed as follows:

        A.    For any garage, when not being moved as a building accessory to, and together with, another building, the sum of thirty-five dollars;

        B.     For any building other than a garage not exceeding twenty-four feet in length and not exceeding twenty feet in width, when not being moved as a building accessory to, and together with, another building, the sum of thirty-five dollars;

        C.     For any other building, or group of buildings consisting of one primary building and a garage and/or other accessory structures not exceeding twenty-four feet in length and not exceeding twenty feet in width, the sum of one hundred dollars. (Ord. 73-2 §1, 1973: Ord. 72-1 §4, 1972).

 

15.28.040 Permit—Application—Referral.
        Prior to the issuance of a permit, the application shall be referred to the planning commission of the city and by them forwarded to the city council with their recommendations for approval or disapproval of the permit and the council shall thereupon determine whether a permit shall or shall not be issued and the conditions that shall be attached to the issuance of the permit. (Ord. 72-1 §5, 1972).

 

15.28.050 Permit—Findings prerequisite to issuance.
        Before the planning commission may recommend approval of an application for a permit for the moving of a building or structure, or the council can authorize the issuance of a permit, the planning commission shall make the following determinations:

        A.    That the building or structure will not become or continue to be a substandard building;

        B.     That the building or structure will be located upon a foundation which complies with the standards for foundations applicable to new construction;

        C.     That the building or structure complies with the requirements set forth in California Health and Safety Code Section 17958.9;

        D.    That the proposed location will comply with lot area, required yards, setbacks and all other provisions of the zoning ordinance;

        E.     That all dedication and improvements required for streets and alleys including sidewalks, curbs and gutters, necessary for access to the property upon which the structure is to be located, are provided in conformity with the standards of the city. (Ord. 79-6 Art. III §U, 1979; Ord. 72-1 §6, 1972).

 

15.28.060 Bond and building permit required.
        A.    Before a permit for the relocation of any building is issued pursuant to this chapter, a building permit shall be applied for and approved, and a cash deposit or bond shall be posted with the city in an amount estimated by the city building inspector or his or her agent to cover the cost of the required improvements to bring the building up to the standards of the city and shall be conditioned, among other things, upon and guaranteeing completion of the required improvements on or before the one hundred eightieth day from the date of issuance of the relocation permit.

        B.     If the site vacated by removal of a building pursuant to this chapter is within the city, an additional cash deposit shall be posted with the city to cover the cost involved in cleaning up the vacated site and restoring it to a safe and sightly condition. (Ord. 72-1 §8, 1972).

 

15.28.070 Permitted hours for moving to be specified.
        The building inspector or his or her agent shall, in any permit issued pursuant to this chapter, specify the hours during which the structure may be moved over city streets. No such moving shall be permitted during any hours except those specified in the permit. (Ord. 72-1 §7, 1972).

 

15.28.080 Conformance with building standards.
        Prior to occupancy, any building or structure moved pursuant to this article shall be brought up to the standards of the building standards of the city for a new building, and shall be painted, refurnished and maintained at that standard. (Ord. 72-1 §9, 1972).

 

15.28.090 Compliance required.
        Buildings or structures moved into or within the city shall comply with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 72-1 §1, 1972).

Chapter 15.32 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Article 1. Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact, Purpose and Methods
15.32.010 Statutory authorization.
        The Legislature of the state of California has in Government Code Sections 65302, 65560 and 65800 conferred upon the city of Waterford’s authority to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry. (Ord. 02-01, 2002; Ord. 88-3, 1988).

 

15.32.020 Findings of fact.
        A.    The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation, which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.

        B.     These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazards, which increase flood heights and velocities, and when inadequately anchored, damage uses in other areas. Uses that are inadequately flood proofed, elevated or otherwise protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss. (Ord. 88-3, 1988).

 

15.32.030 Statement of purpose.
        It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed:

        A.    To protect human life and health;

        B.     To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood-control projects;

        C.     To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;

        D.    To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard;

        E.     To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the second use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood blight areas;

        F.     To ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard;

        G.    To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions; and

        H.    To minimize prolonged business interruptions. (Ord. 02-01, 2002; Ord. 88-3, 1988).

 

15.32.040 Methods of reducing flood losses.
        In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and provisions for:

        A.    Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or flood heights or velocities;

        B.     Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;

        C.     Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel floodwaters;

        D.    Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage; and

        E.     Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas. (Ord. 88-3, 1988).

 

Article 2. Definitions.
15.32.050 Definitions.
        Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.

        1.     “Accessory use” means a use which is incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the parcel of land on which it is located.

        2.     “Appeal” means a request for a review of the flood-plain administrator’s interpretation of any provision of this chapter, or a request for a variance.

        3.     “Area of shallow flooding” means a designated AO or AH Zone on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to three feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.

        4.     “Area of special flood hazard”. See “Special flood hazard area.”

        5.     “Area of special mudslide (i.e., mudflow) hazard” means the area subject to severe mudslides (i.e., mudflows). The area is designated as zone M on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).

        6.     “Base flood” means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the “one-hundred-year flood”).

        7.     “Basement” means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.

        8.     “Development” means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations.

        9.     “Encroachment” means the advancement or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavations, buildings, permanent structures, or development into a floodplain, which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.

        10.   “Existing manufactured home park or subdivision” means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.

        11.   “Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision” means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or pouring of the concrete pads).

        12.   “Flood” or “flooding” means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:

        a.     The overflow of floodwaters;

        b.     The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source; and/or

        c.     The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in this subsection.

        13.   “Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM)” means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the floodway.

        14.   “Flood Hazard Boundary Map” means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated the areas of flood hazards.

        15.   “Flood insurance rate map (FIRM)” means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium applicable to the community.

        16.   “Flood Insurance Study” means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the FIRM, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood.

        17.   “Floodplain” or “flood-prone area” means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of “flooding”).

        18.   “Floodplain administrator” means the public works director of the city of Waterford.

        19.   “Floodplain management” means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations.

        20.   “Floodplain management regulations” means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.

        21.   “Floodproofing” means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.

        22.   “Floodway” means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. Also referred to as “regulatory floodway.”

        23.   “Floodway fringe” is that area of the floodplain on either side of the “Regulatory Floodway” where encroachment may be permitted.

        24.   “Fraud and victimization” as related to Section 15.32.200, variances, of this chapter, means that the variance granted may not cause fraud on or victimization of the public. In examining this requirement, the city council will consider the fact that every newly constructed building adds to government responsibilities and remains part of the community for fifty to one hundred years. Buildings that are permitted to be constructed below the base flood elevation are subject during all those years to increased risk of damage from floods, while future owners of the property and the community as a whole are subject to all the costs, inconvenience, danger, and suffering that those increased flood damages bring. In addition, future owners may purchase the property, unaware that it is subject to potential flood damage, and can be insured only at very high insurance rates.

        25.   “Functionally dependent use” means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and shipbuilding and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities.

        26.   “Governing body” is the local governing unit, i.e. county or municipality, that is empowered to adopt and implement regulations to provide for the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry.

        27.   “Hardship” as related to Section 15.32.200, variances, of this chapter means the exceptional hardship that would result from a failure to grant the requested variance. The city council requires that the variance be exceptional, unusual, and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or financial hardship alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences, or the disapproval of one’s neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship. All of these problems can be resolved through other means without granting a variance, even if the alternative is more expensive, or requires the property owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally intended.

        28.   “Highest adjacent grade” means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.

        29.   “Historic structure” means any structure that is:

        a.     Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;

        b.     Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;

        c.     Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.

        30.   “Levee” means a man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding.

        31.   “Levee system” means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accord with sound engineering practices.

        32.   “Lowest floor” means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building’s lowest floor provided it conforms to applicable non-elevation design requirements, including, but not limited to,

        a.     The wet floodproofing standard in Section 15.32.155(C);

        b.     The anchoring standards in Section 15.32.155(A);

        c.     The construction materials and methods standards in Section 15.32.155(B); and

        d.     The standards for utilities in Section 15.32.160.

        33.   “Manufactured home” means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. For floodplain management purposes the term “manufactured home” also includes park trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than one hundred eighty consecutive days.

        34.   “Manufactured home park or subdivision” means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for sale or rent.

        35.   “Market value” shall be determined by estimating the cost to replace the structure in new condition and adjusting that cost figure by the amount of depreciation, which has accrued since the structure was constructed. The cost of replacement of the structure shall be based on a square foot cost factor determined by reference to a building cost estimating guide recognized by the building construction industry. The amount of depreciation shall be determined by taking into account the age and physical deterioration of the structure and functional obsolescence as approved by the Floodplain Administrator, but shall not include economic or other forms of external obsolescence. Use of replacement costs or other depreciation factors different from those contained in recognized building cost estimating guides may be considered only if such factors are included in a report prepared by an independent professional appraiser and supported by a written explanation of the differences.

        36.   “Mean sea level” means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.

        37.   “New construction” means, for floodplain management purposes, structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of a flood-plain management regulation adopted by this community.

        38.   “New manufactured home park or subdivision” means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed [including at a minimum, the construction of streets, the installation of utilities, and either final site grading or pouring of concrete pads] is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by this community.

        39.   “Obstruction” includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or projecting into any watercourse which may impede, alter, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, or due to its location, its propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its likelihood of being carried downstream.

        40.   “One-hundred-year flood” or “100-year flood” means a flood which has a one percent annual probability of being equaled or exceeded. It is identical to the “base flood,” which will be the term used throughout this chapter.

        42.   “Persons” means an individual or his or her agent, firm, partnership, association or corporation, or agent of the aforementioned groups, or this state or its agencies or political subdivisions.

        43.   “Recreational vehicle” means a vehicle which is:

        a.     Built on a single chassis;

        b.     Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;

        c.     Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and

        d.     Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.

        44.   “Remedy a violation” means to bring the structure or other development into compliance with state or local floodplain management regulations, or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impact of its noncompliance. Ways that impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of this chapter or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development.

        45.   “Riverine” means relating to, formed by or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.

        46.   “Special flood hazard area (SFHA)” means an area having special flood or flood-related erosion hazards, and shown on an FHBM or FIRM as zone A, AD, Al-30, AE, A99, AH, VO, V1-V30, VE or V.

        47.   “Start of construction” includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement or other improvement was within one hundred eighty days of the permit date. The “actual start” means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations, or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.

        48.   “Structure” means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally aboveground, as well as a manufactured home.

        49.   “Substantial damage” means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.

        50.   a. “Substantial improvement” means any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent of the market value of the structure either:

        i.      Before the improvement or repair is started;

or

        ii.     If the structure has been damaged, and is being restored, before the damage occurred.

        b.     For the purposes of this definition, “substantial improvement” is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include either:

        i.      Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or

        ii.     Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places.

        51.   “Variance” means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter.

        52.   “Violation” means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations. A certification, or other evidence of compliance required in this chapter, is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.

        53.   “Water surface elevation” means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, (or other datum, where specified) of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.

        54.   “Watercourse” means a lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo, channel, or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur. (Ord. 02-01, 2002; Ord. 88-3, 1988).

 

Article 3. General Provisions
15.32.060 Lands to which this chapter applies.
        This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards, within the jurisdiction of the city. (Ord. 88-3, 1988).

 

15.32.070 Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard.
        The areas of special flood hazard, identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency or the Federal Insurance Administration in a scientific and engineering report entitled “Flood Insurance Study for Waterford,” and accompanying flood Insurance Rate Map dated July 16, 1979, and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this ordinance. This Flood Insurance Study is the minimum area of applicability of this chapter and may be supplemented by studies for other areas which allow implementation of this chapter and which are recommended to the city council by the Floodplain Administrator. (Ord. 02-01, 2002; Ord. 88-3, 1988).

 

15.32.080 Compliance with provisions.
        No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violations of the provisions of this chapter by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing herein shall prevent the city council from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. (Ord. 88-3, 1988).

 

15.32.090 Abrogation and greater restrictions.
        This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. (Ord. 88-3, 1988).

 

15.32.100 Interpretation of provisions.
        In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:

        A.    Considered as minimum requirements;

        B.     Liberally construed in favor of the city council; and

        C.     Deemed to neither limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. (Ord. 88-3, 1988).

 

15.32.110 Warning and disclaimer of liability.
        The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards, areas of flood-related erosion hazards and areas of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Insurance Administration, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. (Ord. 88-3, 1988).

 

15.32.120 Severability.
        This chapter and the various parts thereof are hereby declared severable. Should any section of this chapter be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole, or any portion thereof other than the section so declared unconstitutional or invalid. (Ord. 88-3, 1988).

 

Article 4. Administration
15.32.130 Establishment of development permit.
        A.    A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development begins within any area of special flood hazard, established in Section 15.32.070. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the floodplain administrator and may include, but is not limited to: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevation of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing.

        Site plan, includes, but is not limited to:

        1.     For all proposed structures, spot ground elevations at building corners and twenty-foot or smaller intervals along the foundation footprint, or one-foot contour elevations throughout the building site; and

        2.     Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and utilities; and

        3.     If available, the base flood elevation from the Flood Insurance Study and/or Flood Insurance Rate Map; and

        4.     If applicable, the location of the regulatory floodway; and

        B.     Foundation design detail, includes, but is not limited to:

        1.     Proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures;

        2.     For a crawl-space foundation, location and total net area of foundation openings as required in Section 15.32.155(C)(3) of this chapter and FEMA Technical Bulletins 1-93 and 7-93; and

        3.     For foundations placed on fill, the location and height of the fill, and compaction requirements (compacted to ninety-five percent using the Standard Proctor Test Method);

        4.     Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure will be floodproofed;

        5.     All appropriate certifications listed in subsection D of Section 15.32.150 of this chapter; and

        6.     Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. (Ord. 02-01, 2002; Ord. 88-3, 1988).

 

15.32.140 Floodplain administrator—Director of public works authority.
        The director of public works is hereby appointed to administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying development permits in accordance with its provisions. (Ord. 88-3, 1988).

 

15.32.150 Floodplain administrator—Powers and duties.
        The duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to:

        A.    Permit Review.

        1.     Review all development permits to determine that the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied;

        2.     All other required state and federal permits have been obtained;

        3.     The site is reasonably safe from flooding;

        4.     The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying capacity of areas where base flood elevations have been determined but a floodway has not been designated. For purposes of this ordinance, “adversely affects” means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will increase the water flood elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point.

        B.     Review, Use and Development of Other Base Flood Data.

        1.     When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Section 15.32.070, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer Article V of this chapter. Any such information shall be submitted to the city council for adoption;

        2.     If no base flood elevation data is available from a federal or state agency or other source, then a base flood elevation shall be obtained using one of two methods from the FEMA publication “Managing Floodplain Development in Approximate Zone A Areas—A Guide for Obtaining and Developing Base (100-year) Flood Elevations” dated July 1995 in order to administer Section 15.32.155:

        a.     Simplified Method.

        i.      One-hundred-year or base flood discharge shall be obtained using the appropriate regression equation found in a U.S. Geological Survey publication; or the discharge-drainage area method; and

        ii.     base flood elevation shall be obtained using the Quick-2 computer program developed by FEMA; or

        b.     Detailed Method. The one-hundred-year or base flood discharge and the base flood elevation shall be obtained using detailed methods identified in FEMA Publication 265, published in July 1995 and titled: “Managing Floodplain Development in Approximate Zone A Areas—A Guide for Obtaining and Developing (100-year) Base Flood Elevations.”

        C.     Notification of Other Agencies.

        1.     Notify adjacent communities and the California Department of Water Resources before such alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration;

        2.     Require that the flood-carrying capacity of the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse is maintained;

        3.     Submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency; and

        4.     Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse is maintained.

        D.    Documentation of Floodplain Development.

        1.     Certification required by Section 15.32.155(C)(1) and 15.32.180 (lowest floor elevations),

        2.     Certification required by Section 15.32.155(C)(2) (elevation or floodproofing of nonresidential structures),

        3.     Certification required by Section 15.32.155(C)(3) (wet floodproofing standard),

        4.     Certification of elevation required by Section 15.32.170 (subdivision standards),

        5.     Certification required by Section 15.32.190(A) (floodway encroachments),

        6.     Information required by Section 5.7F (coastal construction standards), and

        7.     Reports required by Section 5.8C (mudflow standards).

        E.     Map Determinations. Make interpretations, where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions, grade and base flood elevation shall be used to determine the boundaries of the special flood hazard area).

        The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in Article 6 of this chapter;

        F.     Remedial Action. Take action to remedy violations of this chapter as specified in Section 15.32.080. (Ord. 02-01, 2002; Ord. 88-3, 1988).

 

Article 5. Standards
15.32.155 Standards of construction.
        In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required:

        A.    Anchoring.

        1.     All new construction and substantial improvements shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.

        2.     All manufactured homes shall meet the anchoring standards of Section 15.32.180.

        B.     Construction Materials and Methods. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed:

        1.     With flood resistant materials as specified in FEMA Technical Bulletin TB 2-93, and utility equipment resistant to flood damage;

        2.     Using methods and practices that minimize flood damage;

        3.     With electrical, heating, plumbing, ventilation, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; and if

        4.     Within Zones AH or AO, so that there are adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.

        C.     Elevation and Floodproofing. (See Section 15.32.050 definitions for “basement,” “lowest floor,” “new construction,” “substantial damage,” and “substantial improvement.”)

        1.     Residential construction, new or substantial development, shall have the lowest floor, including basement:

        a.     In an AO zone, elevated above the highest adjacent grade to a height equal to or exceeding the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM, or elevated at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified.

        b.     In an A zone, elevated to or above the base flood elevation; said base flood elevation shall be determined by one of the methods in Section 15.32.040(B) of this chapter.

        c.     In All Other Zones, Elevated to or Above the Base Flood Elevation. Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor including basement shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor, and verified by the community building inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator.

        2.     Nonresidential construction, new or substantial improvement, shall either be elevated to conform with Section 15.32.155(C)(1) or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities:

        a.     Be floodproofed below the elevation recommended under Section 15.32.155(C)(1) so that the structure is watertight with walls impermeable to the passage of water;

        b.     Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and

        c.     Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the standards of this section are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator.

        3.     All new construction and substantial improvement with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (excluding basements) that are useable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, and which are subject to flooding, shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwater. Designs for meeting this requirement shall follow the guidelines in FEMA Technical Bulletins TB 1-93 and TB 7-93, and must meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:

        a.     Have a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwater; or

        b.     Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect.

        4.     Manufactured homes shall also meet the standards in 15.32.180. (Ord. 02-01, 2002).

 

15.32.160 Utility standards.
        A.    All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood-waters into the system and discharge from systems into floodwaters.

        B.     On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. (Ord. 88-3, 1988).

 

15.32.170 Subdivision standards.
        A.    All preliminary subdivision proposals shall identify the special flood hazard area and the elevation of the base flood.

        B.     All final subdivision plans will provide the elevation of proposed structure(s) and pads.

        C.     All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.

        D.    All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.

        E.     All subdivisions shall provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards. (Ord. 02-01, 2002; Ord. 88-3, 1988).

 

15.32.180 Manufactured home standards.
        A.    All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved, within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the Community’s Flood Insurance Map, on sites located:

        1.     Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision,

        2.     In a new manufactured home park or subdivision,

        3.     In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision,

        4.     In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on a site upon which a manufactured home has incurred “substantial damage” as the result of a flood, shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and be securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.

        B.     All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved on sites located within Zones V1-30, V, and VE on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map will meet the requirements of subsection A and Section 5.7.

        C.     All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within Zones A1-30, AH, AE, V1-30, V, and VE on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map that are not subject to the provisions of paragraph 5.4A will be securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, lateral movement, and be elevated so that either the:

        1.     Lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation, or

        2.     Manufactured homes chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than thirty-six inches in height above grade. Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor including basement shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor, and verified by the community building inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator. (Ord. 02-01, 2002; Ord. 88-3, 1988).

 

15.32.185 Standard for recreational vehicles.
        A.    All recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map will either:

        1.     Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty consecutive days, and be fully licensed and ready for highway use—a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions, or

        2.     Meet the permit requirements of Section 4 of this ordinance and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in Section 15.32.180(A).

        B.     Recreation vehicles placed on sites within Zones V1-30, V, and VE on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map will meet the requirements of Section 15.32.185(A) and Section 5.7. (Ord. 02-01, 2002).

 

15.32.190 Floodways.
        Located within areas of special flood hazards established in Section 15.32.070 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters, which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:

        A.    Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development, unless certification by a registered professional engineer or architect is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge;

        B.     All new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all other applicable flood-hazard reduction provisions of this article. (Ord. 88-3, 1988).

 

Article 6. Appeals and Variance
15.32.200 Appeal board—Appeal and variance procedures.
        A.    The city council of the city of Waterford shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter.

        B.     The city council shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter.

        C.     In passing upon such applications, the city council shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and:

        1.     The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;

        2.     The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;

        3.     The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;

        4.     The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;

        5.     The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use, which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;

        6.     The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;

        7.     The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area;

        8.     The safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;

        9.     The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters expected at the site; and

        10.   The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and bridges.

        D.    Nature of Variances. The variance criteria set forth in this section of the ordinance are based on the general principle of zoning law that variances pertain to a piece of property and are not personal in nature. A variance may be granted for a parcel of property with physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the requirements of this chapter would create an exceptional hardship to the applicant or the surrounding property owners. The characteristics must be unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent parcels. The unique characteristic must pertain to the land itself, not the structure, its inhabitants, or the property owners.

        It is the duty of the city council to help protect its citizens from flooding. This need is so compelling and the implications of the cost of insuring a structure built below flood level is so serious that variances from the flood elevation or from other requirements in the flood ordinance are quite rare. The long term goal of preventing and reducing flood loss and damage can only be met if variances are strictly limited. Therefore, the variance guidelines provided in this chapter are more detailed and contain multiple provisions that must be met before a variance can be properly granted. The criteria are designed to screen out those situations in which alternatives other than a variance are more appropriate.

        E.     Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing items 15.32.200(C)(1) through (10) have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.

        F.     Upon consideration of the factors of subsection C of this section and the purposes of this chapter, the city council may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter.

        G.    The floodplain administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request. (Ord. 02-01, 2002; Ord. 88-3, 1988).

 

15.32.210 Conditions for variances.
        A.    Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed in the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this section.

        B.     Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.

        C.     Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.

        D.    Variances shall only be issued upon:

        1.     A showing of good and sufficient cause;

        2.     A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and

        3.     A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.

        E.     Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that the provisions of subsections A through D of this section are satisfied and that the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety.

        F.     Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor elevation below the regulatory flood elevation and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. A copy of the notice shall be recorded by the floodplain board in the office of the Stanislaus County recorder and shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land. (Ord. 88-3, 1988).

Chapter 15.40 DWELLING UNIT MAINTENANCE
15.40.010 Definitions.
        A.    “Manager/owner” as used in this chapter means any person, firm, or corporation having personal management or control of real estate containing dwelling unit(s) whether as legal or equitable owner or as a managing agent of such real estate located within the boundaries of the city of Waterford.

        B.     “Dwelling unit” as defined by Section 17.06.215 and shall also be interpreted to be “housing unit”.

        C.     “Premises” as used in this ordinance means real estate on which dwelling unit(s) are placed.

        D.    “Criminal housing manager” means and includes all of the following:

        1.     Any manager/owner who is convicted three or more times, in a twelve-month period after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, of any one, or any combination, of the following violations of the Waterford Municipal Code, where all of the convictions pertain to action or non-action involving the same premises, and shall be subsequently convicted a fourth time within the same time period for one of the following violations of the Waterford Municipal Code and is found to have knowingly permitted the physical condition or facilities on the premises to become or remain in a condition which endangers the health and safety of its tenants or the general public shall be adjudged to be a “criminal housing manager.”

        a.     Any section pertaining to provisions related to the current edition of the Uniform Housing Code as published by the International Conference of Building Officials.

        b.     Any of the following chapters of the Health and Safety Title of the Waterford Municipal Code:

        i.      Nuisance, Chapter 8.12; or

        ii.     Garbage and Refuse, Chapter 8.04; or

        iii.    Drug Paraphernalia, Chapter 8.18; or

        iv.    Sidewalk Obstructions, Chapter 8.20; or

        v.     Noise Control, Chapter 8.22.

        c.     Section 5.20.010 pertaining to the responsibility of property owners under Chapter 5.20 Gambling and Unlawful Games of the Waterford Municipal Code pertaining to gambling; or

        d.     Section 15.40.020 of the Waterford Municipal Code regarding the duties and responsibilities of a manager/owner. (Ord. 95-08 §1, 1995).

 

15.40.020 Duties and responsibilities of a manager/owner.
        A.    It shall be the duty and the responsibility of a manager/owner to maintain dwelling unit(s) and premises in a safe and sanitary condition in compliance with provisions of the Waterford Municipal Code.

        B.     It is unlawful for any manager/owner, after being notified in writing by the Waterford police department, to knowingly allow or to have knowledge of, and make no attempt to prohibit the commission on the premises of offenses pertaining to illegal narcotics activity.

        C.     It is unlawful for any manager/owner to knowingly allow or to have knowledge of, and make no attempt to prohibit the commission on the premises of offenses pertaining to the following Waterford Municipal Code violations:

        1.     Public nuisance;

        2.     Abandoned vehicles;

        3.     Trespass;

        4.     Loitering;

        5.     Unnecessary noise;

        6.     Trash/garbage;

        7.     Unlawful fames.

        D.    The manager/owner will be given the opportunity to be heard at a specified date and time at the city of Waterford police department with the stated purpose of the hearing to give the manager/owner the opportunity to demonstrate that: (1) the notice was issued on insufficient grounds, (2) the manager/owner had been mistakenly identified as the cause of the nuisance activity, or (3) that the nuisance does not exist and therefore no adverse action should be taken. A decision made by the police chief may be appealed by interesting party to the city council by writing within five days of the chief’s decision. (Ord. 95-08 §1, 1995).

 

15.40.030 Manager/owner penalty.
        Any manager/owner found guilty of a violation of subsection B or C at Section 15.40.020 shall be fined no less than one hundred dollars nor more than one thousand dollars for each occurrence. (Ord. 95-08 §1, 1995).

 

15.40.040 Criminal housing manager penalty.
        Anyone adjudged to be a criminal housing manager shall be punished upon conviction with a fine not to exceed two thousand dollars for each occurrence. (Ord. 95-08 §1, 1995).

 

15.40.050 House removal—Cost reimbursement—Lien.
        Upon finding by the Waterford chief building official that any dwelling unit, in relation to which a conviction under this Section 15.40.020 has occurred, is no longer safe for habitation and is a dangerous building, the chief building official may declare that building to be a dangerous and unsafe building. The chief building official may commence abatement proceedings consistent with the requirements for abatement actions as set forth in the State Housing Law, California Code of Regulations, Title 25, Division 1, Chapter 1, Section 48 et seq. Said procedure may result in an order requiring removal of garbage, debris, hazardous, noxious or unhealthy substances and requiring repairs to be made and to put the building in a safe and sanitary condition, to cause reimbursement to the city of all costs by the owner associated with action taken by the city, including all court costs and attorneys’ fees and authorizing the placement of a lien against the premises involved for payment of such costs. (Ord. 95-08 §1, 1995).

Chapter 15.42 PUBLIC NUISANCE
15.42.010 Purpose and intent.
        The city has a history and reputation for well-kept properties; and property values and the general welfare of the community are founded, in part, upon the appearance and maintenance of private properties. The purpose of this chapter is to promote the health, safety, economic, aesthetic and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to protect neighborhoods against nuisances, blight and deterioration by establishing requirements for all building exteriors, whether residential or nonresidential, or structures of whatever kind, and establishing requirements for the maintenance of all land, whether improved or vacant.

        Owners and occupants of some properties within the city permit conditions to exist which are below the minimum conditions required by Title 8 and Title 17 of this code and therefore injurious and inimical to the public health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the city and contribute substantially and increasingly to the deterioration of residential neighborhoods and commercial areas.

        The abatement of certain uses and abuses of property as described in this chapter reasonably relates to the proper exercise of police power to protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the public.

        Abatement of conditions less than those required by Title 8 and Title 17 of this code will promote health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the city because maximum use and enjoyment of property in close proximity to another depends upon maintenance of both properties.

        This chapter shall apply to all buildings, structures and lands within the city without regard to use, date of construction or alterations. (Ord. 05-02 §1).

 

15.42.020 Definitions used within this chapter.
        “Board” means the appeals hearing board of the city of Waterford as set by resolution of the city council.

        “Building/structure” means and includes, but is not limited to, any house, garage, carport, duplex, apartment, condominium, mobile home, storage shed, any commercial establishment, warehouse, fence, wall or other structures affixed to or upon real property, or any assemblage of materials on private property of another for the purpose of human habitation.

        “City” means the area within the territorial city limits of the city of Waterford and all territory outside of the city over which the city has jurisdiction by virtue of any constitutional provisions, or any ordinance or law.

        “City manager” means the manager of the city, or any person or persons designated by the city manager to act in his or her stead in connection with this chapter.

        “Director” means the director of public works or any officer which is now or may in the future be charged with the enforcement of this code.

        “Enforcement officer” means any city employee designated by the city manager to enforce the provisions of this code. Such employees may be employed in any city department.

        “Person” means any natural person, firm, association, business, or organization, corporation, partnership, trust, estate, or any other legal entity recognized by law as the subject of legal rights or duties.

        “Property” means any parcel of land which is identified in the secured roll of the Stanislaus County assessor, all residential, commercial and other real property, including, but not limited to, front yards, side yards, backyards, driveways, walkways, alleys, sidewalks, and shall include any building or structure whether fixed or moveable, located on such property.

        “Property owner” means the record owner of real property as listed in the most current equalized assessment role as maintained by the Stanislaus County assessor.

        “Responsible party” means any occupant, lessor, lessee, administrator, licensee, or other person having control over a structure or parcel of land. A responsible party may be a property owner.

        “Violation” means a violation of Title 8 or Title 17 of this code by any property owner or any responsible party.

        “Visual blight” means any unreasonably or unlawful condition or use of premises or of a building exterior which by reason of its appearance as viewed at ground level from the public right-of-way or from neighboring premises, is detrimental to the surrounding area and the property of others, or is detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of individuals residing within the community. (Ord. 2014-13 §1; Ord. 05-02 §1).

 

15.42.030 Civil violations.
        A.    In addition to any other remedy provided by this code, any provision of this chapter may be enforced by injunction issued by the Superior Court upon a suit brought by the city.

        B.     As part of a civil action filed to enforce provisions of this chapter, a court may assess a maximum civil penalty of two thousand five hundred dollars per violation of this chapter for each day during which any person commits, continues, allows or maintains a violation of any provision of this chapter. (Ord. 05-02 §1).

 

15.42.040 Criminal violations.
        A.    It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. A violation of any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor; except that notwithstanding any other provision of this code, any such violation constituting a misdemeanor under this code may, in the discretion of the city attorney, be charged and prosecuted as an infraction. Any person convicted of a misdemeanor under the provisions of this chapter, unless provision is otherwise herein made, shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars, or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of not more than six months or by both fine and imprisonment. Any person convicted of an infraction under the provisions of this code, unless provision is otherwise herein made, shall be punishable by a fine only as follows: Upon a first conviction, by a fine of not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars and for a second conviction or any subsequent conviction within a period of one year, by a fine of not exceeding five hundred dollars.

        B.     Each such person shall be charged with a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this code is committed, continued or permitted by such person and shall, upon conviction, be punished accordingly. (Ord. 05-02 §1).

 

15.42.050 Administrative remedies.
        Title 1, Chapter 1.14, of this code established the administrative enforcement of remedies for violations of this code and applicable state codes. The general remedies include administrative abatement, summary abatement, civil penalties, administrative citations, recordation of notices of violation and mediation. The city may pursue any of these administrative remedies for violations of this chapter. (Ord. 05-02 §1).

 

15.42.060 Severability.
        If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The city council declares that it would have adopted such section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, phrases or portions be declared invalid or unconstitutional. (Ord. 05-02 §1).

 

15.42.070 Public nuisance defined.
        A public nuisance consists of doing any act, or permitting or allowing any condition or thing to exist, occur, or accumulate upon any property within the city that is injurious to health, indecent or offensive to the senses, or an obstruction to the free use of property, so as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property and endangers the health or safety of others. (Ord. 05-02 §1).

 

15.42.075 State Housing Law.
        The city may: (A) declare that a public nuisance exists whenever any member of the public creates, causes, commits, permits or maintains any condition or performs or causes to be performed any activity that falls within the scope of the definition of “public nuisance” as set forth in Sections 17910 through 17995.5 of the California Health and Safety Code; and (B) commence any action or proceeding set forth therein to abate the public nuisance, to pursue all other remedies against the violator, to seek the imposition of all penalties against the violator and to recover any and all costs from the violator. (Ord. 2016-04 §3).

 

15.42.080 Unsecured buildings.
        It is unlawful and constitutes a public nuisance for any responsible party or owner of any property in the city to fail to install, or to fail to use, reasonable security measures to prevent unauthorized entry into any vacant or uninhabited building upon such property. Except when the owner or responsible party is personally upon the property, all exterior openings, such as doors and windows, affording entry into any building upon such property shall be reasonably secured against unauthorized entry into such building. (Ord. 05-02 §1).

 

15.42.090 Vacant buildings—Declaration of purpose.
        The council finds that neglected, vacant buildings are a major cause of blight in residential and nonresidential neighborhoods. Vacant buildings often attract transients and criminals, including drug users and prostitutes. Use of vacant buildings by transients and criminals, who may employ primitive cooking or heating methods, creates a risk of fire for the vacant building and adjacent properties. Vacant properties are often used as dumping grounds for drug paraphernalia, furniture, tires, garbage, junk and debris and are often overgrown with weeds and grass creating a wide variety of health and safety concerns. In addition, vacant buildings which are simply boarded up for long periods of time with plywood or other materials to prevent entry by transients or vandals very often discourage economic development, disrupting neighborhood stability, retarding appreciation of property values and promote visual blight conditions, all of which interfere with the rights of neighboring property owners and occupants to the full use and enjoyment of their property.

        The city currently expends resources monitoring and responding to vacant buildings, because of the numerous health, welfare, safety and economic problems caused by neglected, vacant buildings. There is already a substantial cost to the city for monitoring neglected, vacant buildings (whether or not those buildings are boarded up) as well as substantial toll on the citizens who are affected by the nuisance conditions created, therefore the city council finds there is an urgent need to refine the process by which these buildings are monitored and remediated. (Ord. 05-02 §1).

 

15.42.100 Boarded buildings—Declaration of purpose.
        Boarded buildings are a major cause and source of crime and blight in both residential and nonresidential neighborhoods. In addition, vacant buildings which are boarded and unkept, and which are vacant for long periods of time, discourage economic development and retard appreciation of property values. (Ord. 05-02 §1).

 

15.42.110 Vacant building—Defined.
        For the purposes of this chapter, the term “vacant building” means an unoccupied or an illegally occupied structure or an occupied structure without adequate facilities/utilities. (Ord. 05-02 §1).

 

15.42.120 Boarded building—Defined.
        For the purposes of this chapter, the term “boarded building” means an unoccupied building some or all of whose doors and windows and other openings have been covered with plywood or other material for the purpose of preventing entry into the building. (Ord. 05-02 §1).

 

15.42.130 Violation.
        Every owner or responsible person shall maintain their vacant or boarded building in accordance with all of the requirements set forth herein. Failure to do so constitutes a violation of this code and a public nuisance. (Ord. 05-02 §1).

 

15.42.140 Method of boarding.
        All windows, doors and openings shall be secured as per the board up specifications maintained by the city’s community development department. Secured window or door openings on an unoccupied structure require polycarbonate material securement specifications on all openings. Other like materials may be acceptable subject to staff’s discretion. Existing unoccupied structures shall comply with specifications within thirty days’ notice, unless additional time is granted by the building official or designee. (Ord. 2015-05 §1; Ord. 05-02 §1).

 

15.42.150 Boarded or vacant building—Time period maintenance.
        No responsible party shall allow a building to stand vacant for more than sixty days, unless one of the following applies:

        A.    The building is the subject of an active building permit and the owner is progressing diligently to repair the premises for occupancy;

        B.     The building meets all applicable codes in existence at either the time of its construction or at the time of its alteration or modification and is actively being offered for sale, lease, or rent;

        C.     The building is being maintained in a safe and orderly manner and does not contribute to blight conditions;

        D.    Maintenance in a safe and orderly manner shall include:

        1.     Maintenance of any landscaping and plant materials in good condition;

        2.     Maintenance of the exterior of the building, including, but not limited to, paint and finishes, in good condition;

        3.     Regular removal of all exterior trash, debris and graffiti; and

        4.     Maintenance of the building in continuing compliance with all applicable codes and regulations. (Ord. 05-02 §1).

 

15.42.160 Vacant building monitoring fee.
        A.    Fee Imposed. There is hereby imposed upon every owner of a vacant building an annual vacant building monitoring fee in an amount to be set by resolution of the city council. The fee shall not exceed the estimated reasonable cost of monitoring the vacant building. The fee shall be payable as to any building, residential or nonresidential, which:

        1.     Is boarded up by voluntary action of the owner or as the result of enforcement activities by the city; or

        2.     Is vacant for more than sixty days for any reason.

        B.     Fee Waiver. The vacant building monitoring fee may be waived by the building official upon a showing by the owner that:

        1.     The owner has obtained a building permit and is progressing diligently to repair the premises for occupancy; or

        2.     The building meets all applicable codes and is actively being offered for sale, lease or rent; or

        3.     Imposition of the fee would impose a substantial economic hardship on the owner or would hinder the rehabilitation of the building.

        C.     Procedure.

        1.     The vacant building monitoring fee shall be billed to the owner of the property and mailed to the owner’s address as set forth on the last equalized assessment roll of the county assessor.

        2.     Any owner billed may apply for a waiver on the grounds set forth in subsection B of this section by submitting a written statement of the grounds for the waiver, and the owner’s daytime telephone number, to the building official within thirty days after the billing is mailed to the owner. The building official shall review the written statement and may contact the owner to discuss the application for waiver. The building official shall prepare a written decision which shall be mailed to the owner.

        3.     Any owner who disagrees with the decision of the building official may submit a written notice of appeal to the building official within thirty days of receipt of the decision. Failure to timely appeal the decision of the building official relating to a denial of a waiver constitutes a waiver of all rights to an administrative hearing and determination of the matter subject only to review pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5.

        4.     If the fee is not paid within sixty days after billing, or within sixty days after the decision of the building official or after the decision upon appeal by the owner becomes final, the fee may be specially assessed against the property involved and made a personal obligation of the owner. If the fee is to be specially assessed against the property, the board shall confirm the assessment and thereafter said assessment may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary real property taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary real property taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection, and enforcement of real property taxes are applicable to the special assessment.

        5.     The board may also cause a notice of lien to be recorded. The notice shall, at a minimum, identify the record owner or possessor of the property, set forth the last known address of the record owner or possessor, a description of the real property subject to the lien, and the amount of the fee. (Ord. 2014-13 §1; Ord. 05-02 §1).

Chapter 15.46 WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPING STANDARDS
15.46.010 Purpose.
        A.    The State Legislature has found:

        1.     That the waters of the state are of limited supply and are subject to ever increasing demands;

        2.     That the continuation of California’s economic prosperity is dependent on the availability of adequate supplies of water for future uses;

        3.     That it is the policy of the state to promote the conservation and efficient use of water and to prevent the waste of this valuable resource;

        4.     That landscapes are essential to the quality of life in California by providing areas for active and passive recreation and as an enhancement to the environment by cleaning air and water, preventing erosion, offering fire protection, and replacing ecosystems lost to development;

        5.     That landscape design, installation, maintenance and management can and should be water efficient; and

        6.     That Section 2 of Article X of the California Constitution specifies that the right to use water is limited to the amount reasonably required for the beneficial use to be served and the right does not and shall not extend to waste or unreasonable method of use.

        7.     Consistent with these California State Legislative findings, the purpose of this chapter is to:

        a.     Promote the benefits of consistent landscape standards with neighboring local and regional agencies,

        b.     Encourage local agencies and water purveyors to use economic incentives that promote the efficient use of water, such as implementing a tiered-rate structure, and

        c.     Encourage conformance with the State Model Water Efficient Landscape regulations.

        8.     As required under state law (California Code of Regulations, Title 23, Waters, Division 2, Department of Water Resources, Chapter 2.7, Model Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance) the city of Waterford formally adopts the following provisions for the purpose of:

 

        a.     Promoting the values and benefits of landscapes while recognizing the need to invest water and other resources as efficiently as possible,

        b.     Establishing a structure for planning, designing, installing, maintaining and managing water efficient landscapes in new construction and rehabilitated projects,

        c.     Establishing provisions for water management practices and water waste prevention for existing landscapes,

        d.     Using water efficiently without waste by setting a maximum applied water allowance as an upper limit for water use and reduce water use to the lowest practical amount. (Ord. 2011-06 §1).

 

15.46.020 Applicability.
        A.    After January 1, 2010, as established by state law, this chapter shall apply to all of the following landscape projects:

        1.     New construction and rehabilitated landscapes for public agency projects and private development projects with a landscape area equal to or greater than two thousand five hundred square feet requiring a building or landscape permit, plan check or design review;

        2.     New construction and rehabilitated landscapes which are developer-installed in single-family and multifamily projects with a landscape area equal to or greater than two thousand five hundred square feet requiring a building or landscape permit, plan check, or design review;

        3.     New construction landscapes which are homeowner-provided and/or homeowner-hired in single-family and multifamily residential projects with a total project landscape area equal to or greater than five thousand square feet requiring a building or landscape permit, plan check or design review;

        4.     Existing landscapes limited to Sections 15.46.220, 15.46.230 and 15.46.240; and

        5.     Cemeteries. Recognizing the special landscape management needs of cemeteries, new and rehabilitated cemeteries are limited to Sections 15.46.080, 15.46.150 and 15.46.160; and existing cemeteries are limited to Sections 15.46.220, 15.46.230 and 15.46.240.

        B.     This chapter does not apply to:

        1.     Registered local, state or federal historical sites;

        2.     Ecological restoration projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system;

        3.     Mined-land reclamation projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system; or

        4.     Plant collections, as part of botanical gardens and arboretums open to the public. (Ord. 2011-06 §1).

 

15.46.030 Definitions.
        The terms used in this chapter have the meaning set forth below:

        1.     “Applied water” means the portion of water supplied by the irrigation system to the landscape.

        2.     “Automatic irrigation controller” means an automatic timing device used to remotely control valves that operate an irrigation system. Automatic irrigation controllers schedule irrigation events using either evapotranspiration (weather-based) or soil moisture data.

        3.     “Backflow prevention device” means a safety device used to prevent pollution or contamination of the water supply due to the reverse flow of water from the irrigation system.

        4.     “Certificate of completion” means the document required under Section 15.46.130.

        5.     “Certified irrigation designer” means a person certified to design irrigation systems by an accredited academic institution, a professional trade organization or other program such as the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s Water-
Sense irrigation designer certification program and Irrigation Association’s Certified Irrigation Designer program.

        6.     “Certified landscape irrigation auditor” means a person certified to perform landscape irrigation audits by an accredited academic institution, a professional trade organization or other program such as the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s WaterSense irrigation auditor certification program and Irrigation Association’s Certified Landscape Irrigation Auditor program.

        7.     “Check valve” or “anti-drain valve” means a valve located under a sprinkler head, or other location in the irrigation system, to hold water in the system to prevent drainage from sprinkler heads when the sprinkler is off.

        8.     “Common interest developments” mean community apartment projects, condominium projects, planned developments, and stock cooperatives per Civil Code Section 1351.

        9.     “Conversion factor (0.62)” means the number that converts acre-inches per acre per year to gallons per square foot per year.

        10.   “Drip irrigation” means any non-spray low volume irrigation system utilizing emission devices with a flow rate measured in gallons per hour. Low volume irrigation systems are specifically designed to apply small volumes of water slowly at or near the root zone of plants.

        11.   “Ecological restoration project” means a project where the site is intentionally altered to establish a defined, indigenous, historic ecosystem.

        12.   “Effective precipitation” or “usable rainfall (Eppt)” means the portion of total precipitation which becomes available for plant growth.

        13.   “Emitter” means a drip irrigation emission device that delivers water slowly from the system to the soil.

        14.   “Established landscape” means the point at which plants in the landscape have developed significant root growth into the soil. Typically, most plants are established after one or two years of growth.

        15.   “Establishment period of the plants” means the first year after installing the plant in the landscape or the first two years if irrigation will be terminated after establishment. Typically, most plants are established after one or two years of growth.

        16.   “Estimated total water use (ETWU)” means the total water used for the landscape as described in Section 15.46.080.

        17.   “ET adjustment factor (ETAF)” means a factor of 0.7, that, when applied to reference evapotranspiration, adjusts for plant factors and irrigation efficiency, two major influences upon the amount of water that needs to be applied to the landscape.

        A combined plant mix with a site-wide average of 0.5 is the basis of the plant factor portion of this calculation. For purposes of the ETAF, the average irrigation efficiency is 0.71. Therefore, the ET adjustment factor is (0.7)=(0.5/0.71). ETAF for a special landscape area shall not exceed 1.0. ETAF for existing non-rehabilitated landscapes is 0.8.

        18.   “Evapotranspiration rate” means the quantity of water evaporated from adjacent soil and other surfaces and transpired by plants during a specified time.

        19.   “Flow rate” means the rate at which water flows through pipes, valves and emission devices, measured in gallons per minute, gallons per hour, or cubic feet per second.

        20.   “Hardscapes” mean any durable materials (pervious and non-pervious).

        21.   “Homeowner-provided landscaping” means any landscaping either installed by a private individual for a single-family residence or installed by a licensed contractor hired by a homeowner. A homeowner, for purposes of this chapter, is a person who occupies the dwelling he or she owns. This excludes speculative homes, which are not owner-occupied dwellings.

        22.   “Hydrozone” means a portion of the landscaped area having plants with similar water needs. A hydrozone may be irrigated or non-irrigated.

        23.   “Infiltration rate” means the rate of water entry into the soil expressed as a depth of water per unit of time (e.g., inches per hour).

        24.   “Invasive plant species” mean species of plants not historically found in California that spread outside cultivated areas and can damage environmental or economic resources. Invasive species may be regulated by county agricultural agencies as noxious species. “Noxious weeds” mean any weed designated by the Weed Control Regulations in the Weed Control Act and identified on a regional district noxious weed control list. Lists of invasive plants are maintained at the California Invasive Plant Inventory and USDA invasive and noxious weeds database.

        25.   “Irrigation audit” means an in-depth evaluation of the performance of an irrigation system conducted by a certified landscape irrigation auditor. An irrigation audit includes, but is not limited to: inspection, system tune-up, system test with distribution uniformity or emission uniformity, reporting overspray or runoff that causes overland flow, and preparation of an irrigation schedule.

        26.   “Irrigation efficiency (IE)” means the measurement of the amount of water beneficially used divided by the amount of water applied. Irrigation efficiency is derived from measurements and estimates of irrigation system characteristics and management practices. The minimum average irrigation efficiency for purposes of this chapter is 0.71. Greater irrigation efficiency can be expected from well designed and maintained systems.

        27.   “Irrigation survey” means an evaluation of an irrigation system that is less detailed than an irrigation audit. An irrigation survey includes, but is not limited to: inspection, system test, and written recommendations to improve performance of the irrigation system.

        28.   “Irrigation water use analysis” means an analysis of water use data based on meter readings and billing data.

        29.   “Landscape architect” means a person who holds a license to practice landscape architecture in the state of California Business and Professions Code, Section 5615.

        30.   “Landscape area” means all the planting areas, turf areas, and water features in a landscape design plan subject to the maximum applied water allowance calculation. The landscape area does not include footprints of buildings or structures, sidewalks, driveways, parking lots, decks, patios, gravel or stone walks, other pervious or non-pervious hardscapes, and other non-irrigated areas designated for non-development (e.g., open spaces and existing native vegetation).

        31.   “Landscape contractor” means a person licensed by the state of California to construct, maintain, repair, install, or subcontract the development of landscape systems.

        32.   “Landscape documentation package” means the documents required under Section 15.46.070.

        33.   “Landscape project” means total area of landscape in a project as defined in “landscape area” for the purposes of this chapter, meeting requirements under Section 15.46.020.

        34.   “Lateral line” means the water delivery pipeline that supplies water to the emitters or sprinklers from the valve.

        35.   “City of Waterford” means the incorporated city of Waterford. This chapter shall apply to all lands located within the incorporated limits of the city. The city of Waterford is responsible for the enforcement of this chapter, including, but not limited to, approval of a permit and plan check or design review of a project.

        36.   “Local water purveyor” means any entity, including a public agency, city, county, or private water company that provides retail water service.

        37.   “Low volume irrigation” means the application of irrigation water at low pressure through a system of tubing or lateral lines and low-volume emitters such as drip, drip lines, and bubblers. Low volume irrigation systems are specifically designed to apply small volumes of water slowly at or near the root zone of plants.

        38.   “Main line” means the pressurized pipeline that delivers water from the water source to the valve or outlet.

        39.   “Maximum applied water allowance (MAWA)” means the upper limit of annual applied water for the established landscaped area as specified in Section 15.46.080. It is based upon the area’s reference evapotranspiration, the ET adjustment factor, and the size of the landscape area. The estimated total water use shall not exceed the maximum applied water allowance. Special landscape areas, including recreation areas, areas permanently and solely dedicated to edible plants such as orchards and vegetable gardens, and areas irrigated with recycled water are subject to the MAWA with an ETAF not to exceed 1.0.

        40.   “Microclimate” means the climate of a small, specific area that may contrast with the climate of the overall landscape area due to factors such as wind, sun exposure, plant density, or proximity to reflective surfaces.

        41.   “Mined-land reclamation projects” mean any surface mining operations with a reclamation plan approved in accordance with the Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975.

        42.   “Mulch” means any organic material such as leaves, bark, straw, compost, or inorganic mineral materials such as rocks, gravel, and decomposed granite left loose and applied to the soil surface for the beneficial purposes of reducing evaporation, suppressing weeds, moderating soil temperature, and preventing soil erosion.

        43.   “New construction” means, for the purposes of this chapter, a new building with a landscape or other new landscape, such as a park, playground, or greenbelt without an associated building.

        44.   “Operating pressure” means the pressure at which the parts of an irrigation system are designed by the manufacturer to operate.

        45.   “Overhead sprinkler irrigation systems” mean systems that deliver water through the air (e.g., spray heads and rotors).

        46.   “Overspray” means the irrigation water which is delivered beyond the target area.

        47.   “Permit” means an authorizing document issued by local agencies for new construction or rehabilitated landscapes.

        48.   “Pervious” means any surface or material that allows the passage of water through the material and into the underlying soil.

        49.   “Plant factor” or “plant water use factor” is a factor, when multiplied by ETo, that estimates the amount of water needed by plants. For purposes of this chapter, the plant factor range for low water use plants is 0 to 0.3, the plant factor range for moderate water use plants is 0.4 to 0.6, and the plant factor range for high water use plants is 0.7 to 1.0. Plant factors cited in this chapter are derived from the Department of Water Resources 2000 publication “Water Use Classification of Landscape Species.”

        50.   “Precipitation rate” means the rate of application of water measured in inches per hour.

        51.   “Project applicant” means the individual or entity submitting a landscape documentation package required under Section 15.46.070, to request a permit, plan check, or design review from the city of Waterford. A project applicant may be the property owner or designee.

        52.   “Rain sensor” or “rain sensing shutoff device” means a component which automatically suspends an irrigation event when it rains.

        53.   “Record drawing” or “as-builts” means a set of reproducible drawings which show significant changes in the work made during construction and which are usually based on drawings marked up in the field and other data furnished by the contractor.

        54.   “Recreational area” means areas dedicated to active play such as parks, sports fields, and golf courses where turf provides a playing surface.

        55.   “Recycled water,” “reclaimed water,” or “treated sewage effluent water” means treated or recycled waste water of a quality suitable for non-potable uses such as landscape irrigation and water features. This water is not intended for human consumption.

        56.   “Reference evapotranspiration” or “ETo” means a standard measurement of environmental parameters which affect the water use of plants. ETo is expressed in inches per day, month, or year as represented in Section 495.1, and is an estimate of the evapotranspiration of a large field of four- to seven-inch tall, cool-season grass that is well watered. Reference evapotranspiration is used as the basis of determining the maximum applied water allowance so that regional differences in climate can be accommodated.

        57.   “Rehabilitated landscape” means any re-landscaping project that requires a permit, plan check, or design review, meets the requirements of Section 15.46.020, and the modified landscape area is equal to or greater than two thousand five hundred square feet, is fifty percent of the total landscape area, and the modifications are completed within one year.

        58.   “Runoff” means water which is not absorbed by the soil or landscape to which it is applied and flows from the landscape area. For example, runoff may result from water that is applied at too great a rate (application rate exceeds infiltration rate) or when there is a slope.

        59.   “Soil moisture sensing device” or “soil moisture sensor” means a device that measures the amount of water in the soil. The device may also suspend or initiate an irrigation event.

        60.   “Soil texture” means the classification of soil based on its percentage of sand, silt, and clay.

        61.   “Special landscape area (SLA)” means an area of the landscape dedicated solely to edible plants, areas irrigated with recycled water, water features using recycled water and areas dedicated to active play such as parks, sports fields, golf courses, and where turf provides a playing surface.

        62.   “Sprinkler head” means a device which delivers water through a nozzle.

        63.   “Static water pressure” means the pipeline or municipal water supply pressure when water is not flowing.

        64.   “Station” means an area served by one valve or by a set of valves that operate simultaneously.

        65.   “Swing joint” means an irrigation component that provides a flexible, leak-free connection between the emission device and lateral pipeline to allow movement in any direction and to prevent equipment damage.

        66.   “Turf” means a ground cover surface of mowed grass. Annual bluegrass, Kentucky bluegrass, Perennial ryegrass, Red fescue, and Tall fescue are cool-season grasses. Bermudagrass, Kikuyugrass, Seashore Paspalum, St. Augustinegrass, Zoysiagrass, and Buffalo grass are warm-season grasses.

        67.   “Valve” means a device used to control the flow of water in the irrigation system.

        68.   “Water conserving plant species” means a plant species identified as having a low plant factor.

        69.   “Water feature” means a design element where open water performs an aesthetic or recreational function. Water features include ponds, lakes, waterfalls, fountains, artificial streams, spas, and swimming pools (where water is artificially supplied). The surface area of water features is included in the high water use hydrozone of the landscape area. Constructed wetlands used for on-site wastewater treatment or stormwater best management practices that are not irrigated and used solely for water treatment or stormwater retention are not water features and, therefore, are not subject to the water budget calculation.

        70.   “Watering window” means the time of day irrigation is allowed.

        71.   “WUCOLS” means the Water Use Classification of Landscape Species published by the University of California Cooperative Extension, the Department of Water Resources and the Bureau of Reclamation, 2000. (Ord. 2011-06 §1).

 

15.46.040 Provisions for new construction or rehabilitated landscapes.
        A.    The city of Waterford may designate another agency (i.e., the city of Modesto, Merced Irrigation District, etc.) as a water purveyor to implement some or all of the requirements of this chapter with respect to a specific project or within a specific water service area as determined to be appropriate by the Waterford city council.

        B.     The city of Waterford will collaborate with water purveyors to define each entity’s specific responsibilities relating to this chapter in accordance with state law.

        C.     Where the city of Waterford is not the primary water purveyor for a project or project area, all permits issued in accordance with this chapter will be provided to the primary water purveyor for comment and/or recommendations for a period of time not to exceed ten working days prior to the effective date of permit. (Ord. 2011-06 §1).

 

15.46.050 Compliance with landscape documentation package.
        A.    Prior to construction, the city of Waterford shall:

        1.     Provide the project applicant with a copy of applicable WMC sections or website address where this code provision and applicable procedures for permits, plan checks, or design reviews are available;

        2.     Review the landscape documentation package submitted by the project applicant;

        3.     Approve or deny the landscape documentation package;

        4.     Issue a permit or approve the plan check or design review for the project applicant; and

        5.     Upon approval of the landscape documentation package, submit a copy of the water efficient landscape worksheet to the water purveyor (i.e., city of Modesto or Merced Irrigation District) when the city of Waterford is not the water purveyor.

        B.     Prior to construction, the project applicant shall submit a landscape documentation package to the city of Waterford.

        C.     Upon approval of the landscape documentation package by the city of Waterford, the project applicant shall:

        1.     Receive a permit or approval of the plan check or design review and record the date of the permit in the certificate of completion;

        2.     Submit a copy of the approved landscape documentation package along with the record drawings, and any other information to the property owner or designee; and

        3.     Submit a copy of the water efficient landscape worksheet to the local water purveyor. (Ord. 2011-06 §1).

 

15.46.060 Penalties.
        The city of Waterford may establish and administer penalties to a project applicant for noncompliance with this chapter in accordance with WMC to the extent permitted by law. (Ord. 2011-06 §1).

 

15.46.070 Elements of the landscape documentation package.
        A.    The landscape documentation package shall include the following six elements:

        1.     Project information.

        a.     Date;

        b.     Project applicant;

        c.     Project address (if available, parcel and/or lot number(s));

        d.     Total landscape area (square feet);

        e.     Project type (e.g., new, rehabilitated, public, private, cemetery, homeowner-installed);

        f.      Water supply type (e.g., potable, recycled, well) and identify the local retail water purveyor if the applicant is not served by a private well;

        g.     Checklist of all documents in landscape documentation package;

        h.     Project contacts to include contact information for the project applicant and property owner;

        i.      Applicant signature and date with statement, “I agree to comply with the requirements of the water efficient landscape chapter and submit a complete landscape documentation package.”

        2.     Water Efficient Landscape Worksheet.

        a.     Hydrozone information table;

        b.     Water budget calculations:

        i.      Maximum applied water allowance (MAWA),

        ii.     Estimated total water use (ETWU),

        iii.    Soil management report,

        iv.    Landscape design plan,

        v.     Irrigation design plan, and

        vi.    Grading design plan. (Ord. 2011-06 §1).

 

15.46.080 Water efficient landscape worksheet.
        A     A project applicant shall complete the water efficient landscape worksheet which contains two sections (see sample worksheet in Appendix B):

        1.     A hydrozone information table (see Appendix B, Section A) for the landscape project; and

        2.     A water budget calculation (see Appendix B, Section B) for the landscape project. For the calculation of the maximum applied water allowance and estimated total water use, a project applicant shall use the ETo values for Oakdale from the Reference Evapotranspiration Table in Appendix A.

        B.     Water budget calculations shall adhere to the following requirements:

        1.     The plant factor used shall be from WUCOLS. The plant factor ranges from 0 to 0.3 for low water use plants, from 0.4 to 0.6 for moderate water use plants, and from 0.7 to 1.0 for high water use plants.

        2.     All water features shall be included in the high water use hydrozone and temporarily irrigated areas shall be included in the low water use hydrozone.

        3.     All special landscape areas shall be identified and their water use calculated as described below.

        4.     ETAF for special landscape areas shall not exceed 1.0.

        C.     Maximum Applied Water Allowance.

        1.     The maximum applied water allowance shall be calculated using the equation:

 

MAWA = (50.3)(0.62)[(0.7 x LA) + (0.3 x SLA)]

 

        The example calculations below are hypothetical to demonstrate proper use of the equations and do not represent an existing and/or planned landscape project. The ETo values used in these calculations are from the Reference Evapotranspiration Table in Appendix A, for the city of Oakdale, the closest city to the city of Waterford. For actual irrigation scheduling, automatic irrigation controllers are required and shall use current reference evapotranspiration data, such as from the California Irrigation Management Information System (CIMIS), other equivalent data, or soil moisture sensor data.

        a.     Example MAWA calculation: a hypothetical landscape project in Waterford, CA with an irrigated landscape area of 50,000 square feet without any special landscape area (SLA= 0, no edible plants, recreational areas, or use of recycled water). To calculate MAWA, the annual reference evapotranspiration value for Waterford, use city of Oakdale (ETo Table Appendix A) which is 50.3 inches as listed in the Reference Evapotranspiration Table in Appendix A.

 

MAWA = (50.3)(0.62)[(0.7 x LA) + (0.3 x SLA)]

 

 

MAWA =

Maximum applied water allowance (gallons per year)

ETo =

50.3 reference evapotranspiration (inches per year)

0.62 =

Conversion factor (to gallons)

0.7 =

ET adjustment factor (ETAF)

LA =

Landscape area including SLA (square feet)

0.3 =

Additional water allowance for SLA

SLA =

Special landscape area (square feet)

MAWA =

(50.3 inches)(0.62)[(0.7 x 50,000 square feet) + (0.3 x 0)]

=

1,091,510 gallons per year

 

        To convert from gallons per year to hundred-cubic-feet per year:

 

 

=

1,091,510/748

=

1,459 hundred-cubic-feet per year

 

(100 cubic feet = 748 gallons)

 

        b.     In this next hypothetical example, the landscape project in Waterford, CA has the ETo value of 50.3 inches and a total landscape area of 50,000 square feet. Within the 50,000 square foot project, there is now a 2,000 square foot area planted with edible plants. This 2,000 square foot area is considered to be a special landscape area.

 

MAWA = (50.3)(0.62)[(0.7 x LA) + (0.3 x SLA)]

 

 

MAWA =

(50.3 inches)(0.62)[(0.7 x 50,000 square feet) + (0.3 x 2,000 square feet)]

=

31.186 x [35,000 + 600] gallons per year

=

31.186 x 35,600 gallons per year

=

1,110,222 gallons per year or 1,484 hundred-cubic-feet per year

 

        D.    Estimated Total Water Use.

        1.     The estimated total water use shall be calculated using the equation below. The sum of the estimated total water use calculated for all hydrozones shall not exceed MAWA.

 



 

Where:

 

ETWU =

Estimated total water use per year (gallons)

ETo =

50.3 reference evapotranspiration (inches per year)

PF =

Plant factor from WUCOLS (see Section 491)

HA =

Hydrozone area [high, medium, and low water use areas] (square feet)

SLA =

Special landscape area (square feet)

0.62 =

Conversion factor

IE =

Irrigation efficiency (minimum 0.71)

 

        2.     Example ETWU calculation: landscape area is 50,000 square feet; plant water use type, plant factor, and hydrozone area are shown in the table below. The ETo value is 50.3 inches per year. There are no special landscape areas (recreational area, area permanently and solely dedicated to edible plants, and area irrigated with recycled water) in this example.

 

Hydrozone

Plant Water Use Type(s)

Plant Factor (PF)*

Hydrozone Area (HA) (square feet)

PF x HA (square feet)

1

High

0.8

7,000

5,600

2

High

0.7

10,000

7,000

3

Medium

0.5

16,000

8,000

4

Low

0.3

7,000

2,100

5

Low

0.2

10,000

2,000

 

*Plant factor from WUCOLS

 



 = 1,084,921 gallons per year

 

        Compare ETWU with MAWA: For this example MAWA = (50.3)(0.62)[(0.7 x 50,000) + (0.3 x 0)] = 1,091,510 gallons per year. The ETWU (1,091,510 gallons per year) is less than MAWA (1,084,921 gallons per year). In this example, the water budget complies with the MAWA.

        3.     Example ETWU calculation: total landscape area is 50,000 square feet, 2,000 square feet of which is planted with edible plants. The edible plant area is considered a Special Landscape Area (SLA). The reference evapotranspiration value is 50.3 inches per year. The plant type, plant factor, and hydrozone area are shown in the table below.

 

 

Hydrozone

Plant Water Use Type(s)

Plant Factor (PF)*

Hydrozone Area (HA) (square feet)

PF x HA (square feet)

1

High

0.8

7,000

5,600

2

High

0.7

9,000

6,300

3

Medium

0.5

15,000

7,500

4

Low

0.3

7,000

2,100

5

Low

0.2

10,000

2,000

 

 

 

Sum

23,500

6

SLA

1.0

2,000

2,000

*Plant factor from WUCOLS

 



 

= (31.186) (33,099 + 2,000)

 = 1,094,597 gallons per year

 

        Compare ETWU with MAWA. For this example:

 

MAWA = (50.3)(0.62)[(0.7 x 50,000) + (0.3 x 2,000)]

 

 

 =

31.186 x [35,000 + 600]

 =

31.186 x 35,600

 =

1,110,222 gallons per year

 

        The ETWU (1,094,597 gallons per year) is less than MAWA (1,110,222 gallons per year). For this example, the water budget complies with the MAWA. (Ord. 2011-06 §1).

 

15.46.090 Soil management report.
        A.    In order to reduce runoff and encourage healthy plant growth, a soil management report shall be completed by the project applicant, or designee, as follows:

        1.     Submit soil samples to a laboratory for analysis and recommendations.

        a.     Soil sampling shall be conducted in accordance with laboratory protocol, including protocols regarding adequate sampling depth for the intended plants.

        b.     The soil analysis may include:

        i.      Soil texture;

        ii.     Infiltration rate determined by laboratory test or soil texture infiltration rate table;

        iii.    pH;

        iv.    Total soluble salts;

        v.     Sodium;

        vi.    Percent organic matter; and

        vii.   Recommendations.

        2.     The project applicant, or designee, shall comply with one of the following:

        a.     If significant mass grading is not planned, the soil analysis report shall be submitted to the city of Waterford as part of the landscape documentation package; or

        b.     If significant mass grading is planned, the soil analysis report shall be submitted to the city of Waterford as part of the certificate of completion;

        c.     The soil analysis report shall be made available, in a timely manner, to the professionals preparing the landscape design plans and irrigation design plans to make any necessary adjustments to the design plans;

        d.     The project applicant, or designee, shall submit documentation verifying implementation of soil analysis report recommendations to the city of Waterford with certificate of completion. (Ord. 2011-06 §1).

 

15.46.100 Landscape design plan.
        A.    For the efficient use of water, a landscape shall be carefully designed and planned for the intended function of the project. A landscape design plan meeting the following design criteria shall be submitted as part of the landscape documentation package.

        1.     Plant Material.

        a.     Any plant may be selected for the landscape, providing the estimated total water use in the landscape area does not exceed the maximum applied water allowance. To encourage the efficient use of water, the following is highly recommended:

        i.      Protection and preservation of native species and natural vegetation;

        ii.     Selection of water-conserving plant and turf species;

        iii.    Selection of plants based on disease and pest resistance;

        iv.    Selection of trees based on applicable provisions of WMC, city landscape standards and guidelines or tree shading guidelines; and

        v.     Selection of plants from local and regional landscape program plant lists.

        b.     Each hydrozone shall have plant materials with similar water use, with the exception of hydrozones with plants of mixed water use, as specified in Section 15.46.110(A)(2)(d).

        c.     Plants shall be selected and planted appropriately based upon their adaptability to the climatic, geologic, and topographical conditions of the project site. To encourage the efficient use of water, the following is highly recommended:

        i.      Use the Sunset Western Climate Zone System which takes into account temperature, humidity, elevation, terrain, latitude, and varying degrees of continental and marine influence on local climate;

        ii.     Recognize the horticultural attributes of plants (i.e., mature plant size, invasive surface roots) to minimize damage to property or infrastructure (e.g., buildings, sidewalks, power lines); and

        iii.    Consider the solar orientation for plant placement to maximize summer shade and winter solar gain.

        b.     Turf is not allowed on slopes greater than twenty-five percent where the toe of the slope is adjacent to an impermeable hardscape and where twenty-five percent means one foot of vertical elevation change for every four feet of horizontal length (rise divided by run x 100 = slope percent).

        c.     A landscape design plan for projects in fire-prone areas shall address fire safety and prevention. A defensible space or zone around a building or structure is required per Public Resources Code Section 4291(a) and (b). Avoid fire-prone plant materials and highly flammable mulches.

        d.     The use of invasive and/or noxious plant species is strongly discouraged.

        e.     The architectural guidelines of a common interest development, which include community apartment projects, condominiums, planned developments, and stock cooperatives, shall not prohibit or include conditions that have the effect of prohibiting the use of low water use plants as a group.

        2.     Water Features.

        a.     Recirculating water systems shall be used for water features.

        b.     Where available, recycled water shall be used as a source for decorative water features.

        c.     Surface area of a water feature shall be included in the high water use hydrozone area of the water budget calculation.

        d.     Pool and spa covers are highly recommended.

        3.     Mulch and Amendments.

        a.     A minimum two-inch layer of mulch shall be applied on all exposed soil surfaces of planting areas except in turf areas, creeping or rooting groundcovers, or direct seeding applications where mulch is contraindicated.

        b.     Stabilizing mulching products shall be used on slopes.

        c.     The mulching portion of the seed/mulch slurry in hydro-seeded applications shall meet the mulching requirement.

        d.     Soil amendments shall be incorporated according to recommendations of the soil report and what is appropriate for the plants selected (see Section 15.46.090).

        B.     The landscape design plan, at a minimum, shall:

        1.     Delineate and label each hydrozone by number, letter, or other method;

        2.     Identify each hydrozone as low, moderate, high water, or mixed water use. Temporarily irrigated areas of the landscape shall be included in the low water use hydrozone for the water budget calculation;

        3.     Identify recreational areas;

        4.     Identify areas permanently and solely dedicated to edible plants;

        5.     Identify areas irrigated with recycled water;

        6.     Identify type of mulch and application depth;

        7.     Identify soil amendments, type, and quantity;

        8.     Identify type and surface area of water features;

        9.     Identify hardscapes (pervious and non-pervious);

        10.   Identify location and installation details of any applicable stormwater best management practices that encourage on-site retention and infiltration of stormwater. Stormwater best management practices are encouraged in the landscape design plan and examples include, but are not limited to:

        a.     Infiltration beds, swales, and basins that allow water to collect and soak into the ground,

        b.     Constructed wetlands and retention ponds that retain water, handle excess flow, and filter pollutants, and

        c.     Pervious or porous surfaces (e.g., permeable pavers or blocks, pervious or porous concrete, etc.) that minimize runoff;

        11.   Identify any applicable rain harvesting or catchment technologies (e.g., rain gardens, cisterns, etc.);

        12.   Contain the following statement: “I have complied with the criteria of this chapter and applied them for the efficient use of water in the landscape design plan”; and

        13.   Bear the signature of a licensed landscape architect, licensed landscape contractor, or any other person authorized to design a landscape. (See Sections 5500.1, 5615, 5641, 5641.1, 5641.2, 5641.3, 5641.4, 5641.5, 5641.6, 6701, 7027.5 of the Business and Professions Code, Section 832.27 of Title 16 of the California Code of Regulations, and Section 6721 of the Food and Agriculture Code.) (Ord. 2011-06 §1).

 

15.46.110 Irrigation design plan.
        A.    For the efficient use of water, an irrigation system shall meet all the requirements listed in this section and the manufacturers’ recommendations. The irrigation system and its related components shall be planned and designed to allow for proper installation, management, and maintenance. An irrigation design plan meeting the following design criteria shall be submitted as part of the landscape documentation package.

        1.     System.

        a.     Dedicated landscape water meters are highly recommended on landscape areas smaller than five thousand square feet to facilitate water management.

        b.     Automatic irrigation controllers utilizing either evapotranspiration or soil moisture sensor data shall be required for irrigation scheduling in all irrigation systems.

        c.     The irrigation system shall be designed to ensure that the dynamic pressure at each emission device is within the manufacturer’s recommended pressure range for optimal performance.

        i.      If the static pressure is above or below the required dynamic pressure of the irrigation system, pressure-regulating devices such as inline pressure regulators, booster pumps, or other devices shall be installed to meet the required dynamic pressure of the irrigation system.

        ii.     Static water pressure, dynamic or operating pressure, and flow reading of the water supply shall be measured at the point of connection. These pressure and flow measurements shall be conducted at the design stage. If the measurements are not available at the design stage, the measurements shall be conducted at installation.

        d.     Sensors (rain, freeze, wind, etc.), either integral or auxiliary, that suspend or alter irrigation operation during unfavorable weather conditions shall be required on all irrigation systems, as appropriate for local climatic conditions. Irrigation should be avoided during windy or freezing weather or during rain.

        e.     Manual shut-off valves (such as a gate valve, ball valve, or butterfly valve) shall be required, as close as possible to the point of connection of the water supply, to minimize water loss in case of an emergency (such as a main line break) or routine repair.

        f.      Backflow prevention devices shall be required to protect the water supply from contamination by the irrigation system. A project applicant shall refer to the applicable city of Waterford code (i.e., public health) for additional backflow prevention requirements.

        g.     High flow sensors that detect and report high flow conditions created by system damage or malfunction are recommended.

        h.     The irrigation system shall be designed to prevent runoff, low head drainage, overspray, or other similar conditions where irrigation water flows onto non-targeted areas, such as adjacent property, non-irrigated areas, hardscapes, roadways, or structures.

        i.      Relevant information from the soil management plan, such as soil type and infiltration rate, shall be utilized when designing irrigation systems.

        j.      The design of the irrigation system shall conform to the hydrozones of the landscape design plan.

        k.     The irrigation system must be designed and installed to meet, at a minimum, the irrigation efficiency criteria as described in Section 15.46.080 regarding the maximum applied water allowance.

        l.      It is highly recommended that the project applicant or city of Waterford inquire with the local water purveyor about peak water operating demands (on the water supply system) or water restrictions that may impact the effectiveness of the irrigation system.

        m.    In mulched planting areas, the use of low volume irrigation is required to maximize water infiltration into the root zone.

        n.     Sprinkler heads and other emission devices shall have matched precipitation rates, unless otherwise directed by the manufacturer’s recommendations.

        o.     Head to head coverage is recommended. However, sprinkler spacing shall be designed to achieve the highest possible distribution uniformity using the manufacturer’s recommendations.

        p.     Swing joints or other riser-protection components are required on all risers subject to damage that are adjacent to high traffic areas.

        q.     Check valves or anti-drain valves are required for all irrigation systems.

        r.      Narrow or irregularly shaped areas, including turf, less than eight feet in width in any direction shall be irrigated with subsurface irrigation or low volume irrigation system.

        s.      Overhead irrigation shall not be permitted within twenty-four inches of any non-permeable surface. Allowable irrigation within the setback from non-permeable surfaces may include drip, drip line, or other low flow non-spray technology. The setback area may be planted or unplanted. The surfacing of the setback may be mulch, gravel, or other porous material. These restrictions may be modified if:

        i.      The landscape area is adjacent to permeable surfacing and no runoff occurs; or

        ii.     The adjacent non-permeable surfaces are designed and constructed to drain entirely to landscaping; or

        iii.    The irrigation designer specifies an alternative design or technology, as part of the landscape documentation package and clearly demonstrates strict adherence to irrigation system design criteria in subsection (A)(1)(h) of this section. Prevention of overspray and runoff must be confirmed during the irrigation audit.

        t.      Slopes greater than twenty-five percent shall not be irrigated with an irrigation system with a precipitation rate exceeding 0.75 inches per hour. This restriction may be modified if the landscape designer specifies an alternative design or technology, as part of the landscape documentation package, and clearly demonstrates no runoff or erosion will occur. Prevention of runoff and erosion must be confirmed during the irrigation audit.

        2.     Hydrozone.

        a.     Each valve shall irrigate a hydrozone with similar site, slope, sun exposure, soil conditions, and plant materials with similar water use.

        b.     Sprinkler heads and other emission devices shall be selected based on what is appropriate for the plant type within that hydrozone.

        c.     Where feasible, trees shall be placed on separate valves from shrubs, groundcovers, and turf.

        d.     Individual hydrozones that mix plants of moderate and low water use, or moderate and high water use, may be allowed if:

        i.      Plant factor calculation is based on the proportions of the respective plant water uses and their plant factor; or

        ii.     The plant factor of the higher water using plant is used for calculations.

        e.     Individual hydrozones that mix high and low water use plants shall not be permitted.

        f.      On the landscape design plan and irrigation design plan, hydrozone areas shall be designated by number, letter, or other designation. On the irrigation design plan, designate the areas irrigated by each valve, and assign a number to each valve. Use this valve number in the Hydrozone Information Table (see Appendix B Section A). This table can also assist with the irrigation audit and programming the controller.

        B.     The irrigation design plan, at a minimum, shall contain:

        1.     Location and size of separate water meters for landscape;

        2.     Location, type and size of all components of the irrigation system, including controllers, main and lateral lines, valves, sprinkler heads, moisture sensing devices, rain switches, quick couplers, pressure regulators, and backflow prevention devices;

        3.     Static water pressure at the point of connection to the public water supply;

        4.     Flow rate (gallons per minute), application rate (inches per hour), and design operating pressure (pressure per square inch) for each station;

        5.     Recycled water irrigation systems as specified in Section 15.46.180;

        6.     The following statement: “I have complied with the criteria of the ordinance and applied them accordingly for the efficient use of water in the irrigation design plan”; and

        7.     The signature of a licensed landscape architect, certified irrigation designer, licensed landscape contractor, or any other person authorized to design an irrigation system. (See Sections 5500.1, 5615, 5641, 5641.1, 5641.2, 5641.3, 5641.4, 5641.5, 5641.6, 6701, 7027.5 of the Business and Professions Code, Section 832.27 of Title 16 of the California Code of Regulations, and Section 6721 of the Food and Agricultural Code.) (Ord. 2011-06 §1).

 

15.46.120 Grading design plan.
        For the efficient use of water, grading of a project site shall be designed to minimize soil erosion, runoff, and water waste. A grading plan shall be submitted as part of the landscape documentation package. A comprehensive grading plan prepared by a civil engineer for other city of Waterford permits satisfies this requirement.

        A.    The project applicant shall submit a landscape grading plan that indicates finished configurations and elevations of the landscape area including:

        1.     Height of graded slopes;

        2.     Drainage patterns;

        3.     Pad elevations;

        4.     Finish grade; and

        5.     Stormwater retention improvements, if applicable.

        B.     To prevent excessive erosion and runoff, it is highly recommended that project applicants:

        1.     Grade so that all irrigation and normal rainfall remains within property lines and does not drain on to non-permeable hardscapes;

        2.     Avoid disruption of natural drainage patterns and undisturbed soil; and

        3.     Avoid soil compaction in landscape areas.

        C.     The grading design plan shall contain the following statement: “I have complied with the criteria of the ordinance and applied them accordingly for the efficient use of water in the grading design plan” and shall bear the signature of a licensed professional as authorized by law. (Ord. 2011-06 §1).

 

15.46.130 Certificate of completion.
        A.    The certificate of completion (see Appendix C for a sample certificate) shall include the following six elements:

        1.     Project information sheet that contains:

        a.     Date,

        b.     Project name,

        c.     Project applicant name, telephone, and mailing address,

        d.     Project address and location, and

        e.     Property owner name, telephone, and mailing address;

        2.     Certification by either the signer of the landscape design plan, the signer of the irrigation design plan, or the licensed landscape contractor that the landscape project has been installed per the approved landscape documentation package.

        a.     Where there have been significant changes made in the field during construction, these “as-built” or record drawings shall be included with the certification;

        3.     Irrigation scheduling parameters used to set the controller (see Section 15.46.140);

        4.     Landscape and irrigation maintenance schedule (see Section 15.46.150);

        5.     Irrigation audit report (see Section 15.46.160); and

        6.     Soil analysis report, if not submitted with the landscape documentation package, and documentation verifying implementation of soil report recommendations (see Section 15.46.090).

        B.     The project applicant shall:

        1.     Submit the signed certificate of completion to the city of Waterford for review;

        2.     Ensure that copies of the approved certificate of completion are submitted to the local water purveyor and property owner or designee.

        C.     The city of Waterford shall:

        1.     Receive the signed certificate of completion from the project applicant;

        2.     Approve or deny the certificate of completion. If the certificate of completion is denied, the city of Waterford shall provide information to the project applicant regarding reapplication, appeal, or other assistance. (Ord. 2011-06 §1).

 

15.46.140 Irrigation scheduling.
        For the efficient use of water, all irrigation schedules shall be developed, managed, and evaluated to utilize the minimum amount of water required to maintain plant health. Irrigation schedules shall meet the following criteria:

        A.    Irrigation scheduling shall be regulated by automatic irrigation controllers.

        1.     Overhead irrigation shall be scheduled between eight p.m. and ten a.m. unless weather conditions prevent it. If allowable hours of irrigation differ from the local water purveyor, the stricter of the two shall apply. Operation of the irrigation system outside the normal watering window is allowed for auditing and system maintenance.

        2.     For implementation of the irrigation schedule, particular attention must be paid to irrigation run times, emission device, flow rate, and current reference evapotranspiration, so that applied water meets the estimated total water use. Total annual applied water shall be less than or equal to maximum applied water allowance (MAWA). Actual irrigation schedules shall be regulated by automatic irrigation controllers using current reference evapotranspiration data (e.g., CIMIS) or soil moisture sensor data.

        3.     Parameters used to set the automatic controller shall be developed and submitted for each of the following:

        a.     The plant establishment period;

        b.     The established landscape; and

        c.     Temporarily irrigated areas.

        B.     Each irrigation schedule shall consider for each station all of the following that apply:

        1.     Irrigation interval (days between irrigation);

        2.     Irrigation run times (hours or minutes per irrigation event to avoid runoff);

        3.     Number of cycle starts required for each irrigation event to avoid runoff;

        4.     Amount of applied water scheduled to be applied on a monthly basis;

        5.     Application rate setting;

        6.     Root depth setting;

        7.     Plant type setting;

        8.     Soil type;

        9.     Slope factor setting;

        10.   Shade factor setting; and

        11.   Irrigation uniformity or efficiency setting. (Ord. 2011-06 §1).

 

15.46.150 Landscape and irrigation maintenance schedule.
        A.    Landscapes shall be maintained to ensure water use efficiency. A regular maintenance schedule shall be submitted with the certificate of completion.

        B.     A regular maintenance schedule shall include, but not be limited to, routine inspection; adjustment and repair of the irrigation system and its components; aerating and dethatching turf areas; replenishing mulch; fertilizing; pruning; weeding in all landscape areas, and removing and obstruction to emission devices. Operation of the irrigation system outside the normal watering window is allowed for auditing and system maintenance.

        C.     Repair of all irrigation equipment shall be done with the originally installed components or their equivalents.

        D.    A project applicant is encouraged to implement sustainable or environmentally-friendly practices for overall landscape maintenance. (Ord. 2011-06 §1).

 

15.46.160 Irrigation audit, irrigation survey, and irrigation water use analysis.
        A.    All landscape irrigation audits shall be conducted by a certified landscape irrigation auditor.

        B.     For new construction and rehabilitated landscape projects installed after January 1, 2010, as described in Section 15.46.020:

        1.     The project applicant shall submit an irrigation audit report with the certificate of completion to the city of Waterford that may include, but is not limited to: inspection, system tune-up, system test with distribution uniformity, reporting overspray or run off that causes overland flow, and preparation of an irrigation schedule;

        2.     The city of Waterford shall administer programs that may include, but not be limited to, irrigation water use analysis, irrigation audits, and irrigation surveys for compliance with the maximum applied water allowance. (Ord. 2011-06 §1).

 

15.46.170 Irrigation efficiency.
        For the purpose of determining maximum applied water allowance, average irrigation efficiency is assumed to be 0.71. Irrigation systems shall be designed, maintained, and managed to meet or exceed an average landscape irrigation efficiency of 0.71. (Ord. 2011-06 §1).

 

15.46.180 Recycled water.
        A.    The installation of recycled water irrigation systems shall allow for the current and future use of recycled water, unless a written exemption has been granted as described in subsection B.

        B.     Irrigation systems and decorative water features shall use recycled water unless a written exemption has been granted by the local water purveyor stating that recycled water meeting all public health codes and standards is not available and will not be available for the foreseeable future.

        C.     All recycled water irrigation systems shall be designed and operated in accordance with all applicable local and state laws.

        D.    Landscapes using recycled water are considered special landscape areas. The ET adjustment factor for special landscape areas shall not exceed 1.0. (Ord. 2011-06 §1).

 

15.46.190 Stormwater management.
        A.    Stormwater management practices minimize runoff and increase infiltration which recharges groundwater and improves water quality. Implementing stormwater best management practices into the landscape and grading design plans to minimize runoff and to increase on-site retention and infiltration are encouraged.

        B.     Project applicants shall refer to the city of Waterford or Regional Water Quality Control Board for information on any applicable stormwater ordinances and stormwater management plans.

        C.     Rain gardens, cisterns, and other landscapes features and practices that increase rainwater capture and create opportunities for infiltration and/or on-site storage are recommended. (Ord. 2011-06 §1).

 

15.46.200 Public education.
        A.    Publications. Education is a critical component to promote the efficient use of water in landscapes. The use of appropriate principles of design, installation, management and maintenance that save water is encouraged in the community.

        1.     A city of Waterford shall provide information to owners of new, single-family residential homes regarding the design, installation, management, and maintenance of water efficient landscapes.

        B.     Model Homes. All model homes that are landscaped shall use signs and written information to demonstrate the principles of water efficient landscapes described in this chapter.

        1.     Signs shall be used to identify the model as an example of a water efficient landscape featuring elements such as hydrozones, irrigation equipment, and others that contribute to the overall water efficient theme.

        2.     Information shall be provided about designing, installing, managing, and maintaining water efficient landscapes. (Ord. 2011-06 §1).

 

15.46.210 Environmental review.
        The city of Waterford will comply with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), as appropriate. (Ord. 2011-06 §1).

 

15.46.220 Provisions for existing landscapes.
        The city of Waterford may designate another agency, such as a water purveyor, to implement some or all of the requirements contained in this chapter. Local agencies may collaborate with water purveyors to define each entity’s specific responsibilities relating to this chapter. (Ord. 2011-06 §1).

 

15.46.230 Irrigation audit, irrigation survey, and irrigation water use analysis.
        A.    This section shall apply to all existing landscapes that were installed before January 1, 2010 and are over one acre in size.

        1.     For all landscapes in subsection A that have a water meter, Waterford shall administer programs that may include, but not be limited to, irrigation water use analyses, irrigation surveys, and irrigation audits to evaluate water use and provide recommendations as necessary to reduce landscape water use to a level that does not exceed the maximum applied water allowance for existing landscapes. The maximum applied water allowance for existing landscapes shall be calculated as: MAWA = (0.8) (ETo)(LA)(0.62).

        2.     For all landscapes in subsection A, that do not have a meter, the city of Waterford shall administer programs that may include, but not be limited to, irrigation surveys and irrigation audits to evaluate water use and provide recommendations as necessary in order to prevent water waste.

        B.     All landscape irrigation audits shall be conducted by a certified landscape irrigation auditor. (Ord. 2011-06 §1).

 

15.46.240 Water waste prevention.
        A.    The city of Waterford shall prevent water waste resulting from inefficient landscape irrigation by prohibiting runoff from leaving the target landscape due to low head drainage, overspray, or other similar conditions where water flows onto adjacent property, non-irrigated areas, walks, roadways, parking lots, or structures. Penalties for violation of these prohibitions shall be established by the Waterford city council.

        B.     Restrictions regarding overspray and runoff may be modified if:

        1.     The landscape area is adjacent to permeable surfacing and no runoff occurs; or

        2.     The adjacent non-permeable surfaces are designed and constructed to drain entirely to landscaping. (Ord. 2011-06 §1).

 

15.46.250 Effective precipitation.
        A city of Waterford may consider effective precipitation (twenty-five percent of annual precipitation) in tracking water use and may use the following equation to calculate maximum applied water allowance:

 

MAWA = (50.3 - Eppt)(0.62)[(0.7 x LA) + (0.3 x
                 SLA)].

 

(Ord. 2011-06 §1).

 

15.46.260 Appendices.
 







 







 



(Ord. 2011-06 §1).

Title 16 SUBDIVISIONS
Chapter 16.01 BASIC PROVISIONS
Chapter 16.02 DEFINITIONS
Chapter 16.03 DESIGN REQUIREMENTS
Chapter 16.04 LOT LINE OR BOUNDARY ADJUSTMENTS
Chapter 16.05 MERGER OF PARCELS
Chapter 16.06 REVERSION TO ACREAGE
Chapter 16.07 TENTATIVE SUBDIVISION MAPS
Chapter 16.08 TENTATIVE PARCEL MAPS AND PARCEL MAPS
Chapter 16.09 VESTING TENTATIVE MAPS
Chapter 16.10 FINAL MAPS
Chapter 16.11 REQUIRED AND SUPPLEMENTAL IMPROVEMENTS
Chapter 16.12 IMPROVEMENT SECURITY
Chapter 16.13 DEDICATION, SITE RESERVATION, DISTRICTS
Chapter 16.14 DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT
Chapter 16.15 ENFORCEMENT

Chapter 16.01 BASIC PROVISIONS
16.01.010 Short title.
        This title is adopted to supplement and implement the Subdivision Map Act and may be cited as the “Subdivision Ordinance of the City of Waterford.” (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.01.020 Purpose and intent.
        The purpose of these regulations, and the intent of the city in their adoption, is as follows:

        A.    To secure compliance with the city of Waterford Zoning Ordinance, and to provide policies, standards, requirements and procedures to regulate and control the design and improvement of all subdivisions within the city;

        B.     To assist in implementing the objectives, policies and programs of the general plan by ensuring that all proposed subdivisions, together with the provisions for their design and improvement, are consistent with the general plan and all applicable specific plans of the city;

        C.     To preserve and protect, to the maximum extent possible, the unique and valuable natural resources and amenities of the city’s environment, including topographic and geologic features, open space lands, the Tuolumne River, natural and manmade waterways, recreational areas, fish and wildlife habitats, historical and cultural places and scenic vistas and attractions; and, to maximize the public’s access to and enjoyment of such resources and amenities through the dedication or continuance of applicable easements thereto;

        D.    To relate land use intensity and population density to existing development, street capacity and traffic access, the slope of the natural terrain, and the availability of public facilities, utilities and open space;

        E.     To provide lots of sufficient size and appropriate design for the purposes for which they are to be used;

        F.     To provide streets of adequate capacity and design and to ensure maximum safety for pedestrians and vehicles;

        G.    To ensure adequate access to each building site;

        H.    To provide sidewalks, and where needed, pedestrian ways, bike paths, and equestrian and hiking trails for the safety, convenience and enjoyment of the residents of new developments;

        I.      To provide adequate systems of water supply, sanitary sewage disposal, storm drainage, street lighting, and other utilities needed for the public health, safety and convenience;

        J.      To provide adequate sites for public facilities needed to serve the residents of new developments;

        K.    To ensure that the costs of providing land for streets, alleys, pedestrian-ways, easements, and other rights-of-way, and for the improvements needed to serve new developments, are the responsibility of the subdivider;

        L.     To prevent land which is actually or potentially dangerous by reason of flood hazard, inundation, proximity to excessive noise, inadequate access, inadequate water supply or fire protection, insufficient sewerage facilities, hazardous geological conditions, or critical soil conditions from being subdivided for any use or in any manner tending to create an increased detriment to the public health, safety or welfare;

        M.    To ensure that, insofar as possible, land is subdivided in a manner that will promote the public health, safety, convenience, and general welfare in conformance with the general plan;

        N.    To reduce the hardships on tenants displaced when multi-residential buildings are converted to condominium projects and to protect the purchasers of dwelling units in such condominium projects;

        O.    Further, it is the purpose of this title to encourage new concepts and innovations in the arrangement of building sites within subdivisions. Deviations from the traditional mechanical approach to the subdivision of land are encouraged in order to facilitate the ultimate development of the land in a manner that will be commensurate with contemporary living patterns and technological progress;

        P.     To promote sustainable development within the city and implement “new urbanism” concepts where appropriate. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.01.030 Applicability.
        This title shall apply to the subdivision, reconfiguration and consolidation of land within the city. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.01.040 Authority.
        These regulations are adopted pursuant to the Subdivision Map Act (Title 7, Division 2, Government Code) as a “local ordinance” as the term is used in the Act and are supplemental to the provisions thereof. All provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and future amendments thereto not incorporated in these regulations shall, nevertheless, apply to all subdivision, subdivision maps and proceedings under these regulations. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.01.050 Conformity to general plan.
        In all respects a subdivision will be considered in relation to the general plan or sections thereof.

        A.    A report as to conformity to the general plan, which is required pursuant to Section 65402 of the Government Code as the result of a proposed division of land, may be included as part of and at the same time as the action taken by the planning commission on such division of land.

        B.     Such report is not required for a proposed subdivision which involves: (1) the disposition of the remainder of a large parcel which was acquired and used in part for street purposes; (2) acquisitions, dispositions, or abandonment for street and/or utility easement widening; or (3) alignment projects, provided that the planning commission expressly finds that any such disposition for street purposes, acquisitions, dispositions, or abandonment for street widening, or alignment projects is of a minor nature. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.01.060 Division of multifamily, commercial and industrially zoned land.
        All land zoned, in accordance with the Waterford Municipal Codes, as “R-3” (high density residential), “C” (commercial) or “I” (industrial) shall not be divided into lots or parcels of one-acre or less unless part of an approved master development plan for the site.

        A.    Purpose of Limitation. It is determined by the city of Waterford that premature subdivision of the limited amount of multifamily, commercial and industrial lands available within the city of Waterford can result in inefficient use of this limited land resource and may result in small parcels or lots that are not suitable for multifamily, commercial and industrial use.

        B.     The master development plan shall be subject to a development agreement and contain at least the following elements:

        1.     Development site plan showing buildings, elevations, parking areas;

        2.     Development plan for sewer, water and storm drainage and locations of any required on-site and off-site improvements necessary to implement this plan;

        3.     Phasing of construction and timing for the provision of necessary utilities and infrastructure;

        4.     Circulation and access plan; and

        5.     Other information that may be necessary to facilitate the ultimate development of the property proposed to be subdivided. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.01.070 Conformance with other regulations required.
        Neither the approval nor conditional approval of a subdivision map shall authorize or be deemed to authorize a violation or failure to comply with other applicable provisions of the Waterford Municipal Code or other applicable ordinances or regulations adopted by the city. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.01.080 Exceptions from the requirements.
        It is recognized that there are certain parcels of land of such dimensions, subject to such restrictions, so affected by physical conditions and devoted to such uses that it would be difficult or impractical for the subdivider to conform to the foregoing requirements.

        A.    Upon receipt of a complete application and fee for a subdivision exception, as provided by the planning department, the planning commission (or on appeal to the city council) will consider exceptions from the foregoing requirements, when the following findings are made:

        1.     That because of special circumstances applicable to the subdivision, including size, shape, topography, location or surroundings, the literal application of this title would deprive the subdivision of privileges enjoyed by other properties in the vicinity; and

        2.     That under the circumstances of a particular case granting the exceptions, rather than the sections at issue in this title, actually carries out the intent of this title.

        B.     Any exception granted shall be subject to such conditions as will assure that the adjustments thereby authorized shall not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the same vicinity.

        C.     Adequate guarantees may be required to insure that any conditions imposed as a part of any approved exception shall be carried out as specified. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.01.090 Advisory agency.
        The planning commission is hereby designated as the advisory agency with respect to subdivisions as provided in the Subdivision Map Act of the state of California.

        A.    The planning commission shall have those powers and duties with respect to tentative and final maps, and the procedure relating thereto, which are specified by law and by this title.

        B.     In the case of a parcel map for which a variance from requirements of the Waterford Zoning Ordinance, an exception from the requirements of this title, or a use permit must be granted prior to the approval of the parcel map, or is applied for consideration concurrent with the tentative parcel map application, the planning commission shall serve as the advisory agency for the review of the tentative parcel map and the planning commission shall take all actions. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.01.100 Planning director.
        The planning director shall have the powers and duties specified by this title. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.01.110 Filing fees.
        Fees for all applications, maps, appeals and other matters described in this title shall be paid at the time of submittal to the city for consideration in an amount prescribed by resolution of the Waterford city council. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.01.120 Appeals.
        A.    The subdivider may appeal from any action of the staff or the planning commission within ten calendar days with respect to a tentative map to the commission or city council, as appropriate, as provided by Government Code Section 66452.5. Such appeal and the hearing thereon shall be conducted in the manner provided by Government Code Section 66452.5(a) and (b).

        B.     Any interested person adversely affected by a decision of the staff or the planning commission may file a complaint with the planning commission or city council, as appropriate, concerning such decision. Any such complaint shall be filed with the planning commission secretary or city clerk, as applicable, within ten calendar days after the action which is the subject of the complaint and shall be accompanied by a filing fee in a sum to be established by the city council by resolution. The planning commission or city council, as applicable, shall have the authority to waive or refund such fee upon good cause being shown. The planning commission or city council may, in its discretion reject the complaint within fifteen calendar days or set the matter for public hearing. If the city council rejects the complaint, the complainant shall be notified of such action. If the matter is set for hearing, the hearing shall be conducted within thirty calendar days of filing as required by Subdivision Map Act Section 66452.5(a) and notice thereof given as provided by Government Code Section 66451.3 and by this title.

        C.     Notwithstanding the provision of subsections A and B of this section, any interested person may appeal any decision of the planning commission relative to the provisions of Government Code Sections 66473.5, 66474, 66474.1 and 66474.6 to the city council. Such appeal and the hearing thereon shall be conducted in the manner provided by Government Code Section 66452.5(a) and (b). (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

Chapter 16.02 DEFINITIONS
16.02.010 Definitions.
        The following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.02.020 Scope of provisions.
        Unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows. Those terms, defined below, shall be supplementary to the definitions contained in the Subdivision Map Act Section 66414 et seq. (Article 2. Definitions) of the Government Code. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.02.030 Acreage.
        Any parcel of land, of one acre or more and those areas where a legal subdivision has not been made previously, or where a legal subdivision has declared the parcel as acreage. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.02.040 Boundary adjustment.
        A minor shift or rotation of an existing lot line where no additional parcels are created, nor deleted, as approved by the commission and/or the city engineer. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.02.050 City.
        “City” means the city of Waterford, state of California. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.02.060 City engineer.
        The director of public works/city engineer of the city of Waterford; hereinafter referred to as “city engineer.” (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.02.070 Conversion.
        The creation of separate ownership of existing real property together with a separate interest in space of residential or commercial buildings. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.02.080 County recorder.
        The county recorder of the county of Stanislaus. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.02.090 City council.
        “City council” means the city council of the city of Waterford, state of California. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.02.100 City officer.
        “City officer” means the particular officer of the city of Waterford. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.02.110 Civil code.
        “Civil Code” means the Civil Code of the state of California. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.02.120 Commission, planning.
        “Planning commission” means the planning commission of the city of Waterford and the advisory agency referred to in the Subdivision Map Act. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.02.130 Cross slope, average.
        Formula for average cross slope:

 

S = .00229 IL

            A

 

        Where I = Interval of measured contours in feet;

        S = Average cross slope of parcel in percent;

        L = Combined length of contours in feet (i.e., map measurement of contours in inches x the scale);

        A = Area of parcel in acres.

(Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.02.140 Department of public works.
        The public works department of the city of Waterford; hereinafter referred to as “public works.” (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.02.150 Density.
        Depending on application means one of the following:

        A.    “Density” designates the ratio of single-family living units to acreage.

        B.     “Density, gross” designates the ratio of single-family living unit to acreage within the entire parcel.

        C.     “Density, net” designates the ratio of single-family living unit to acreage including only open space and actual lot areas. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.02.160 Design.
        “Design” refers to street alignment, grades and widths; alignment and widths of easements and rights-of-way for drainage, sanitary sewers, water, utilities, and other facilities for public use or benefit; lot area, width, depth, shape and pattern as required in this title. “Design” also includes land to be dedicated for park or recreational purposes. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.02.170 Director.
        The director of the city of Waterford planning department. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.02.180 Division of land—Four or less parcels.
        A tentative and final parcel map shall be required for all divisions of land creating four or fewer parcels, as well as those divisions contained in Map Act Section 66426. A tentative and final parcel map shall not be required for those divisions outlined in Map Act Section 66428, nor for lot line adjustments contained in Map Act Section 66412(d). (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.02.190 Easement.
        An area offered for dedication to, and accepted by, the city which easement shall be continuing and irrevocable unless formally abandoned by the city.

        A.    “Easement” is a burden or servitude upon land, whether or not attached to other land as an incident or appurtenance that allows the holder of the burden or servitude to do acts upon the land.

        B.     “Easement, appurtenant” is an easement that runs with the land.

        C.     “Easements in gross” is not appurtenant to any estate in land or does not belong to any person by virtue of ownership of estate in other land but is mere personal interest in or tied to use land of another, it is purely personal and usually ends with death of grantee.

        D.    “Easements, public service” includes all or part of, or any right in a right-of-way, easement or use restriction acquired for public use by dedication or otherwise for sewers, pipelines, pole-lines, electrical transmission and communication lines, pathways, storm drains, drainage, canal, water transmission lines, light and air, and other limited use public easements other than for street or highway purposes. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.02.200 Environmental review.
        Includes documentation and procedures in accordance with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), State Public Resources Code Sections 21000 et seq., which describe and analyze the potential significant environmental effects of a project and discussing methods to mitigate or avoid said effects including all public notifications, review and filings associated with the requirements of state law and city policies and procedures. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.02.210 General plan.
        Means the city of Waterford Vision 2025 General Plan as adopted, and amended, by the Waterford city council. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.02.220 Final map.
        A map showing a subdivision for which a tentative and final map is required under the Subdivision Map Act, Section 66426 of the Government Code, prepared in compliance with the provisions of this Municipal Code and the Subdivision Map Act and designed to be recorded in the office of the recorder of the county of Stanislaus. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.02.230 Government Code.
        The Government Code of the state of California. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.02.240 Improvement.
        “Improvement” refers to such street work, drainage work and utilities, landscaping, or other improvements to be installed, or agreed to be installed by the subdivider on the subdivision or land adjacent thereto to be used for public streets, easements, highways, and park and recreation sites necessary for the use and benefit of the lot owners in the subdivision and adjacent areas as a condition precedent to approval of the final map, thereof. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.02.250 Lot.
        A parcel of land established in accordance with the requirements of the California Subdivision Map Act and applicable local implementing ordinances and regulations of the city of Waterford. The word “lot” includes the words “plot” and “parcel.” (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.02.260 Lot depth.
        The horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines, measured in the mean direction of the side lot lines. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.02.270 Lot depth, average.
        With the exception of cul-de-sac lots, “average lot depth” is the sum of the length of the two side lines of the lot divided by two. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.02.280 Lot line, front.
        In the case of any interior lot, shall mean a line separating the lot from the street. In the case of a corner lot, a line separating the narrowest street frontage of the lot from the street except in those cases where the latest tract deed restrictions specify another line as the front lot line. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.02.290 Lot line, rear.
        With the exception of cul-de-sac lots, “rear lot line” is a lot line which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line and, in the case of an irregular line within the lot parallel to and at the maximum distance from the front lot line, having a length of at least ten feet. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.02.300 Lot width.
        With the exception of cul-de-sac lots, “average lot width” is the sum of the length of the front and rear lot line divided by two. In the case of irregularly-shaped lots having four or more sides, “average lot width” means the sum of the length of two lines, drawn perpendicular to one side line at the widest and narrowest portions of the lot, divided by two. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.02.310 Improvement standard.
        A specified requirement imposed by this Municipal Code relating to the installation, modification or removal by the subdivider of a street, sidewalk, utility, well, tree, storm drain or other facility as necessary for the general use by the lot owners of the subdivision and local neighborhood. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.02.320 Merger.
        “Merger” means the joining of two or more contiguous parcels of land, under one ownership, into one parcel. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.02.330 Owner.
        The individual, firm, partnership, or corporation having sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought to be subdivided to commence and maintain proceedings to subdivide such land pursuant to the provisions of this title and state law. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.02.340 Parcel.
        See “Lot.” (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.02.350 Parcel map or subdivision, minor.
        Means a final parcel map. This definition refers to any subdivision containing four or less lots or parcels or any subdivisions of more than four lots or parcels where each lot is forty acres or larger subdivision requiring a parcel map in accordance with the provisions of Government Code, Chapter 2, Article 1 (Maps) and other applicable provisions of state law. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.02.360 Preliminary or plat map.
        A map or diagram made for the purpose of showing the design of a proposed subdivision lot line adjustment or parcel merger, where a tentative map is not required, and shows the existing conditions in and around the proposed project, prepared as required by the provisions of this title. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.02.370 Record of survey.
        Any subdivision prepared, filed, and approved in accordance with the laws of the state and the provisions of this title. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.02.380 Remainder.
        That portion of an existing parcel which is not included as part of the proposed subdivision. The remainder is not considered as part of the subdivision but must be shown on the required maps as part of the area surrounding subdivision development. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.02.390 Shall and may.
        “Shall” is mandatory and “may” is permissive. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.02.400 Street, city.
        Any street, avenue, or other public way accepted by the council. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.02.410 Street, private.
        “Private street” means a privately maintained street within a private development. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.02.420 Street, public.
        “Public street” means a street, road, or way, but not an alley, owned by or maintained by a state, county, or incorporated city. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.02.430 Street, major.
        Any street which carries traffic between different areas of the city and traffic entering from collector streets. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.02.440 Street, minor.
        A street which is used primarily for access to abutting properties. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.02.450 Street, secondary.
        A street which collects traffic from a subdivision or area to a major street and which is sometimes referred to as a collector street. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.02.460 Subdivision.
        “Subdivision” means the division, by any subdivider, of any unit or units of improved or unimproved land, or any portion thereof, shown on the latest equalized county assessment roll as a unit or as contiguous units, for the purpose of sale, lease or financing, whether immediate or future. Property shall be considered as contiguous units, even if it is separated by roads, streets, utility easements or railroad rights-of-way. This definition also refers to a condominium project, a community apartment project, or the conversion of five or more existing dwelling units to a stock cooperative, as defined in subdivisions (f), (d), and (m) of Section 1351 of the Civil Code. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.02.470 Subdivision Map Act.
        State of California Government Code Section 66410 to 66499; hereinafter referred to as “The Map Act.” (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.02.480 Subdivision standard.
        Means a subdivision requiring a tentative and final map in accordance with the provisions of Government Code, Chapter 2, Article 1 (Maps) and other applicable provisions of state law. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.02.490 Subdivider.
        Means a person, firm, corporation, partnership or association who proposes to divide, divides or causes to be divided real property into a subdivision for himself or for others except that employees and consultants of such persons or entities, acting in such capacity, are not “subdividers.” (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.02.500 Tentative subdivision map and tentative parcel map.
        “Tentative subdivision map” and “tentative parcel map” mean a map designed to illustrate the concept of a proposed subdivision and how it interfaces with existing conditions and surrounding uses. Tentative maps need not be based upon accurate or detailed field survey of the property. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.02.510 Thoroughfare.
        “Thoroughfare” means a street of general city-county importance which is a limited access street carrying major traffic through several areas. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.02.520 Vesting tentative map.
        A “tentative map” for a subdivision, as defined in this article, which shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words “vesting tentative map” at the time it is filed in accordance with Section 16.09.080 of this title and is thereafter processed in accordance with the provisions thereof. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

Chapter 16.03 DESIGN REQUIREMENTS
16.03.010 Generally.
        A.    Subdivision design and improvements required are as set out in this chapter and in Zoning (Title 17), Waterford Improvement Standards and other policy and Municipal Code provisions of the city. These design requirements shall be considered by the planning director, planning commission and city council as set forth in this title.

        B.     The subdivider, as a condition of approval of the final or parcel map shall, consistent with Map Act Sections 66411.1 and 66462.5, improve or agree and guarantee to improve all land either within or outside the subdivision to be used for public or private streets, alleys, pedestrian ways, easements or other improvements in compliance with this title. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.03.020 General design standards.
        A.    Concepts of “new urbanism” or “traditional neighborhood development” are encouraged through the design of subdivisions by the city of Waterford. These development approaches promote sustainable development in the city of Waterford through:

        1.     Creating more efficient land use, minimizing agricultural land lost to urban development;

        2.     Promoting compact and pedestrian-friendly neighborhoods;

        3.     Promoting a mixture of higher density uses surrounding activity centers;

        4.     Providing higher density residential uses adjacent to or surrounding retail, recreational, and governmental uses that promotes the effective delivery of urban services;

        5.     Provides a physical design that will reduce the number of vehicle trips generated by the new development; and

        6.     Provides a mixture of housing types that will result in neighborhoods of diverse economic background, rather than segregating different economic groups in isolated neighborhoods.

        B.     The design of subdivision maps shall, to the maximum extent practical, incorporate new urban style development and take into account design consideration that includes, at a minimum, the following:

        1.     Masonry walls at appropriate locations to suppress noise and to provide barriers from transportation routes;

        2.     Appropriate landscaping of common open areas or public rights of way at appropriate locations;

        3.     The use of neighborhood/subdivision identification monuments at the entrances to subdivisions;

        4.     Promote pedestrian friendly development through improved pedestrian and bicycle easements to provide access to public facilities such as schools and parks;

        5.     The piping of all irrigation or drainage facilities, which are not to be abandoned within, or abutting the boundary or, the subdivision;

        6.     The removal or abandonment of all underground structures such as septic tanks or gas tanks to the satisfaction of Stanislaus County department of environmental resources and the city engineer;

        7.     Appropriate street designs that discourage nonlocal residential traffic on residential streets and reduce traffic speeds within residential areas;

        8.     Residential “traffic calming” techniques that promote street patterns that are developed along a “grid” design or concentric “grid” that provide neighborhood access and discourage “through” traffic in residential areas;

        9.     Narrow tree-lined streets with pedestrian amenities and designs that facilitate non-vehicular access to service centers, recreation and schools;

        10.   Reduced private “yard” space and larger “communal” open-space areas that encourage neighborhood interaction;

        11.   Narrow front yard areas with alley access to garages and carports;

        12.   Mixed residential densities within each distinct neighborhood that accommodates a variety of housing needs.

        C.     The completion of any other improvements as the planning commission may deem advisable given the particular circumstances of the land proposed for subdivision.

        D.    In determining the necessity for such improvements, the planning commission shall balance the public interest of providing desirable living environments against the private loss to the developer and the concomitant increase in housing costs to the consumer. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.03.030 Street frontage.
        All lots shall have a minimum thirty-five feet of street frontage hereinafter set out unless otherwise established within the applicable zoning district within which the subdivision is proposed. If the review body determines that a flag lot is necessary for the reasonable development of a parcel, the minimum width of the portion of the flag lot that provides access to the buildable portion of the lot shall have a minimum pavement width of sixteen feet and a length not exceeding ninety feet. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.03.040 Block standards.
        Block length shall not exceed five hundred feet unless existing conditions warrant an exception. Long blocks along major thoroughfares and highways are desirable to reduce the number of intersections. Block width shall be of sufficient width to permit the platting of two tiers of lots of normal depth. The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks shall comply with the following general standards:

        A.    Convenient pedestrian access, vehicular circulation, traffic control and safety of street traffic, as outlined in the circulation element of the general plan;

        B.     Lot specifications, as outlined in this chapter, the general plan and or applicable city adopted specific plan; and

        C.     Limitations and opportunities of existing topography, terrain features such as water ways and drainage, and overall property configuration. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.03.050 Lot standards.
        The design, size, shape and orientation of each lot, which provides for a suitable building site, shall be appropriate to its location and type of development contemplated. The following standards shall apply:

        A.    The lot lines of all lots, so far as practical, shall be at approximately right angles to the fronting street, or approximately radial to the center of the curvature, if the street is curved. Sidelines of each lot shall be approximately radial to the center of the curvature of a cul-de-sac, where applicable;

        B.     All lots shall be suitable for the purpose for which they are intended. Land subject to flooding or deemed by the planning commission to be uninhabitable shall not be platted for residential occupancy. Areas subject to flooding, as defined by the most current flood hazard maps for the city, shall be noted on the final map with “Subject to Flooding”;

        C.     All subdivision designs shall attempt to achieve a variety of lot sizes in order to accommodate a full range of housing styles, sizes and price ranges in conformance with the housing element of the Waterford general plan. It shall be expected that a greater variance in lot sizes will exist in larger subdivisions consisting of twenty-five lots or more. The integration of housing for all sectors of the community within all areas of the city, and to avoid development patterns which result in large sectors of the city which are immediately identifiable as “low income” or “upper income”;

        D.    No lot shall be divided by a city or special district boundary line. Division of the lot by a tax code boundary shall be avoided;

        E.     Corner lots for residential use shall have extra width and size to permit appropriate building setback from both streets and potential development as duplex units;

        F.     Through lots and reverse corner lots shall be avoided were possible;

        G.    All lots that front on a designated arterial street or a state highway shall have an additional ten feet of depth from the arterial or highway which shall be included as part of the landscape maintenance district;

        H.    No remnants of property, with the exception of one-foot control lots and approved nonbuildable sites, shall be created which do not conform to lot requirements or which are not required for public or private utility, open space or parkland purposes;

        I.      All lots shall conform to the requirements contained in this code. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.03.060 Walls and fences.
        Each lot located on the exterior boundary of the subdivision shall have a wall or fence adequate to prevent access between the lot and adjacent properties subject to the approval of planning director and in compliance with this Municipal Code. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.03.070 Noise attenuation.
        A.    A subdivider, as a condition of approval of a tentative map, for a subdivision located within an area subject to high traffic noise levels shall comply with the following standards consistent with the general plan and this Municipal Code:

        1.     Noise Attenuation Considerations. In general, three basic techniques provide noise attenuation:

        a.     Barriers and Earth Berm. The least desirable method of noise attenuation is a noise barrier or wall. Improper design can result in an increase in noise deflection thereby making the roadway undesirable to pedestrians and other forms of nonmotorized transportation.

        Diffracted path, transmitted path, and reflected path are the redistribution of the sound energy when a barrier is introduced between the source of the noise and the receiver. If no barrier exists between the noise source and adjoining areas, the sound will travel in a direct path from the source, diminishing only with distance. But, if a barrier is introduced, some attenuation is possible at shorter distances.

        The amount of sound that “passes through” a barrier (barrier transmission) depends upon the barrier material weight and stiffness, and the holes or openings in the barrier. In the case of the latter ones, any openings or holes may seriously degrade the noise reduction since the sound pressure increases upon striking the barrier wall, and this results in an amplification of the transmitted sound. Materials that provide good sound absorption are concrete, masonry, brick, and granite, among others.

        b.     Site and Improvement Design. Site and structure design techniques are preferred means to minimize noise impacts on noise sensitive uses. Techniques such as building placement, increased landscaped setbacks, orientation of noise-tolerant components (i.e., parking, utility areas, maintenance facilities) between the noise source and the receptor, and the use of a combination of noise barriers and landscaped berms, etc., are the most effective means of reducing noise impacts.

        Builders and designers should consider alternative architectural designs as a means of meeting noise reduction requirements, such as use of noise tolerant rooms (kitchen, garages, bathrooms) to shield other noise sensitive rooms or areas (living rooms, bedrooms).

        i.      Locate bedrooms away from major roadways;

        ii.     For building façades, use architectural design techniques and materials that will help shield noise;

        iii.    Avoid balconies or operable windows facing major travel routes.

        c.     Acoustical Construction. Acoustical construction reduces the interior noise level of a building, but would not reduce exterior noise levels. Acoustical construction is recommended when barriers or site design cannot provide all the attenuation necessary. Acoustical construction techniques include use of double or sound wall placement, double pain windows, sound insulation that absorbs noise.

        2.     General Design Considerations.

        a.     Sound walls should be made of materials which have a good sound absorption rate.

        b.     A combination of sound wall and an earth mound or berm should be utilized along road ways to provide landscape areas and improved noise attenuation.

        c.     Landscaping shall be included in all wall designs to improve the visual impacts of a wall, reduce potential for graffiti and reduce noise reflection.

        d.     Wall design should avoid design that provide a flat even alignment and smooth surface to improve acoustic reflection and visual impacts.

        B.     Noise Standards. On the basis of noise design studies conducted for the proposed subdivision, and with special design and noise attenuation as may be required to be implemented, the development can be reasonably expected to conform to the following noise standards as set forth in the Waterford general plan.

 

Table 16.03.1

Allowable Noise Standards
Measured in Ldn (dBA)

 

Land Use Category

Maximum Exterior

Maximum Interior*

 

Acceptable

Conditionally Acceptable

 

Residential

60

70

45

Live/Work

65

75

50

Hotel/Motel

65

75

50

Office

67

77

55

Other Commercial

70

80

60

Industrial/ Agriculture

70

80

60

Schools, Libraries, Theaters, Churches, Nursing Homes

60

70

45

Parks and Playfields

65

70

NA

Golf Courses, Riding Stables, Cemeteries

70

75

NA

*       It is preferred that the interior noise standard be attained with open windows. However, where the interior noise standard is attainable only with closed windows and doors, mechanical ventilation shall be required.

 

Table 16.03.2

Noise Standards for Stationary Noise Sources

 

Duration

Maximum Allowable Noise

 

Day (7.00 a.m. to 10.00 p.m.)

Night (10.00 p.m. to 7.00 a.m.)

Hourly Leq in dB 1,2

50

45

Maximum Level in dB 1,2

70

65

Maximum Impulsive Noise in dB 1,3

65

60

 

1.      As determined at the property line of the receiver. When determining the effectiveness of noise mitigation measures, the standards may be applied on the receptor side of noise barriers or other property-line noise mitigation measures.

2.      Sound level measurements shall be made with slow meter response.

3.      Sound level measurements shall be made with fast meter response.

(Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.03.080 Energy conservation.
        The design of a subdivision shall provide, to the maximum extent feasible, for future passive or natural heating or cooling opportunities and the use of solar energy generation, pursuant to Map Act Section 66473.1. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.03.090 Cable television and telecommunication service.
        The design of a subdivision shall provide one or more appropriate cable television and telecommunication systems an opportunity to construct, install and maintain any necessary equipment, pursuant to Map Act Section 66473.3. Conduits and man-vaults shall be dedicated to the city. This section is not intended to require free access to a subdivision, but to allow a cable and telecommunication franchises the opportunity to negotiate for providing service. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.03.100 Sidewalks.
        Except as otherwise provided in this title, sidewalks shall be provided for all lots included in the subdivision. The sidewalks shall be of such width as may be required by the Waterford improvement standards, but in no case less than five feet in width. Larger sidewalks may be required in some commercial and industrial districts. Considerations in design are to be given for handicapped persons and senior citizens ease of access and convenience. In addition, the following shall apply:

        A.    Required sidewalk widths may include street signs, lights, fire hydrants, etc. These sidewalks should be located adjacent to the curb. However, in no instance may the clear path of travel be reduced to less than four feet;

        B.     Meandering sidewalks, where used, shall be five feet in width and shall not include street signs, lights, etc.;

        C.     Sidewalks constructed of alternative paving materials as approved by the city engineer, shall have smooth surfaces to ensure pedestrian safe asphalt shall not be used as an alternative paving material; and

        D.    Undulating or uneven sidewalk height is not permitted. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.03.110 Streets and highways.
        The street and highway design shall conform both in width and alignment to any master plan of streets and highways, general plan circulation element or city improvement standards, approved by the city council, and the right-of-way for any such street or highway, including utility easements, sidewalks, etc., shall be indicated on such master plan shall and dedicated offered for dedication to the city of Waterford.

        The following general conditions of design shall apply:

        A.    The street system in the proposed subdivision shall relate functionally to the existing streets in the area adjoining the subdivision.

        B.     The center lines of all streets wherever practicable shall be the continuation of the center lines of existing streets, or shall be off-set a minimum of one hundred feet centerline to centerline for local streets. A greater distance shall be established for larger streets as determined by the city engineer.

        C.     Street intersections shall be required to be as near to a right angle as is practicable.

        D.    Dead-End Streets or Cul-De-Sacs. Where necessary to give access or to permit a satisfactory future subdivision of adjoining land, streets shall extend to the boundary of the property and the resulting dead-end streets may be approved without a turnaround when such streets are less than one hundred and fifty feet in length unless otherwise approved by the fire marshal. In all other cases a turn-around having a minimum radius of forty feet or a comparable area in another form shall be required separated to the depth of one lot from the exterior boundary line or other topographical feature of the subdivision.

        E.     Curve Radius. The center line curve radius of all streets and highways shall conform to accepted engineering standards of design and shall be subject to the approval of the city engineer.

        F.     Grades. No streets or highways shall have a grade of more than two percent except when approved by the city engineer.

        G.    Street Names. All street names shall be as approved by the planning commission. Duplication of existing names within the county of Stanislaus will not be allowed unless the streets are obviously in alignment with existing streets and likely at some time to be a continuation of the other street.

        H.    Part Width Streets. Part width streets shall be dedicated and improved in accordance with the requirements of the city engineer in conformance with the standards established in the circulation element of the general plan or a specific plan. A part width street shall be located along and adjacent to a boundary of the subdivision. The words “Part Width Street” shall be lettered on the map following the name of such streets.

        I.      Street Design. The design and layout of all required streets shall comply with the following standards/requirements:

        1.     In compliance with the circulation element and all other related provisions of the general plan or any applicable specific plan and the city of Waterford improvement standards; and

        2.     Direct driveway access shall be avoided when possible from arterials and collector streets as identified in the circulation element. Circular driveways or turnarounds shall be provided when direct access is unavoidable. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.03.120 Access.
        All subdivisions shall abut upon or have an approved access to a public street. In addition, the following standards shall apply:

        A.    Each lot or unit within the subdivision shall have approved direct access to a public or private street;

        B.     Street layout shall be designed to provide for future access to, and shall not impose undue hardship upon, property adjoining the subdivision;

        C.     No new direct driveway access from individual residential lots onto divided major arterials, major arterials or minor arterials shall be permitted, unless approved by the planning commission upon recommendation of the director and city engineer;

        D.    In the case of private streets, the subdivider shall provide an appropriate method for permanent maintenance subject to approval of the city engineer and the city attorney;

        E.     Reserve strips, or non-access at the end of any street or at the exterior bound of the subdivision, shall be dedicated unconditionally to the city, when required; and

        F.     A tentative tract or parcel map shall provide for at least two different standard routes for ingress and egress. A standard route is a road which is dedicated to the city, has a minimum paved width of at least eighteen feet, and a clear path of travel of at least twenty feet. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.03.130 Alleys.
        Alleys shall be not less than thirty feet in easement width with a minimum of sixteen feet of paved surface width with an additional four feet of unobstructed area on either side of the paved area. Where two alleys intersect, eighteen-foot corner cutoffs measured along the property lines from the point of intersection shall be provided. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.03.140 Median standards.
        A.    Street medians and median islands shall be designed into streets designed as “arterials” or “major collectors” or higher in functional classification for the purpose of limiting cross traffic movements and reducing roadway capacity.

        B.     Median islands shall be installed as a condition of approval of a tentative map at appropriate locations and/or consistent with city general plan and specific plan policies and in compliance with city standards in effect at the time of issuance of a construction permit. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.03.150 Stormwater detention basins.
        When the stormwater plan for a project requires the construction of a storm water detention basin to serve a residential use, the basin shall be designed to be used as an open space or recreation area element of the development with shallow sloping sides, landscaping, grass and the ability to be used for public purposes as a secondary use. In no event is the development of a deep, steep sided and fenced detention basin an acceptable solution to storm water system design. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.03.160 Service roads and off-street parking.
        When the front of any lot proposed for commercial usage fronts on a major thoroughfare or any lot fronts on a state highway, the planning commission may require the dedication and improvement of a service road for use as off-street parking and provide ingress to and egress from such lots. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.03.170 Improvement review.
        In addition to all other requirements herein:

        A.    Improvement work shall not be commenced until plans for such work have been submitted to and approved by the city engineer;

        B.     All improvements shall be constructed under the inspection of, and to the satisfaction of the city engineer;

        C.     Cost of inspection shall be borne by the subdivider. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.03.180 Variances.
        It is realized there are certain parcels of land of such dimensions, subject to such title restrictions, so affected by physical conditions, and/or devoted to such uses that it is impossible for the subdivider to conform to all of the provisions of this chapter when subdividing property. The commission may grant variances from the provisions of this chapter when findings can be made that all the following conditions exist if the variance is approved:

        A.    That the variance granted shall be subject to such conditions as will assure that the adjustment thereby authorized shall not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the same vicinity;

        B.     That special circumstances applicable to the subject property, including size, shape, topography, location, or surroundings, the strict literal application of the provisions of this chapter are found to deprive the subject property of privileges enjoyed by other properties in the vicinity;

        C.     Under the circumstances of any particular case, the requested variance, rather than the sections at issue in this chapter, actually carries out the spirit and intent of the provisions of this chapter;

        D.    In the determination of the planning commission, the overall project will be substantially improved for the benefit of the city and the future occupants of the development as a result of granting a variance to the established city standard; and

        E.     The granting of the requested variance serves a greater purpose than simply making a development possible where the strict adherence to city standards would make the proposed development impossible or impractical. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

Chapter 16.04 LOT LINE OR BOUNDARY ADJUSTMENTS
16.04.010 Generally.
        The procedure outlined in this chapter shall govern the processing of and requirements for lot line or boundary adjustments, pursuant to Subdivision Map Act Section 66412(d). (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.04.020 Lot line adjustment.
        A.    Any adjustment may be filed pursuant to the provisions of this section to adjust the boundaries between two or more adjacent parcels, where the land taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel, and where a greater number of parcels than originally existed is not created, provided the staff can determine that the proposed adjustment does not:

        1.     Create any additional parcels;

        2.     Include any parcels which are not legal as defined in the Municipal Code;

        3.     Impair any existing access or create a need for new access to any adjacent parcels;

        4.     Impair any existing easements or create a need for any new easements serving any adjacent parcels;

        5.     Require substantial alteration of any existing improvements or create a need for any new improvements; and

        6.     Adjust the boundary between parcels for which a covenant of improvement requirements has been recorded and all required improvements stated therein have not been completed unless the city determines the proposed adjustment will not significantly affect the covenant of improvement requirements.

        B.     Nothing in this chapter is intended to prohibit a subdivider from proposing lot line adjustments in conjunction with a subdivision of land which is being processed by means of a final map or parcel map. In addition, an applicant may follow the minor subdivision procedure set forth in this title to accomplish a lot line adjustment as an alternative to following the procedures in this section. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.04.030 Requirements.
        A.    A lot line adjustment diagram, as described in this chapter, is required for all lot line adjustments.

        B.     The applicant for a lot line adjustment shall deliver to the planning director, and copies of a lot line adjustment diagram, as specified by the planning director, on which the proposed lot line adjustment is shown.

        C.     At the time of delivering the lot line adjustment diagram, the applicant shall pay to the planning director a fee which shall be established from time to time by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.04.040 Application form and content.
        A.    The lot line adjustment diagram shall be on paper eight and one-half by eleven inches or eighteen by twenty-six inches. The lot line adjustment diagram shall be legibly drawn in pencil or ink and shall use a decimal or an engineer’s scale adequate and appropriate for the diagram. The lot line adjustment diagram shall clearly show the following information:

        1.     The boundary lines of the original parcels, with dimensions indicated in feet and decimals thereof. Such information shall be based on existing survey or other record data;

        2.     The proposed division lines with dimensions and the net area of each lot within such lot line adjustment;

        3.     All existing surface and underground structures and improvements located on the original parcels within fifty feet of the boundary of each unit of land to be transferred or conveyed between adjoining lots or parcels;

        4.     The names, locations, and widths of all abutting streets;

        5.     The location, purpose and width of all existing streets and easements affected by or in close proximity to the land to be conveyed between adjoining lots;

        6.     The existing use of the property;

        7.     The existing water supply;

        8.     The existing method of sewage disposal;

        9.     A description of all the property involved in the lot line adjustment sufficient to identify it on the county assessor’s maps, including the section, township and range in which the property is located;

        10.   Current title report of both properties along with names and addresses of all lien holders of record.

        B.     Such other information as the planning director determines is necessary for him or her to properly consider the proposed lot line adjustment.

        C.     The lot line adjustment diagram shall be accompanied by the following information:

        1.     Legal descriptions of each adjusted parcel shown on the lot line adjustment diagram.

        2.     A certificate signed by the legal owner or owners and lien holders of public record or an authorized agent stating that a lot line adjustment is requested and certifying that the information shown on the diagram is true and correct. If the certificate is signed by an agent of the legal owner or lien title holder, such agent shall submit written authorization from the owner to file the diagram. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.04.050 Consideration of lot line adjustment diagram.
        A     In his or her review of lot line adjustment diagrams, the planning director shall limit the review and approval to a determination of whether or not the parcels resulting from the lot line adjustment will conform to zoning and building ordinances. The planning director shall not impose conditions or exactions on the approval of the lot line adjustment except to conform to local zoning and building ordinances, or to facilitate the relocation of existing utilities, infrastructure, or easements.

        B.     When the planning director determines that conditions or exactions may be necessary in order to carry out the provisions of this title, he or she shall immediately refer the lot line adjustment diagram to the city engineer for review and comment:

        1.     The city engineer/city surveyor shall review the diagram and legal descriptions and determine what conditions or exactions, if any, should be placed on the application.

        2.     The city engineer shall not require any conditions or exactions on the lot line adjustment except to conform to local zoning and building ordinances, or to facilitate the relocation of existing utilities, infrastructures or easements.

        3.     The city engineer and public works director shall thereafter advise the planning director what conditions or exactions are to be required.

        4.     If the city engineer determines that conditions or exactions are required, the engineer shall determine at what time such conditions or exactions are to be fulfilled under the same provisions of this chapter as they apply to parcel maps.

        5.     Agreements for fulfilling such conditions or exactions, security for such agreements and all other matters pertaining to such conditions or exactions shall also be governed by the same provisions of this title as they apply to parcel maps.

        C.     The planning director shall approve the proposed lot line adjustment whenever all of the following conditions are complied with:

        1.     The lots which will result from the proposed lot line adjustment conform to all the applicable zoning and building ordinances in effect and comply with regulations set forth in this title pertaining to size, shape, and dimensions of lots in subdivisions for which tentative and final maps are required.

        2.     The proposed lot line adjustment will not, under the circumstances of the particular case, be detrimental to the health, safety, or general welfare of persons residing or working in the neighborhood or to the general welfare of the city.

        D.    In addition to any other basis for disapproval, the planning director may disapprove a lot line adjustment if he or she determines that there is no real relationship between the existing parcels and the proposed new parcels and that the proposal is more adequately processed as a merger and re-subdivision pursuant to Section 6649a.20-1/2 of the Subdivision Map Act of the state of California.

        E.     The planning director shall review the proposed lot line adjustment diagram and, within thirty calendar days after the lot line adjustment diagram was filed, approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the lot line adjustment diagram. Said time limits may be extended by mutual consent of the planning director and the applicant.

        1.     The planning director shall give written notice of his action to the applicant and to affected city departments and to each public and private agency to which a copy of the lot line adjustment diagram was transmitted.

        F.     If the planning director approved the lot line adjustment diagram, the written decision of the planning director approving the adjustment shall be filed for record with the county recorder. Such decision shall contain a legal description of each parcel resulting from the lot line adjustment.

        1.     The lot line adjustment shall not be effective until the decision of the planning director approving the diagram has been recorded as set forth in subsection (E)(1) of this section. Said decision shall not be recorded until the appeal period specified in this title has expired without an appeal having been filed or until the applicant waives his right to appeal, whichever occurs first. If an appeal is filed, said decision shall not be recorded until the termination of the appeal proceedings.

        2.     If conditions or exactions are required by the city engineer, the decision of the planning director shall not be recorded until the required conditions and exactions have been fulfilled and, if required by the city engineer, an agreement with security is on file for fulfilling such conditions or exactions.

        3.     If a lot line adjustment covers property owned by two or more different persons, the decision of the planning director approving the lot line adjustment shall be recorded simultaneously with the recording of the deeds which are necessary to make the conveyances which the approved diagram allows.

        4.     The recording of the decision of the planning director shall supersede all prior recorded parcel maps, subdivision maps or other documents which create the superseded parcels and the boundaries created by the decision of the planning director shall prevail over the earlier recorded boundaries, and the recorded decision of the planning director shall so state. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

Chapter 16.05 MERGER OF PARCELS
16.05.010 Purpose.
        This chapter implements the procedure prescribed in Section 66451 of the Subdivision Map Act for consolidation of contiguous parcels or units of land held by the same owner without reversion to acreage. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.05.020 Applicability.
        Parcel mergers apply to contiguous parcels or units of real property, under common ownership, which meet the requirements of Section 16.05.030 of this chapter. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.05.030 Requirement for parcel mergers.
        A parcel merger may be made with any parcel or unit with a contiguous parcel or unit held by the same owner if any one of the contiguous parcels or units does not conform to standards for minimum parcel size, under the Zoning Ordinance and if all of the following requirements are satisfied:

        A.    At least one of the affected parcels is undeveloped by any structure for which a building permit was issued or for which a building permit was not required at the time of construction, or is developed only with an accessory structure or accessory structures, or is developed with a single structure, other than an accessory structure, that is also partially sited on a contiguous parcel or unit.

        B.     With respect to any affected parcel, one or more of the following conditions shall exist on at least one of the parcels to be merged:

        1.     It comprises less than five thousand square feet in area at the time of the determination of merger;

        2.     It was not created in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances in effect at the time of its creation;

        3.     It does not meet current standards for sewage disposal and domestic water supply;

        4.     It does not meet slope stability standards;

        5.     It has no legal access which is adequate for vehicular and safety equipment access and maneuverability;

        6.     Its development would create health or safety hazards; and

        7.     It is inconsistent with the city general plan and any applicable specific plan, other than minimum lot size or density standards. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.05.040 Initiation of mergers by property owner.
        Applications to merge contiguous parcels shall be made to the planning director on forms provided by the planning department and shall include the following:

        A.    An exhibit, drawn to scale, delineating the existing parcel boundaries and the location of existing structures, easements and public rights-of-way;

        B.     Copies of the latest grant deeds for the existing parcels;

        C.     A legal description and plat, drawn to scale on reproducible mylar or other approved medium, showing the boundaries of the new parcel (after the merger). The legal description and plat shall be appropriate for recordation with the county recorder;

        D.    A preliminary title report; and

        E.     Written consent of all owners of record interest. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.05.050 Processing of owner initiated mergers.
        The planning director shall transmit a completed application to the city engineer for review and recommendation and may grant approval of the request for merger if the following criteria are met:

        A.    The merger complies with the standards specified in Section 16.05.030(A);

        B.     The parcel will be consistent with the zoning of all the involved property;

        C.     The parcel will not conflict with the location of existing structures on the property;

        D.    The parcel will not be deprived of adequate access as a result of the merger;

        E.     Access to adjoining properties will not be restricted as a result of the merger; and

        F.     No new lot lines are created by the merger. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.05.060 Initiation of merger by city.
        Parcel mergers shall be initiated by the planning director through the filing, with the county recorder, of a notice of intention to determine status. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.05.070 Notice of intention to determine status.
        The planning director shall initiate a parcel merger by filing, with the county recorder, a notice of intention to determine status. The notice shall identify the subject property and list the owners of record as determined from the county deed records. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.05.080 Notification of property owner.
        The planning director may cause to be mailed, by certified mail to the current record owner of the affected parcels, a copy of the notice of intention to determine status and a notification to the property owner that the affected parcels may be merged pursuant to standards specified herein. The notification shall advise the owner that he or she may, within thirty days, request, in writing, a hearing to present evidence that the property does not meet the criteria for merger. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.05.090 Director’s hearing.
        If a written request for a hearing on the determination of status is received by the planning department within sixty days of recordation of the notice of intention to determine status, the planning director shall set a time, date and place for a director’s hearing.

        A.    The city shall notify the property owner of the time and place of the director’s hearing by certified mail. The hearing shall be conducted not more than sixty days following the receipt of the property owner’s request for hearing, but may be postponed or continued with the mutual consent of planning director and the property owner.

        B.     At the hearing, the property owner shall be given the opportunity to present evidence that the affected property does not meet the requirements for merger as set forth in Section 16.05.030.

        C.     At the conclusion of the hearing, the planning director shall make a determination as to whether the affected parcels are to be merged or not to be merged and shall notify the owner of his or her determination.

        D.    The planning director may make a determination of merger if the affected property meets the standards for merger specified in Section 16.05.030. The planning director may make a determination of nonmerger whether or not the affected property meets the standards for merger specified in Section 16.05.030. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.05.100 Planning director’s determination without hearing—Notice to owner.
        If the property owner fails to file a request for hearing within the thirty-day period as provided in Section 16.05.080, the planning director may, at any time thereafter, make a determination as to whether the affected parcels are to be merged. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.05.110 Filing notice of merger or notice of nonmerger.
        A.    If the planning director makes a determination of merger, he or she shall cause to be recorded a notice of merger no later than ninety days after the mailing of the notice of intention to determine status and no later than thirty days following a hearing on the matter, if a hearing is held. The notice of merger shall specify the names of the record owners and describe the affected property. The merger becomes effective on the date the notice of merger is filed with the county recorder’s office.

        B.     If the planning director determines that the subject property shall not be merged, he or she shall cause to be recorded a release of the notice of intention to determine status and shall mail a clearance letter to the current owner of the subject property. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

Chapter 16.06 REVERSION TO ACREAGE
16.06.010 Purpose.
        Reversion to acreage is a means of recombining land which was previously subdivided. The process may be used to nullify rights and/or obligations effected by a previous subdivision of the property. Reversions to acreage require a tentative map and either a final map or a parcel map and shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 6, Article 1 of the Subdivision Map Act. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.06.020 Applicability.
        Reversion to acreage applies to the reconsolidation of previously subdivided land where:

        A.    A rescission is sought of rights acquired or obligations incurred under a previous subdivision of the property; and

        B.     The parcels do not meet requirements for reconsolidation through a parcel merger or lot line adjustment. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.06.030 Filing of reversions to acreage.
        Proceedings for reversion to acreage may be initiated by motion of the city council or by all of the owners of record of the real property within the subdivision. Requests by property owners shall be filed with the planning department on an approved city application form, accompanied by the required filling fee. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.06.040 Procedure.
        For the purpose of reversion of subdivided land to acreage, provided that no lots have been sold, no streets improved and where it is not the intent to replot the area, the following procedure shall be followed:

        A.    Three copies of record map of area proposed for reversion to acreage shall be filed with the planning commission ten days prior to meeting of said planning commission. Each copy of the map shall be accompanied by the following:

        1.     Evidence of title and non-use or lack of necessity of streets or easement which are to be vacated or abandoned.

        2.     Any streets or easements to be left in effect after the reversion shall be adequately delineated on the map. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.06.050 Action on map.
        A.    Action on Map. The planning commission shall determine whether it is in the best interests of the area to approve such action, and within ninety days, after the determination that the application is complete, shall approve or disapprove the action and forward its recommendations to the city council along with evidence of title and non-use of streets and easements.

        B.     Action by the City Council. At its first regular meeting following receipt of the recommendation of the planning commission, the council shall set a public hearing and give notice as required by law. After said public hearing, the council shall consider such request for reversion of subdivided land to acreage and if said council deems it to be in the best interest of the area, it may approve such request. The clerk of the council shall certify any map approved by the council by signing the certificate provided for on the map.

        C.     Findings for Approval. A request for reversion to acreage shall be approved if the dedications or offers of dedication to be vacated or abandoned by the reversion to acreage are unnecessary for present or prospective public purposes and one of the following findings can be made:

        1.     All owners of an interest in the real property within the subdivision have consented to reversion; or

        2.     None of the improvements required have been made within two years from the date the final or parcel map was filed for record, or within the time allowed by agreement for completion of the improvements, whichever is the later; or

        3.     No lots shown on the final or parcel map have been sold within five years from the date such map was filed for record.

        D.    Conditions of Approval. A reversion to acreage request is subject to conditional approval through the tentative map review process. Conditions will be determined on a case-by-case basis, but shall include, if appropriate:

        1.     Dedications or offers of dedication;

        2.     Retention of all previously paid fees; and

        3.     Retention of any portion of required improvement security or deposits made in guarantee of improvements which are necessary despite reversion of the property to acreage.

        E.     Any map filed for the purpose of reversion of subdivided land to acreage shall be conspicuously designated with the title, “The Purpose of This Map is a Reversion of Acreage.”

        F.     Within fifteen days after approval of the city council, said map shall be recorded in the county recorder’s office. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.06.060 Effective date of reversions.
        Reversion shall be effective upon the final map being filed for record by the county recorder. Thereupon, all dedications and offers of dedication not shown on the reversion map shall be of no further force or effect and all fees, deposits and improvement security not retained pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be released. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

Chapter 16.07 TENTATIVE SUBDIVISION MAPS
16.07.010 Purpose.
        Tentative subdivision maps provide a means for obtaining review and approval of proposed land divisions. Tentative maps shall be prepared and approved in accordance with the Subdivision Map Act and the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.07.020 Generally.
        A.    A tentative subdivision map shall be required for all subdivision, reconfiguration and consolidation of real property for which a final map is required.

        B      The content and form, submittal and approval of tentative maps shall be governed by the provisions of this chapter. An application for approval of a tentative map pursuant to this chapter shall not be accepted for filing until the subdivision has been determined by the department to be consistent with the general plan, applicable specific plans and this Municipal Code. Additionally, all required discretionary city approvals shall have been previously obtained or applications for same shall be filed concurrently with the tentative map. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.07.030 Exclusions.
        This Municipal Code shall be inapplicable to those exclusions provided in the Map Act Section 66412 of the Government Code. Except as otherwise provided in this code, the transfer of land to or from a public agency as described in Map Act Section 66428 and the creation of a parcel for purposes of dedication to a public agency, where the parcel is not created for the purpose of sale, lease or finance, shall be exempt from the provisions of this title. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.07.040 Effect of annexation.
        Any subdivision subject to annexation to the city shall comply with the Map Act, Section 66413 of the Government Code. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.07.050 Multiple maps.
        When any subdivision proposal includes the intention to file multiple maps, such intent must be stated in accordance with requirements of the Subdivision Map Act at the tentative map phase of the process. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.07.060 Remainder parcels.
        Remainder parcels shall be designated on every tentative final or parcel map in accordance with the requirements of Subdivision Map Act Section 66424.6. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.07.070 Application materials.
        Application for a tentative subdivision map or maps shall comply with Chapter 16.03 as to design, and shall include the following materials:

        A.    The city tentative subdivision map application form and preliminary fee deposit in accordance with city policy;

        B.     Ten copies, one digital PMT copy, and one transparency of seven and one-half inch by nine and one-half inch image on eight inch by ten inch plastic of the tentative map, one reproducible eleven inch by seventeen inch copy and the statement for the proposed subdivision of any land;

        C.     A preliminary title report, acceptable to the department, showing the legal owners at the time of filing the tentative map, dated within ninety days of the application being deemed complete;

        D.    Information shall be submitted, as required by the department, to allow a determination on environmental review to be made in compliance with CEQA.

        1.     The various time limits contained in this Municipal Code for taking action on tentative maps shall not commence until the subdivision application is deemed complete for processing, pursuant to Public Resources Code Section 21151.5 and Map Act Sections 66452.1 and 66452.2,

        2.     The subdivider shall deposit and pay all fees as may be required for the preparation and processing of environmental review documents;

        E.     For purposes of a field investigation and prior to filing of a tentative map of a subdivision, critical points on proposed hillside roads as determined by the city engineer shall be slope staked by flagging to indicate the general limits of cut and fill slopes if average cross slope exceeds ten percent. Typical locations of slopes staked shall be designated on a copy of the tentative map;

        F.     Justification and reasons for any exceptions to the provisions of this title or any other provisions of the city;

        G.    A copy of restrictive covenants if proposed by the subdivider;

        H.    Preliminary Engineering Calculations. Information shall be submitted as required by the standard engineering specifications to demonstrate the adequacy of the design of the proposed improvements. This information shall include design parameters and engineering calculations, and be in conformance with the policies and procedures of public works;

        I.      Phasing. If the subdivider plans to file multiple final maps on the tentative map, a written notice to this effect shall be filed with the department. Phase lines may be shown on the map(s);

        J.      A preliminary soils report shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer and shall include the following:

        1.     Such report shall be based on adequate test borings or excavations and shall recommend corrective action. The preliminary soil report may be waived if the building official determines that, due to the knowledge his department has as to the qualities of the soil within the subdivision or lot, no preliminary analysis is necessary,

        2.     If the preliminary soil report indicates the presence of critically expansive soils or other soil problems which, if not corrected, would lead to structural defects, a soil investigation of each lot so affected in the subdivision shall be made by a registered civil engineer;

        K.    A Phase I hazards study shall be prepared by a professional licensed to perform such studies in accordance with state law. A Phase II study shall be prepared based on the findings and conclusions of the Phase I report;

        L.     Accompanying the tentative map, or placed on the map, shall be statements by the subdivider containing the following:

        1.     Existing zoning and proposed uses of the land,

        2.     Intentions regarding erosion control and improvements to be constructed, as required in Chapter 16.03 and by other ordinances of the city,

        3.     Building setback lines,

        4.     Proposed source of water supply and method of sewage disposal,

        5.     Proposed tree removal, preservation and planting,

        6.     Proposed public areas to be dedicated and common area or scenic easements proposed, including designation of public and private streets. If common areas are proposed, method of maintenance shall be stated,

        7.     Proposed development of lots, that is, whether for sale as lots, fully developed house and lot, or for lease and/or for financing purposes;

        M.    A copy of any existing or proposed conditions, restrictions, or covenants regulating or restricting the use of the land within the subdivision shall be attached to the above statement;

        N.    Any other data or reports deemed necessary by the planning department, or city engineer (i.e., traffic, noise, biological survey, cultural resources, water studies, as required by local regulation or state law, etc.). (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.07.080 Form of tentative map.
        A.    Prior to the presentation of a formal tentative map, the subdivider may present sketches of his proposal to the planning director, commission or to the city engineer. Tentative maps shall be eighteen inches by twenty-six inches in size.

        B.     Every tentative map shall be clearly and legibly reproduced in a manner acceptable to the department and shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. The tentative map shall contain, but be not limited to, the following information:

        1.     A key or location map showing roads, adjoining subdivisions, cities, creeks, railroads, and other data sufficient to locate the proposed subdivision and show its relation to the community;

        2.     The tract name and number, date, north arrow, and scale;

        3.     Sufficient data to define the boundaries of the tract, or a legal description of the tract. Tentative map to show any proposed units of final map;

        4.     Name and address of record owner or owners;

        5.     Name and address of the subdivider if different from the owner or owners;

        6.     Name and business address of the person preparing the map;

        7.     The contour of the existing and proposed land at intervals of one foot elevation up to five percent slopes; two-foot intervals up to ten percent and five-foot intervals over ten percent. Contours shall be indicated in contiguous lands for a distance of two hundred feet. Every fifth contour line shall be a heavier weight line;

        8.     The location and outline to scale of each existing building or structure within the subdivision and the location and designation of uses of each structure in contiguous areas within one hundred feet of the boundary thereof; noting thereon whether or not such building or structure within the subdivision is to be removed from or remain in the subdivision, and its existing and proposed use;

        9.     The location and name of all streets as approved by the fire department and the department of public works/city engineer along with width, grade of streets within the subdivision and offered for dedication and approximate radii of all curves;

        10.   Width, approximate location and purpose of all existing and proposed easements and easements adjoining such land;

        11.   The width and approximate grade of all streets, highways, alleys and other rights-of-way whether proposed for dedication or not;

        12.   The location, name and width of adjoining and contiguous highways, streets, and ways;

        13.   Location and size of all pipelines and structures existing or to be used in connection with the subdivision;

        14.   The location of vertical river or creek access easements and irrigation structures, by metes and bounds or other description sufficient in detail to show designation width of ten feet and designation of area as access easement or floodway or habitat protection zones as required by city policy;

        15.   Location and character of existing and proposed utilities;

        16.   The width, location and purpose of all existing and proposed easements;

        17.   All lots numbered consecutively throughout each block in the development; the approximate dimensions of all lots; lot areas shall be shown for all lots not rectangular in shape;

        18.   Lot areas, number of lots, minimum lot size, average lot size and density;

        19.   Gross area of subdivision, proposed park land, public facilities, and open space calculated to nearest one-tenth acre;

        20.   The horizontal and vertical location of existing fences, ditches, wells, sumps, cesspools, reservoirs, sewers, culverts, drain pipes, underground structure, utility lines or sand, gravel or other excavation within the subdivision, noting thereon whether they are to be abandoned or used. The location of utility lines and sand, gravel or other excavation within three hundred feet of any portion of the subdivision shall be shown;

        21.   Type, circumference and drip-line of existing trees with a trunk diameter of four inches or more. Any trees proposed to be removed shall be so indicated;

        22.   The approximate location of all areas subject to inundation or storm water overflow; the location, width, and direction of flow of each water course; and the flood zone designation as indicated on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (“FIRM”), as defined in Title 15.32 (Flood Damage Prevention) of this Municipal Code;

        23.   The names and numbers of adjacent subdivisions and the names of owners of adjacent unplatted land;

        24.   A statement of present land use designation(s) and of existing and proposed uses of the property;

        25.   List the applicable agencies that provide service to the proposed subdivision (i.e., school district(s), gas, electric, water and sewer, telephone, cable TV, etc.);

        26.   The location and size of existing wells, septic tanks, sanitary sewers, fire hydrants, water mains and storm drains. The approximate slope and size of existing sewers and storm drains shall be indicated. The location of existing overhead utility lines on-site or on peripheral streets shall be indicated;

        27.   Proposed on-site and off-site improvements to be illustrated shall include, but not be limited to:

        a.     The location, grade, centerline radius and arc length of curves, pavement, right-of-way width and name of all streets. Typical sections of all streets shall be shown. Proposed private streets shall be clearly indicated,

        b.     The location and radius of all curb returns and cul-de-sacs,

        c.     The location, width and purpose of all easements;

        28.   Proposed recreation sites, bike paths, trails and parks for private or public use, which shall be indicated as lettered lots;

        29.   Proposed common areas and areas to be dedicated to public open space, which shall be indicated as lettered lots;

        30.   The location and size of proposed and existing sanitary sewers, fire hydrants, water mains and storm drains. Proposed slopes and approximate elevations of sanitary sewers and storm drains shall be indicated;

        31.   Any proposed locations and sizes of storm water runoff retention basins;

        32.   Subdivision improvements outside of the boundary including right-of-way, topography, and proposed work;

        33.   If the subdivider plans to develop the site in units or phases, the proposed units or phases and their proposed sequence of construction shall be shown;

        34.   If a condominium or similar development is proposed, the word “condominium” or appropriate name shall be indicated on the tentative map;

        35.   Upon the written request of the subdivider, the department may waive any of the above tentative map content requirements if the department determines the type of subdivision does not justify compliance with these requirements, the department determines that other circumstances justify a waiver. The department may require other drawings, data, or information as deemed necessary to accomplish the purposes of the Subdivision Map Act and this Municipal Code. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.07.090 Department review.
        The tentative map application shall be filed with the Waterford planning department. The application shall be determined by the department to be complete only when the content and form of the tentative map conform to the requirements of this title and when all accompanying data and reports, as required by this title and all fees and/or deposits as required have been submitted and accepted by the department in conformance with Government Code Section 65943.

        A.    The application shall not be deemed complete until all applicable provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act have been complied with.

        B.     If the application requires an amendment to the general or specific plan, annexation, rezoning or prezoning, the subdivision application cannot be deemed complete until those processes have been completed and approved. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.07.100 Extension of permit streamlining time limits.
        Any applicable time limits for acting on the tentative map application may be extended by mutual written consent of the subdivider and the city, as outlined in Map Act Section 66451.1. A waiver of application time limits may be required to permit concurrent processing of related project requests. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.07.110 Tentative map review and distribution procedures.
        A.    Copies of the tentative map shall be submitted to the planning department for review for completeness. A tentative map shall be considered ready for the consideration of the planning commission when the planning director determines that maps and all required supplementary data have been submitted, when the map complies with this title, and when California Environmental Quality Act provisions have been met. If the subdivision is a portion of a larger area which may be subdivided later, the tentative map shall indicate the ultimate plan for the whole.

        B.     Revised Tentative Map Fee. If, subsequent to the approval of a tentative map by the city council, the subdivider submits a revised tentative map as a substitute for the tentative map theretofore approved, or requests a change of any of the conditions approved by the council, the subdivider shall pay a fee to be established by resolution of the city council from time to time hereafter enacted. The fee may be waived when revision is initiated by the council. The time of original approval shall not be extended by revision approval.

        C.     Distribution of Copies. Upon the submission to the planning department of a tentative map and the requisite number of copies thereof, the planning department shall retain two copies and shall transmit copies to the following agencies, departments or officers: city engineer, Stanislaus County consolidated fire district; public works director; city manager and/or others as may be designated by the city manager; if the subdivision is within one mile of a state highway, the Caltrans District 10 Offices in Stockton; the utility companies serving the area including, but not limited to, MID and PG&E; and any municipality as may be required by law.

        D.    Reports. Within a period of not more than sixteen days from the receipt of a copy of a tentative map, each officer or department to which a copy shall have been transmitted shall file with the planning department a report showing changes necessary to make the map meet the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act, this title, and other applicable ordinances. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.07.120 Action by the planning commission.
        A.    The planning commission shall act on any tentative map in accordance with the Permit Streamlining Act found in Government Code. If the map proposed for filing is a corrected tentative map, seven copies of the corrected map and a transparency of seven and one-half inch by nine and one-half inch image on eight-inch by ten-inch plastic shall be filed.

        B.     The planning commission shall recommend city council consideration of whether the tentative map of a standard subdivision is in conformity with provisions of law and this title, and shall recommend findings required by Section 11549.5 of the Business and Professions Code and thereupon recommend approval, conditional approval or disapproval of said map and shall report its action to the subdivider. The report of the planning commission with said findings shall be submitted to the city council.

        C.     The planning commission may, in addition to other causes therefore, recommend disapproval of a tentative map because of flood, inundation, geologic or slide hazards and may require protective improvements to be constructed, as a condition of approval of the map. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.07.130 Action by the city council.
        After receipt of the report of the planning commission on the tentative map the city council shall act thereon in accordance with the requirements of state law. The city council shall approve, conditionally approve or deny said tentative map in accordance with this title and other provisions of state and local law. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.07.140 Grounds for map denial.
        The tentative map may be denied by the commission and/or council on any of the grounds contained in the Map Act, general plan or the Municipal Code.

        A.    The commission and/or council shall deny the tentative map if it makes any of the following mandatory findings contained in Map Act Section 66474:

        1.     That the proposed map is not consistent with applicable general and specific plans as specified in Section 65451;

        2.     That the design or improvement of the proposed subdivision is not consistent with applicable general and specific plans;

        3.     That the site is not physically suitable for the type of development;

        4.     That the site is not physically suitable for the proposed density of development;

        5.     That the design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements are likely to cause substantial environmental damage or substantially and avoidably injure fish or wildlife or their habitat;

        6.     That the design of the subdivision or type of improvements is likely to cause serious public health problems;

        7.     That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will conflict with easements, acquired by the public at large, for access through or use of, property within the proposed subdivision. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.07.150 Minimum conditions of subdivision approval.
        A.    The final subdivision map shall conform to all applicable provisions of the Subdivision Map Act, and city of Waterford Municipal Code (WMC) and the minimum conditions listed below:

        1.     In the event that multiple final subdivision maps are submitted, the city reserves the right, as provided in Section 66456.1 of the Subdivision Map Act to require improvements and/or a deferred improvement agreement, bond or other surety arrangement, between the developer and the city as a condition of the final map in accordance with Chapter 16.12 of this title;

        2.     Final inspection of the sewer system shall be as approved by the city engineer and/or director of public works at the developer’s cost;

        3.     The applicant shall petition the city council for the formation of a district, or annexation to an existing district, established pursuant to the provisions of the California Landscaping and Lighting Act of 1972 to accomplish any or all purposes permitted by the Act;

        4.     Public and city utility easements shall be granted as required by the respective agencies;

        5.     Each home within the subdivision shall have house numbers a minimum of four inches in height affixed to a contrasting background with either internal or external lighting and located in such a manner as to be visible from the fronting street;

        6.     The applicant shall enter into a land development agreement, as set forth in Chapter 16.14 of this title, with the city for installation of public improvements in an amount determined sufficient by the city engineer and in a form approved by the city attorney;

        7.     All fees shall be paid pursuant to fee schedules of the city in effect at the time of payment, except as the provisions for establishing rates may be in conflict with state law;

        8.     All street light shall be installed in the public right-of-way and dedicated to the city;

        9.     If the project is constructed as a phased development, the applicant shall be responsible for taking timely action in renew or extend any portions of the tentative map for which a final map has not been filed;

        10.   The developer shall provide improvement security, complete all necessary agreements with the city, and commence construction of all subsequent phases of the subdivision within twelve months of the date of the issuance for the initial permit for the preceding phase of construction;

        11.   Utility lines shall be stubbed out to the boundary of the subdivision or to the centerline of adjacent streets at locations specified in the Waterford sewer, storm drain and water master plans and as designated by the city engineer for future extension to adjacent properties;

        12.   The type and location of fire hydrants shall be subject to the approval of the Stanislaus County consolidated fire protection district;

        13.   The street trees shall be the type approved by the director of public works and shall be planted at locations and pursuant to planting standards approved by the director;

        14.   The entire subdivision shall comply with all flood hazard reduction standards as provided in Chapter 15.30 of the Waterford Municipal Code;

        15.   The applicant shall prepare and submit for approval improvement and grading plans for all streets, sidewalks, curbs, gutter, valley gutters, street lights, street striping and stenciling, fire hydrants, and all underground conduit systems for review and approval by the city engineer;

        16.   The applicant shall prepare and submit for approval an on-site utility plan indicating capacities, locations, connections to city lines, easements, metering, and compliance with city, county, and state specifications and also including storm drainage calculations for the proposed storm drainage system;

        17.   Applicant shall prepare and submit a storm drainage plan depicting drainage calculations, the gutter flow length to catch basins, the size of lines, and compliance with the city of Waterford’s storm drain master plan. In addition the plans shall indicate the quality, the direction, and ultimate outfall for surrounding parcels, and details of detention ponds, ground water recharge, lift stations and treatment of any water discharged into a surface water system;

        18.   Applicant shall prepare and submit a water service plan depicting both potable and non-potable water use calculations, volume, pressure and the size of lines, well locations, storage, treatment facilities, etc. in compliance with the city of Waterford’s water master plan. In addition the plans shall indicate the details of system design, nonpotable water system use and pressure zones proposed for both potable and nonpotable water;

        19.   Applicant shall prepare and submit a sewer plan depicting sewer flow calculations, the size of lines, and compliance with the city of Waterford’s sewer master plan. In addition the plans shall indicate the details of system design and any proposed lift stations;

        20.   The applicants shall prepare and submit for approval, an improvement and grading plan for lot driveways and pads which shows details for driveway structural sections and required retaining walls;

        21.   All conditions, covenants, and restrictions proposed for recordation shall be submitted to the planning department for review and approval;

        22.   Water and sewer lines and drainage facilities shall be sized in such a manner as to comply with the city master plan and to provide capacity for adjacent parcels;

        23.   Traffic-control signs, street-name signs and street painting shall be installed at locations approved by the public works director in consultation with the Waterford chief of police;

        24.   Any underground structures such as wells, septic tanks, and gas tanks shall be removed or filled and sealed to the satisfaction of the city engineer;

        25.   If the project is to be phased, applicant shall file plan reflecting the limits of, and continuity of, streets and utilities;

        26.   The map shall identify any existing structures to remain on the site and plans for connection to city utilities and any existing structures within one hundred feet of the subdivision boundary; and

        27.   The applicant shall perform all mitigation measures identified in any document prepared pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act.

        B.     In the event that the project requires approvals by the local agency formation commission, a final map shall not be approved until such time as governmental reorganization (annexation) has been approved by all responsible agencies. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.07.160 Improvement plan.
        After the approval by the city council of the tentative map of any subdivision, the subdivider shall furnish the following information to the city engineer:

        A.    A grading plan consisting of cross sections and finished grades of all lots to be graded as a part of the improvement of the subdivision, and of all roads, streets, and highways in the proposed subdivision.

        B.     Plan and profile drawing on all streets, including water, sewer and drainage improvements. Utilities may be shown in plan only. Improvement plan scales shall be one inch equals forty feet horizontally in plan; one inch equals four feet vertical in profile, unless otherwise approved by the city engineer.

        C.     Estimated costs of improvements to be constructed and estimated cost of conditions of approval of the subdivision.

        D.    Any other pertinent information required by the conditional approval of the city council including a soils report on filled areas or areas proposed to be filled; and in all street and alley rights-of-way at intervals not exceeding one thousand feet and/or any change in soil conditions. The soils report and analysis will be in accordance with methods approved by the state of California for “R” values, sieve analysis and sand equivalent. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.07.170 Expiration of tentative maps.
        A.    The approval or conditional approval of a tentative map shall expire twenty-four months following approval by the planning commission or city council, as appropriate. However, the map may be extended if the subdivider has complied with Map Act Section 66452.6(a) and (e). An extension to the expiration date may also be approved pursuant to Section 16.07.180 of this title.

        B.     The approval or conditional approval of a tentative map may be approved for up to thirty-six months by the planning commission or city council, as appropriate, in conformance with Subdivision Map Act Section 66452.6.

        C.     The period of time outlined in subsection A of this section shall not include any period of time during which a lawsuit has been filed, whether or not first appealed to the council, and is pending in a court of competent jurisdiction involving the approval or conditional approval of a tentative map only if a stay of the time period is approved by the commission. After service of the initial petition or complaint upon the city, the subdivider shall, in writing, to the director, request a stay in the time period of the tentative map. Within forty days after receiving the request, the planning commission or city council, as appropriate shall either stay the time period for up to five years or deny the requested stay. The request for the stay shall be a hearing with notice to the subdivider and to the appellant, and upon conclusion of the hearing, the commission or council shall render its decision.

        D.    The period of time outlined in subsection A of this section shall not include any period of time during which a development moratorium is in effect pursuant to Subdivision Map Act Section 66452-6.

        E.     Expiration of an approved or conditionally approved tentative map shall terminate all proceedings and no final map or parcel map of all or any portion of the real property included within the tentative map shall be filed without first processing a new tentative map. The final map or parcel map documents submitted for filing must be accepted as adequate for approval by the city engineer prior to the expiration date. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.07.180 Extensions.
        A.    Request by Subdivider. The subdivider may request an extension of the expiration date of the approved or conditionally approved tentative map by written application to the department. The application shall be filed before the map is to expire and shall state the reasons for requesting the extension. The subdivider shall be solely responsible for filing the application.

        B.     Commission Action. The department shall review the request and submit the application for the extension, together with a report to the commission for approval, conditional approval, or denial to the planning commission. A copy of the department’s report and recommendation shall be forwarded to the subdivider prior to the meeting on the extension. In approving, conditionally approving, or denying the request for extension, the commission shall make findings supporting its decision. The subdivider shall pay any increase in unpaid applicable development fees which have occurred since the date of the approval or conditional approval of the tentative map.

        C.     Conditions of Approval. In granting an extension, new conditions may be imposed and existing conditions may be revised.

        D.    Time Limit of Extensions. The maximum time that a tentative map can be extended shall be in accordance with Subdivision Map Act Section 66452.6(e) and shall not exceed ten years. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.07.190 Minor amendments.
        A.    Minor amendments to the approved tentative map or conditions of approval may be granted by the department upon application by the subdivider or on the department’s own initiative, provided:

        1.     No lots, units, or building sites are added;

        2.     Changes are consistent with the intent of the original tentative map approval; and

        3.     There are no resulting violations of the Map Act, or this Municipal Code.

        B.     The amendment shall be indicated on the approved or conditionally approved tentative map and certified by the planning director. Amendments to the tentative map conditions of approval, which in the opinion of the department, are not minor, shall be presented to the commission for its approval. Processing shall comply with the provisions for processing a tentative map as contained in this Municipal Code. Any approved amendment shall not alter the expiration date of the tentative map. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

Chapter 16.08 TENTATIVE PARCEL MAPS AND PARCEL MAPS
16.08.010 Purpose.
        This chapter establishes the requirements for the preparation and processing of tentative parcel maps and parcel maps. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.08.020 Division of land—Five or more parcels.
        Tentative and final maps shall be required for all subdivisions creating five or more parcels, pursuant to Map Act Section 66426 and are subject to the Tentative Subdivision Map (Chapter 16.07) provisions of this title. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.08.030 Division of land—Four or less parcels.
        A tentative and final parcel map shall be required for all divisions of land creating four or fewer parcels, as well as those divisions contained in Map Act Section 66426 except as provided herein. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.08.040 Waiver of parcel map requirements.
        A.    The city engineer may, in the engineer’s discretion, waive parcel map requirements for the following:

        1.     Division of real property or interest therein created by probate, eminent domain procedures, partition, or other civil judgments or decrees; or

        2.     A division of property resulting from the conveyance of land or interest to or from the city, public entity or public utility for a public purpose, such as school sites, public building sites, or rights-of-way, or easements for streets, sewers, utilities, drainage, etc.

        B.     The city council shall consider waiving the requirement for filing a parcel map for subdivisions where at least one of the following circumstances exists:

        1.     The original, unsubdivided parcel contains less than five acres, each proposed parcel abuts upon a maintained public street and no dedications and improvements are required by this title; or

        2.     Each parcel created by the division has a gross area of twenty acres or more and has approved access to a maintained public street; or

        3.     The parcel(s) have approved access to a public street which comprises part of a tract of land zoned for industrial or commercial development, and which has city approval for street alignment or width; or

        4.     Each parcel has a minimum gross area of forty acres, or is not less than a quarter of a quarter section; or

        5.     The subdivision or interests in the subdivision have been created by probate, eminent domain procedure, partition, or other civil judgments or decrees; or

        6.     The subdivision results from the conveyance of land or interest to or from the city, public entity or public utility for a public purpose, such as school sites, public building sites, or rights-of-way or easements for streets, sewers, utilities, drainage, etc.

        C.     And upon making the following required findings:

        1.     The boundaries of the original parcel have been previously surveyed and a map recorded;

        2.     The proposed division of land complies with requirements established by this title, enacted pursuant thereto as to area, improvement and design, floodwater drainage control, appropriate improved public roads, sanitary disposal facilities, water supply availability, and environmental protection. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.08.050 General design.
        The design requirements of Chapter 16.03 shall apply to tentative parcel maps; and improvement requirements established for standard subdivisions may be applied to tentative parcel maps. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.08.060 Application materials.
        Every subdivider of a proposed tentative parcel map shall submit one copy of an application to the planning department on a form prescribed by the planning director together with ten copies of a tentative parcel map and filing fee to be established by resolution of the city council from time to time hereafter enacted. The planning director and city engineer shall examine said application, supporting data and map for compliance with the requirements of this chapter and shall accept said application and maps for filing when all requirements are met. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.08.070 Parcel map contents.
        Each tentative parcel map and parcel map shall include the following:

        A.    The map shall be clearly and legibly reproduced on sheets eight and one-half inches by eleven inches, eighteen inches by twenty-six inches, or thirteen inches by eighteen inches. The scale shall be one inch to each one hundred feet, unless a larger scale is required, by the city engineer, to show all details of the land division. In all cases, an engineer’s scale shall be used.

        B.     The map shall show the following information:

        1.     Name and address of the person, firm or organization which prepared the map;

        2.     Date of preparation, north point, and map scale;

        3.     Boundaries and dimensions of the land proposed to be divided;

        4.     Location of the land in relation to the nearest cross road or street, including, where necessary, a key map in order to more easily identify the location of the land;

        5.     Right-of-way lines of public highways shall be shown if available; otherwise, where any private or public road adjacent to property lines is fenced, the distance between fences shall be shown;

        6.     Width of pavement and indication of curbs, gutters and sidewalks on all adjacent roads and streets;

        7.     Proposed lot lines and dimensions of existing and proposed lots;

        8.     Approximate radii of all curves;

        9.     Area of the site and of each proposed lot, excluding all roads;

        10.   Locations of watercourses and areas subject to inundation;

        11.   Contour lines, if required by the planning services manager;

        12.   Location and outline, to scale, of any structures on the property being subdivided, with an indication of their uses and whether they are to remain, be relocated, or removed;

        13.   The location and size of existing water lines; sewage facilities, including storm sewers, floodwater drainage control, and sanitary disposal facilities; and wells on the property;

        14.   The location of all proposed utility facilities and easements;

        15.   Private roads, existing or proposed, if any, which are intended to provide access to lots in the subdivision. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.08.080 Reports required for parcel map review.
        A.    The parcel map application shall include reports, prepared by the applicant to the satisfaction of the planning department and city engineer, on:

        1.     Effect of proposed land division on drainage, and other public improvements;

        2.     Adequacy of proposed water supply for domestic purposes;

        3.     Adequacy of proposed sewage disposal system;

        4.     Adequacy of local street system serving the proposed subdivision;

        5.     Sight visibility and safety of proposed access;

        6.     Any other matters which may affect the public health such as fire and police protection, flooding, etc.;

        7.     The necessity of soil tests and hazards studies.

        B.     The planning director shall report on:

        1.     Compliance with the Zoning Ordinance;

        2.     Lot design in accordance with subdivision requirements;

        3.     Such other matters as may be deemed necessary to secure compliance with this title.

        C.     Pursuant to Map Act Section 66428, the commission may waive a parcel map upon making a finding that the proposed division of land complies with city requirements as to area, improvement and design, floodwater drainage control, appropriate improved public roads, sanitary disposal facilities, water supply availability, environmental protection and other requirements of the Map Act, and the Municipal Code.

        D.    Upon waiver of the parcel map requirement by the commission, the city engineer shall cause to be filed with the county recorder a certificate of compliance for the land to be divided and a plat map showing the division.

        E.     A parcel map waived by the commission may be conditioned to provide for payment of parkland dedication, area of benefit fees, and other fees. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.08.090 Action on map.
        A.    Upon the filing of a completed application, the planning department shall circulate the map for review and comment and prepare, or caused to be prepared, appropriate environmental review documents.

        B.     Upon completion of staff review the parcel map, along with all reports and studies shall be submitted to the planning commission who shall then conduct a public hearing to consider the application.

        C.     The commission shall consider the parcel map and supporting data, any reports and recommendations of its staff and members, any evidence submitted by the subdivider and interested persons. Following the close of the public hearing, the commission shall approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the tentative parcel map application and map.

        D.    When the action of the planning commission is the approval or disapproval of the map the planning director shall endorse its action upon the map and then send one copy to the applicant and one copy on file. When the action of the planning commission is the conditional approval of the map, and when conditions imposed are designated as precedent to approval, the city engineer shall so notify the applicant and shall hold the map until the conditions have been met. When met, the planning director or appropriate designee shall so certify by endorsement upon the map and then send one copy to the applicant and keep one copy on file. All conditions of approval shall be met precedent to sale of the property unless otherwise noted. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.08.100 Improvements required.
        The improvement requirements of Chapter 16.11 shall apply to all parcel maps and be installed and constructed or secured in accordance with Chapter 16.12 prior to the recordation of the parcel map. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.08.110 Filing of parcel maps.
        A.    Prior to the expiration of approval or conditional approval of a tentative map or prior to the expiration of any extension of said approval or conditional approval, the subdivider shall cause the filing of a parcel map in accordance with the provisions of Sections 66463 and 66464, et seq., of the Government Code and this chapter.

        B.     The city engineer shall not certify the parcel map for recordation, unless and until he or she finds that:

        1.     The parcel map is in substantial conformity with the approved tentative map, with any conditions imposed upon its approval, and with the requirements of law;

        2.     All dedications required have been made or are being made concurrently with the filing of the parcel map; and

        3.     All improvements required have been made or have been agreed to be made in accordance with the requirements of the statutes of the state, the ordinances and resolutions of the city, and the requirements of the city engineer;

        4.     If improvements are agreed to be made, that all necessary agreements, bonds, certificates have been filed with the city and approved by the city attorney.

        C.     If the city engineer finds that the requirements of this chapter have been complied with, he or she is empowered to certify the parcel map for recordation. Such other certificates as are necessary or convenient to show the acceptance in connection with the processing of a parcel map and as are not forbidden by law may be appended to said parcel map and executed by the appropriate city officials.

        D.    All improvements shall be assured within the period required by this chapter for the filing of a parcel map, unless the planning commission shall consent to a time extension as provided herein. Said assurance shall consist of the execution and filing of improvement agreements, faithful performance and labor and materials bonds, and certificates in the same manner as is required for a major subdivision under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.08.120 Property survey.
        The procedure and practice for all survey work done for preparation of a parcel map shall conform to the standards in Chapter 16.03. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.08.130 Subdivision alternate.
        Nothing contained in this chapter shall prohibit a division of land as a standard subdivision Chapter 16.07. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.08.140 Correction and amendment of maps.
        A.    After a final or parcel map is filed in the office of the county recorder, it may be amended by a certificate of correction or an amending map, pursuant to Map Act Section 66469 et seq.

        B.     The certificate of correction or amending map, shall be submitted to the city engineer, pursuant to Map Act Section 66471. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.08.150 Expiration of tentative parcel maps.
        Tentative parcel maps shall expire and may be extended in accordance with the provisions of Sections 16.07.170 and 16.07.180 of this title. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

Chapter 16.09 VESTING TENTATIVE MAPS
16.09.010 Citation of authority.
        This chapter is adopted pursuant to Map Act Section 66498.1. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.09.020 Purpose.
        The purpose of this chapter is to establish procedures necessary for the processing, reviewing and approving of a vesting tentative map application, and to supplement the provisions of the Map Act and this Municipal Code. Except as otherwise contained in this chapter, the provisions of this Municipal Code shall apply to a vesting tentative map application. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.09.030 Definition of vesting tentative map.
        A tentative map for a subdivision that shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words “Vesting Tentative Map” at the time it is filed in accordance with this title and which, if approved or conditionally approved by the city council, confers a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with ordinances, policies and standards in effect at the time an application for said map is accepted by the city as complete and Section 66498.1 et seq., of the Subdivision Map Act. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.09.040 Applicability.
        This chapter shall only apply to residential and/or commercial development. Whenever a provision of the Subdivision Map Act, as implemented and supplemented by this title, requires the filing of a tentative map or tentative parcel map for a residential or commercial development, a vesting tentative map may instead be filed in accordance with the provision of this chapter. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.09.050 Conformance with existing city plans and development criteria.
        A.    No land shall be subdivided and developed pursuant to a vesting tentative map for any purpose which is inconsistent with provisions of the general plan, any specific plan, the zoning ordinance, or any applicable provisions of this code.

        B.     The subdivider must make application and receive approval concurrent with the vesting tentative map for all zoning approvals, including, but not limited to, site and architectural design review approvals, conditional use permits, zoning variances, and grading and drainage plans, which are necessary for ultimate development on the area covered by the vesting tentative map. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.09.060 Applications inconsistent with current policies.
        Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter, a subdivider may seek approvals or permits for developments which depart from the ordinances, policies, and standards described this title, and local agencies may grant such approvals or issue such permits to the extent the departures are authorized under applicable laws. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.09.070 Processing.
        A vesting tentative map shall be filed in the same form and have the same content, accompanying data and reports, and shall be processed in the same manner described for tentative maps in Chapter 16.07 except as described in this chapter. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.09.080 Application materials.
        Whenever a provision of the Map Act, as implemented and supplemented by this Municipal Code requires the filing of a tentative map or tentative parcel map, a vesting tentative map may be filed, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. At the time a vesting tentative map is filed, it shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words “Vesting Tentative Map.”

        A.    A prospective subdivider, or agent, may request a pre-application conference with the city staff prior to formal submittal of a subdivision application, pursuant to this title. During the conference, the staff shall inform the subdivider of applicable policies, plans, and requirements as they apply to the proposed subdivision, review the appropriate procedures outlined in Municipal Code and examine possible alternatives or modifications relating to the proposed subdivision.

        B.     A vesting tentative map shall be filed in the same form and have the same contents, accompanying data and reports and shall be processed in the same manner as contained in Chapter 16.07 of this title for a tentative map except as herein after provided.

        C.     If the subdivision of any area is proposed to occur in phases by tract, the location of the proposed tract shall be indicated relative to other adjacent phases or tracts established or proposed to be established.

        D.    If a subdivider does not seek the rights conferred by a vesting tentative map, the filing of a vesting tentative map shall not be a prerequisite to an approval for any proposed subdivision, permit for construction, or work preparatory to construction.

 

        E.     Statements shall be those required for the filing of a tentative map, and the following shall be required:

        1.     A list of all regulations, fees, exactions, dedications, policies, standards, guidelines and ordinances, including zoning ordinances and applicable zones, currently in effect that have been used to prepare the map which will be used to construct buildings and improvements on the premises;

        2.     A report documenting the status of any existing condition with respect to hazardous materials and substances on the site and the risk of exposure via air, soil, water, or other conveyance;

        3.     The effect of participation in any special district, benefit district or any other participation the terms of which may infer any vested right;

        4.     An application for a vesting tentative map shall not be accepted for filing until the subdivision has been determined by the department to be consistent with the general plan, applicable specific plans and this Municipal Code;

        5.     All required discretionary city approvals, shall have been previously obtained or applications for same shall be filed concurrently with the vesting tentative map;

        6.     At the time a vesting tentative map is filed a subdivider shall supply the following information for which vesting is requested in a manner satisfactory to the director, in addition to those requirements specified in Chapter 16.17. Any requested vested standard, design, etc. shall be clearing indicated if it is not consistent with existing code or city standard and for which amendments are requested. Otherwise, it is presumed that existing code is to be the requested standard:

        a.     Site plans and/or a tentative map, including the following items of information:

        i.      Project boundary and dimensions,

        ii.     Dimensions relating center line, property line and curb,

        iii.    Building dimensions,

        iv.    Setback dimensions,

        v.     Building locations and size dimensions,

        vi.    Street, driveway widths,

        vii.   Bike paths, if required,

        viii.  Mechanical equipment, location and dimensions,

        ix.    Trash storage design, location and dimensions,

        x.     Recreation area location and design,

        xi.    Wall and fence location and design;

        b.     Floor plans, dimensions and scale;

        c.     Elevations:

        i.      Dimensions and scale,

        ii.     Color and materials,

        iii.    Roof pitch and type;

        d.     Landscape plans:

        i.      Tree sizes, locations and species,

        ii.     Shrub species, range of sizes, typical locations,

        iii.    Groundcover (if not lawn, on-center dimension should be noted),

        iv.    Curbing and planter areas,

        v.     Sidewalks,

        vi.    Lighting;

        e.     One colored print of site plan, elevations and landscape plan, for public presentation;

        f.      Colored rendering;

        g.     Phasing map, if applicable;

        h.     Sample materials board.

        F.     Vesting shall not commence until such time as the application is deemed complete by city staff. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.09.090 Development rights.
        A.    The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies, and standards described in Map Act Section 66474.2.

        B.     However, if Map Act Section 664742 is repealed, the approval or condition approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies and standards in effect at the time the vesting tentative map is approved or conditionally approved.

        C.     Notwithstanding subsection B of this section, a permit approval, extension or entitlement may be made conditional or denied if any of the following findings are determined:

        1.     A failure to do so would place the residents of the subdivision or the immediate community, or both, in a condition dangerous to their health or safety, or both.

        2.     The condition or denial is required, in order to comply with state or federal law.

        D.    The rights referred to herein shall expire if a final map is not approved prior to the expiration of the vesting tentative map. If the final map is approved, these rights shall last for the following periods of time:

        1.     An initial time period of one year beyond the recording of the final map or parcel map. Where several final maps are recorded on various phases of a project covered by a single vesting tentative map, this initial time period shall begin for each phase when the final map for that phase is recorded. All final maps or parcel maps must be recorded within the authorized time period or the vesting tentative map approval shall expire for those parcels for which final maps or parcel maps are not timely recorded.

        2.     The initial time period shall be automatically extended by any time used for processing a complete application for a grading permit or for design or architectural review if the processing exceeds thirty calendar days from the date a complete application is filed.

        3.     A subdivider may apply for a one-year extension at any time before the initial time period expires.

        4.     If the subdivider submits a complete application for a building permit during the periods of time authorized by this title and state law, the rights referred to herein shall continue until either expiration or extension of that permit.

        5.     An approved or conditionally approved vesting tentative map shall not limit the city from imposing reasonable conditions on subsequent required approvals or permits necessary for the development and authorized by law. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.09.100 Expiration of a vesting tentative map.
        The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall expire at the end of the same time period in accordance with Government Code Section 66452.6, and shall be subject to the same extensions, established by this title for the expiration of an approved tentative map. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.09.110 Amendments to vesting tentative maps.
        Amendments to the approved or conditionally approved vesting tentative map shall be made pursuant to this title. After approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map, amendments can be made only by following procedures for the original approval or conditional approval. Approvals or permits which depart from the vesting tentative map may only be granted based upon an amendment to the vesting tentative map. No amendments shall be granted so as to modify or delete any public improvements and site development requirements and conditions approved in the first instance by the city council, including, but not limited to, grading, drainage facilities and structures. This section shall not be construed to prevent the city from denying or placing any conditions upon approval of a final map pursuant to Government Code Section 66498.1(c). (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.09.120 Appeals—Vesting tentative map.
        Any person aggrieved by the decision of the planning commission on any map, amendment thereto or extension request may appeal to the city council in the manner prescribed by this title. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

Chapter 16.10 FINAL MAPS
16.10.010 Purpose.
        This chapter establishes requirements for the preparation and processing of final maps. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.10.020 Applicability.
        A final map shall be required for any subdivision creating five or more parcels, five or more condominium units as defined in Section 783 of the Civil Code, a community apartment project containing five or more parcels, or for the conversion of a dwelling to a stock cooperative containing five or more dwelling units, except where any one of the following occurs:

        A.    The land before division contains less than five acres, each parcel created by the division abuts upon a maintained public street or highway, and no dedications or improvements are required by the legislative body.

        B.     Each parcel created by the division has a gross area of twenty acres or more and has an approved access to a maintained public street or highway.

        C.     The land consists of a parcel or parcels of land having approved access to a public street or highway, which comprises part of a tract of land zoned for industrial or commercial development, and which has the approval of the governing body as to street alignments and widths.

        D.    Each parcel created by the division has a gross area of not less than forty acres or is not less than a quarter of a quarter section.

        e.     The land being subdivided is solely for the creation of an environmental subdivision pursuant to Section 66418.2 of the Subdivision Map Act. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.10.030 Application materials.
        The following material shall be submitted with each proposed final subdivision map:

        A.    Application. The city subdivision map application form;

        B.     The final map, electronic copy in AutoCAD, and twelve blue line copies thereof in the form and with materials prescribed herein to the city engineer;

        C.     A checking fee to be established by resolution of the city council from time to time hereafter enacted, the proposed improvement agreement, accompanying improvement security, a map filing title report and proposed private deed restrictions;

        D.    Traverse Sheets. The subdivider shall furnish the city engineer traverse sheets prepared by a registered engineer or licensed surveyor showing the mathematical closure within one foot to ten thousand feet on the perimeter of the exterior boundary of the tract and of each block within the tract and each irregular lot. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.10.040 Final map contents.
        The final map shall include the following:

        A.    The final map shall be made to a scale large enough to show details clearly, minimum scale of one hundred feet to the inch or larger, using more than one sheet if necessary. The original shall be drawn in black ink upon tracing cloth or polyester base film of good quality. The size of the sheets shall be eighteen inches by twenty-six inches, and all sheets shall have a two inch margin on the left side and a one inch blank margin on all sides outside a 3/32″ wide border line.

        B.     Each sheet shall be numbered, the relation of one sheet to another shown, and the number of sheets used in the map shall be set forth in the title of the map. If more than two sheets are necessary, an index diagram shall be provided.

        C.     The title of the final map shall consist of a tract name, conspicuously placed at the lower right-hand corner of the sheet followed by the words, “consisting of ____ sheets” (showing the number thereof), followed by the words, “City of Waterford.”

        D.    The map and title sheet shall also contain a subtitle giving a general description of the property being subdivided by reference to maps which have been previously filed or recorded, or by reference to the plat of any state or U.S. survey. Each reference in such description shall be set out as on the original record thereof as on the original pages of records and worded identically with the original record thereof and references to book and page of record must be complete.

        E.     Boundaries, Streets and Easements. The exterior boundaries of the land in the subdivision be shown by a border 3/32″ wide; the border lines and center lines of all proposed streets with their widths and names; all easements including those to be dedicated to public use; vertical and lateral access-way easements shall be reviewed by a qualified biologist and/or geologist and easements shall be dedicated to the public as determined by the city unless otherwise specified in the approval of the tentative map.

        F.     Adjacent Streets. The lines of all adjoining properties; the lines of adjacent streets and alleys, showing their widths and names.

        G.    Lot Lines and Numbers. All lot lines, and numbers for all lots. Building lines shall be shown if they differ from zoning requirements. All lots are to be numbered consecutively.

        H.    Dimensions. All dimensions, both linear and angular, for locating boundaries of subdivisions, lots, street and alley lines, easements and building lines. The linear dimensions shall be expressed in feet and hundredths of a foot.

        I.      Monuments. All permanent monuments, together with their descriptions showing their location and size, and if any points were reset by ties, that fact shall be stated. Monuments shall be of a type and location as prescribed by the standards.

        J.      Title and Description. Title and description of property being subdivided, showing its location and extent, north arrow, scale of plan, basis of bearing and name of subdivider and of engineer or surveyor platting the tract.

        K.    The boundaries of any areas subject to periodic inundation by water or to geological hazards.

        L.     River, stream or natural drainage course meander lines from recorded data when sufficient survey information exists on filed maps and when the location of any points can be established by monuments.

        M.    Scenic easements and open spaces if not shown as a lot or parcel shall be described by courses and distances and the basis of bearings shown. When a tentative subdivision map is approved with a prescribed net density and when final subdivision maps are filed in units, sufficient lot size plus open space in each unit to meet the approved net density shall be provided.

        N.    Boundaries. Any city boundaries which adjoin the subdivision shall be designated and located in relation to adjacent lot or block lines. No lot shall be divided by a city or district boundary line.

        O.    Places where access rights have been waived or dedicated. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.10.050 Submission procedure.
        A.    The city engineer shall forthwith transmit copies of the final map to the secretary of the planning commission, the county health officer, and to any fire district and flood control district containing the subdivision.

        B.     The city engineer/city surveyor shall examine the map and accompanying instruments, papers, and materials and if he or she finds the map is substantially the same as the tentative map as approved and as modified by any approved alterations, that it complies with requirements of this title and of the Subdivision Map Act applicable at the time of approval of the tentative map, and that it is technically correct, he or she (or other appropriate licensed civil engineer as determined by the city engineer) shall affix his or her certificate of approval to the map stating that he or she has examined the map and has made these findings.

        C.     The city engineer shall then transmit the final map to the secretary of the planning commission who shall examine the map to determine if it is in substantial conformity to the tentative map, and any approved alterations thereof; that it complies with this title. If he or she finds that the final map meets these requirements he or she shall affix his or her certificate of approval to the map. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.10.060 Time limit.
        Time limits for tentative maps are set forth in Section 16.07.170 of this title. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.10.070 Statements and certificates.
        The following certificates and acknowledgments shall appear on the final map, and may be combined where appropriate:

        A.    A certificate signed and acknowledged, by all parties having any record title interest in the land subdivided, consenting to the preparation and recording of the final map. In the event of dedication, there shall be a certificate signed and acknowledged by all parties having a record title interest in land being subdivided offering certain parcels of land for dedication for specified public uses, subject to such restrictions as may be contained in the offer of dedication.

        B.     An offer of dedication for street or highway purposes may include a waiver of access rights to such street or highway from any property shown on the final map as abutting thereon. Any parcels of land shown on the map and intended for public use shall be offered for dedication for public use except those parcels intended for the exclusive use of lot owners in the subdivision, their licensees, tenants, and employees.

        C.     The signatures of parties owning the following types of interests may be omitted if their names and the nature of their interests are set forth on the map:

        1.     Rights-of-way, easements, or other interest, none of which can ripen into a fee;

        2.     Rights-of-way, easements, or reversions, which by reason of changed conditions, long disuse, or latches, appear to be no longer of practical use or value and which signatures it is impossible or impractical to obtain. In this case, a reasonable statement of the circumstances preventing the procurement of the signatures shall be set forth on the map;

        3.     Any subdivision map including land originally patented by the United States or the state of California, under patent reserving interest to either or both of these entities, may be recorded under the provision of this title without the consent of the United States or the state of California thereto, or to dedication made thereon;

        4.     Interests in or rights to minerals, including, but not limited to, oil, gas, or other hydrocarbon substances, if:

        a.     The ownership of such interests or rights does not include a right of entry on the surface of the land, or

        b.     The use of the land, or surface thereof, in connection with the ownership of such interests or rights is prohibited by zoning or other governmental regulations of the governing body and the signatures of the owners of such interests or rights are waived by the governing body.

        D.    A statement by the engineer or surveyor responsible for the survey and final map. His or her statement shall give the date of the survey, name of the person authorizing the map being made, state that the survey and final map were made by him or her or under his or her direction, and that the survey is true and complete as shown. The statement shall also state that all the monuments are of the character and occupy the positions indicated, or that they will be set in those positions and on or before a specified later date. The statement shall also state that the monuments are, or will be, sufficient to enable the survey to be retraced.

        E.     Certificates for execution by the city engineer (or other appropriate licensed civil engineer as determined by the city engineer), planning director, secretary of the planning commission, clerk of the city council, county tax collector and the county recorder. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.10.080 Improvement agreement.
        The subdivider shall execute and file with the city council an agreement between subdivider and the city of Waterford, in accordance with Section 16.12.040 to this title, for construction of improvements in the subdivision required by provisions of Waterford Municipal Code and other applicable laws. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.10.090 Property survey.
        The procedure and practice for all survey work done on any subdivision, whether for preparation of a final map or parcel map shall conform to the standards and principals of land surveying, California Business and Professions Code Section 8700 et seq., and the provision of this title. All related documents shall be executed by a California-registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor.

        At the time of making a survey for a final map or parcel map, the engineer or surveyor shall set sufficient durable monuments as provided below:

        A.    Monuments set shall be sufficient in number and durability and efficiently placed so as not to be readily disturbed, to assure, together with monuments already existing, the perpetuation or easy reestablishment of any point or line of the survey.

        B.     When monuments exist which control the location of subdivisions, tracts, streets or highways, or provide survey control, the monuments shall be located and referenced by or under the direction of a licensed land surveyor or registered civil engineer prior to the time when any streets or highways are reconstructed or relocated and a corner record of the references shall be filed with the county surveyor. The monuments shall be reset in the surface of the new construction, a suitable monument box placed at that location, or permanent witness monuments set to perpetuate their location and a corner record filed with the county surveyor.

        C.     Sufficient controlling monuments shall be retained or replaced in their original positions to enable land lines, property corners and tract boundaries to be reestablished without devious surveys necessarily originating on monuments differing from those that currently control the area.

        D.    At least one exterior boundary line of a final map shall be adequately monumented or referenced before the final map is submitted for approval to the city council.

        E.     Interior monuments and boundary monuments, other than those required herein, need not be set at the time the map is recorded. If the engineer or surveyor certifies, on the map, that the monuments will be set on or before a specified later date, and the subdivider furnishes to the city security guaranteeing the payment of the cost of setting such monuments, the map may be recorded.

        F.     Within five days after the final setting of all monuments has been completed, the engineer or surveyor shall give written notice to the subdivider, and to the city that the final monuments have been set. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.10.100 Tax and assessment liens.
        Prior to the filing of the final map with the clerk of the city council, the subdivider shall file with the clerk a certification from the officer of the county computing redemptions showing that, according to the records of his or her office, there are no liens against the subdivision or any part thereof for unpaid state, county, municipal, or local taxes or special assessments not yet payable.

        A.    As to taxes or special assessments collected as taxes not yet payable, the subdivider shall file with the clerk of the city council a certificate by the county assessor giving his or her estimate of the amount of taxes and assessments which are a lien but which are not yet payable.

        B.     Whenever any part of the subdivision is subject to a lien for taxes or special assessments collected as taxes which are not yet payable, the final map shall not be recorded until the subdivider executes and files with the city council a bond to be approved by the city council and by its terms made to inure to the benefit of the city and conditioned upon the payment of all state, county, municipal, and local taxes and all special assessments collected as taxes, which at the time the final map is recorded are a lien against the property, but which are not yet payable. In lieu of a bond, a deposit may be made of money or negotiable bonds in the same amount, and of the kind approved for securing deposits of public money. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.10.110 Approval by the city council.
        When the certificates of the city engineer, planning director, the secretary of the planning commission, and all other required certificates, except that of the city council, have been placed on the final map it shall be filed with the clerk of the city council together with accompanying proposed improvement agreements, improvement security, and any other papers and materials required by this title.

        The city council shall consider the map, the proposed improvement agreement, proposed improvement security, and all accompanying papers and materials. If the city council determines that they conform to the requirements of this title and the Subdivision Map Act, and that the conditions of approval of the tentative map are satisfied, it shall:

        A.    Approve the Final Map. The council at this time shall also accept, subject to improvement, or reject any or all offers of dedication;

        B.     Enter into an agreement for construction of improvements in the subdivision;

        C.     After approval of the final map by the city council, the city clerk shall execute a certificate thereon stating that the city council approved the map and accepted or rejected, on behalf of the public, parcels of land offered for dedication for public use in conformity with the terms of the offer for dedication (the clerk shall have the option to release the final map to the subdivider’s title company for recordation to the county recorder). The clerk shall thereupon transmit the final map together with the recording fee, to be paid by the subdivider, to the county recorder; or

        D.    The subdivider shall present to the county recorder evidence in the form of a title guarantee from a licensed title company that, upon the date of recording, as shown by public records, the parties consenting to the recordation of the map are all the parties having a record title interest in the land being subdivided whose signatures are required by the provisions of this title, otherwise the map shall not be recorded. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

Chapter 16.11 REQUIRED AND SUPPLEMENTAL IMPROVEMENTS
16.11.010 Required improvements.
        Completion of improvements outlined within this chapter shall be in compliance with any agreement entered into by the subdivider and the city as well as plans and standard specifications applicable at the time of issuance of grading or building permits.

        A.    Standards and Approval. All improvements hereinafter mentioned shall conform to those required in the “Standard Subdivision Improvement Specifications” prepared by the city engineer, recommended by the planning commission, and adopted by the city council as standards for the city, and copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk.

        1.     Improvement work shall not be commenced until plans and specifications have been approved by the city engineer.

        2.     All improvements shall be constructed under the inspection of and to the approval of the city engineer or inspector named by the city council.

        3.     All underground utilities shall be installed before the construction of streets or alleys and be inspected prior to covering.

        4.     All homes within new subdivisions shall have front yard landscaping and fencing installed prior to the final building inspection. Front yard landscaping shall include street trees as provided by the city street ordinance and mature lawns equipped with an underground sprinkler system approved by the director of public works. Lawn areas may be seeded as an alternative to the installation of turf grass, provided that the lawn is mature at the time of occupancy. Fencing details and plans shall be approved by the director of public works.

        B.     All streets, sidewalks, curbs, gutters, pavements, sanitary sewer lines, water mains, gas mains, culverts, street name signs, fire hydrants, street lights, trees, drainage structures and other improvements specified herein shall be installed by and at the expense of the subdivider as set forth in this title.

        C.     All utilities, water lines, sanitary sewers and laterals and storm sewers, when the same are to lie and shall be installed in the paved portion of streets, service roads, alleys or highways or public improvements, shall be constructed prior to the surfacing of public streets, service roads, alleys or highways or public improvements. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.11.020 Wells.
        Any existing water wells, which are required to be abandoned by conditions of approval or state law, shall be abandoned in a manner approved by the city engineer and the Stanislaus County department of environmental health. The location of any existing well shall be delineated on the tentative map, and well logs, if available, shall be submitted to the city. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.11.030 Canals and water courses.
        A.    The planning commission may require irrigation canals and similar watercourses to be placed in underground conduits or fenced, or otherwise improved in accordance with the standards of this title or the water purveyor, subject to the approval of the city engineer.

        B.     The subdivider shall, subject to riparian rights, dedicate a right-of-way for irrigation, storm drainage or riparian conservation purposes, conforming substantially to a minimum line ten feet from the high water limit of any natural watercourse (stream, river or creek), drainage channel or irrigation canal that traverses the subdivision, or to provide additional easements or both, to facilitate maintenance and protection of the water course or support open space and riparian wildlife habitat. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.11.040 Cable or telecommunication service.
        The design of a subdivision shall provide one or more appropriate cable television or telecommunications systems an opportunity to construct, install and maintain any necessary equipment, pursuant to Map Act Section 66473.3. Conduits and vaults shall be dedicated to the city. This section is not intended to require free access to a subdivision, but to allow a telecommunications or cable franchise the opportunity to negotiate for providing service in the proposed development. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.11.050 Grading.
        Proper grading and erosion control, including the prevention of sedimentation or damage to off-site property shall be in compliance with the city standards, and Subdivision Map Act Section 66411. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.11.060 Monuments.
        At the time of making the survey for the parcel or final map, the engineer or surveyor shall set sufficient durable monuments to conform with the standards described in section 8771 of the Business and Professions Code so that another engineer or surveyor may readily retrace the survey.

        A.    The engineer or surveyor shall also set the following additional monuments:

        1.     Permanent monuments of a type approved by the city engineer shall be set at all angle points on the exterior boundaries of the subdivision, and at all lot corners, block corners, and intersection of street centerlines.

        2.     Monuments shall be not less permanent than three-quarter inch  galvanized pipe, thirty inches in length and placed so that the top is not less than one foot below finished grade.

        B.     Monuments or bench marks used in this subdivision shall be noted on the final map.

        C.     All monuments necessary to establish the exterior boundaries of the subdivision shall be set or referenced prior to recordation of the final map. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.11.070 Improvements.
        All improvements installed and constructed in subdivisions shall conform to city improvement standards or other agency standards, as approved by the city engineer, and to all conditions imposed upon the approval of the tentative map.

        1.     Streets and Highways. All streets and highways shall be graded and surfaced to cross-section grades approved by the city engineer in conformance with Section 16.03.100 of this title. The subdivider shall improve the extension of all subdivision streets, highways, alleys, and public ways to the intercepting paving line of any city street or county road or state highway.

        2.     Curbs and Gutters. Curbs and gutters shall be installed on all lots to locations and grades approved by the city engineer as set forth in Chapter 16.03 of this title.

        3.     Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be installed on all lots to grades, locations, and widths approved by the city engineer in conformance with Section 16.03.100 of this title.

        A.    Water Lines and Other Utility Services.

        1.     Water mains connecting with existing city mains shall be installed by the subdivider to the requirements of the city as set in this title.

        2.     Water lines and other utility services to serve each lot and stubbed to property line prior to construction of street and pavement connected to existing city, public utility, or other approved system when such system is or can be made available. The subdivider shall present evidence from any proposed supplier of the water availability that the supplier will provide the required services to subdivision and evidence that satisfactory agreements have been entered into to provide the services.

        B.     Sanitary Sewers and Laterals.

        1.     The subdivider, as a condition of approval of a tentative map, shall provide and install adequate sanitary sewer facilities, either within and/or outside the subdivision consistent with the adopted city of Waterford sewer master plan and in compliance with the policies and procedures of the department of public works and city engineer.

        2.     Sanitary sewers and laterals to serve each lot and stubbed to property line prior to construction of street base and pavement connected to existing city, district or approved private system, where such system is or can be made available. In such case, the subdivider shall present evidence from the appropriate agency indicating the ability of the system to handle sewage from the subdivision and evidence that a satisfactory agreement has been entered into to provide the service.

        3.     Reserved strips controlling the access to public ways or which will prove taxable for special improvements, will not be approved unless such strips are necessary for the protection of the public welfare or of substantial property rights, or both, and in no case except in which control and disposal of the land comprising such strips is placed definitely within the jurisdiction of the city under conditions approved by the planning commission.

        C.     Storm Drain. The subdivider, as a condition of approval of the tentative map, shall provide and install storm drainage, treatment and/or retention improvements, either within and/or outside the subdivision in a manner consistent with the city of Waterford’s adopted storm drain master plan, and in compliance with the policies and procedures of the department of public works and city engineer.

        D.    Water Utilities. The subdivider, as a condition of approval of the tentative map, shall provide and install both potable and nonpotable (purple pipe) water distribution systems along with any wells, storage, treatment, etc., water system improvements, either within and/or outside the subdivision in a manner consistent with the city of Waterford’s adopted water system master plan, and in compliance with the policies and procedures of the department of public works and city engineer.

        E.     Erosion Control. Silt basins, structures, planting or other forms of erosion control when necessary in the opinion of the planning commission.

        F.     Street Signs. Street name signs and regulatory signs as specified by the city engineer.

        G.    Street Barricades. Street end barricades, walls or fences in accordance with the city’s improvement standards.

        H.    Street Trees. Street trees shall be planted in conformance with the city of Waterford’s master street tree plan, at the expense of the developer in conformance with this title.

        1.     The subdivider, as a condition of approval of a tentative map, shall provide and install approved street trees within the street right-of-way, dedicated planting easement, or within a combination of both in compliance with city standards and the adopted city of Waterford street tree master plan.

        2.     For street trees not installed at time of acceptance of the public improvements, the subdivider shall deposit funds in the amount established by the council. These funds shall be deposited in the street tree fund, and shall be used for the purchase and planting of street trees, as the lots become occupied. The subdivider shall provide a specified list of city approved trees for selection by the new lot owner.

        I.      River Accessway. Identification of easement, installation and maintenance of any structures required to provide access to the “River Trail” along the Tuolumne River from the nearest public road to the highwater line (one hundred year flood) as specified in the general plan or by the planning commission.

        J.      River Trail. Identification of an easement, installation and maintenance of an area required to provide public access and preserve and protect the riparian corridor along the banks of the Tuolumne River.

        1.     The River Trail shall include a minimum engineered emergency service access roadway along the river frontage. The roadway is to be engineered as to grade and be a minimum width of ten feet to permit access by small emergency vehicles.

        2.     The emergency access may be integrated into the trail system or may be a separate access way located within not more than one hundred feet of the highwater line (one hundred year flood).

        3.     The area below the highwater line (one hundred year flood) and the center of the river channel shall be preserved as open space and designated for wildlife habitat preservation and made accessible to the public from the River Trail system.

        4.     The River Trail shall be designed to be accessible to the public, preferably as a natural walking trail, and generally maintained in an unimproved natural dirt path that can be minimally maintained by the city or city sponsored group to assure safe public access. Handicapped access shall be provided through the city controlled use of the emergency access roadway.

        K.    Landscaping. Installation and maintenance of landscaping and/or screen planting as specified by the planning commission and the city’s design guidelines. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.11.080 Underground utilities.
        The subdivider, as a condition of approval of a tentative map, shall provide for the undergrounding of all existing and proposed utility and service distribution, collection or transmission facilities (e.g., community or cable television and telecommunication distribution and/or transmission facilities, electrical distribution for transmission, gas, telephone or other forms of telecommunication lines, sewer collection, storm drain and water distribution lines), within the subdivision and along peripheral streets, in compliance with Subdivision Map Act Section 66473.6 and the following standards:

        A.    Utility lines, including, but not limited to, electric, communications, street lighting and cable television shall be required to be placed underground in compliance with the specifications of the public utility providing such services. The subdivider is responsible for complying with the requirements of this section, and shall make the necessary arrangements with the utility companies for the granting of easements and installation of such facilities. Exceptions to the underground requirements may be made as follows:

        1.     Transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes, meter cabinets and concealed ducts may be situated above ground if they are used solely for the purpose of providing service within subdivisions and are used solely in connection with the underground transmission or distribution lines.

        2.     Transmission lines supported by metal poles may be situated above the surface of the ground if the voltage carried by such lines is thirty-seven and one-half kv or more and no distribution line serving the subdivision is connected to or carried on the poles of said thirty-seven and one-half kv line within the subdivision.

        3.     Poles supporting street lights and the electrical lines within said poles, may be situated above the surface of the ground.

        4.     After consideration of the report and recommendation of the planning commission, the city council may waive the requirement of underground utilities, in whole or in part, for industrial subdivisions.

        5.     In those cases where requirement for underground utilities has been waived, the easements for overhead pole lines shall be provided at the rear of all lots, except where alleys are available, or where the requirement is waived by the city council.

        6.     The waiver by the city council of the requirements of the section for one portion of a subdivision shall not accept the requirements for the balance of that subdivision.

        7.     Provided, however, that where the rules and regulations of the California Public Utility Commission (PUC) and this section are or shall be in conflict, the rules and regulations of the PUC shall apply.

        8.     The council may waive any requirement of this section if topographical, soil or other similar physical conditions make such underground installation unreasonable or impractical.

        9.     Any parcel map with up to four residential parcels, no parcel of which has previously been exempted from this section and where at least fifty percent of the surrounding area within a radius of five hundred feet has been previously developed without undergrounding utilities.

        10.   That portion of a previously developed nonresidential parcel map.

        It shall be the responsibility of all subdividers seeking to provide telephone or telegraph service, electrical distribution or transmission service, cable television service or community television distribution or transmission facilities, to make the necessary arrangements with the utility companies involved for the underground installation of pipes, wires, (including fiber optic systems) and facilities required for said services at subdivider’s expense unless otherwise required by rules, regulations and tariffs on file with the California Public Utilities Commission. In regards to cable television, the subdivider is responsible for and the cost of trenching, necessary substructures, including conduit and pedestals and all extensions of cable television service to the subdivision from existing television trunk lines.

        B.     Subdividers shall make the necessary arrangements with cable television, telecommunications or other communication service operators to comply with the following requirements with respect to cable television installation in residential subdivisions:

        1.     Pre-wire all residential structures;

        2.     Connect laterals to each residential structure with a minimum of two outlets wired in each structure;

        3.     Fiber optic or comparable system communications service as may be appropriate and required based upon the recommendation of the local telecommunications provider; and

        4.     Install “flush mounts” or “pedestals” as required by the cable television or telecommunications provider/operator which will service the subdivision.

        C.     Payment for costs of undergrounding shall be as follows:

        1.     Arrangements, including payment of costs, shall be made by the subdivider directly with the serving utility company(s). Undergrounding of utility structures may be done by the subdivider, with permission from the serving utility;

        2.     Upon approval of the city manager, subdivisions with frontages of less than three hundred feet, can propose and the city engineer may accept a cash payment from the subdivider, in lieu of immediate undergrounding of the lines. Payments will be based upon a written estimate of the short unit cost from the serving utility company(s), and will reflect the subdivision’s proportionate share of the estimated cost for undergrounding the lines over the entire area adopted by the city engineer. Determination may be made by the city engineer at the time any application is made to pay fees pursuant to this section;

        3.     Upon approval of the city manager, a subdivider with property frontage of any length may elect to enter into an agreement with the city to defer the undergrounding until the utility lines along the frontage of one or more of the adjoining parcels are undergrounded. The agreement shall require the cost of the undergrounding, as determined pursuant to subsection (C)(2) herein to be made in semi-annual payments over a period of five years. The agreement shall be secured by a bond, or security interest in the subject real property. City manager approval or denial of the request shall be based on the determination that such deferral is in the “public interest” and will contribute to the orderly growth of the area.

        4.     A subdivider with property frontage of any length may petition the city to establish an assessment district to fulfill the requirement for undergrounding utilities. Prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy or temporary certificate of occupancy for any structure in the subject subdivision, subdivider shall have an assessment district in place or shall have made provision for undergrounding pursuant to subsections (C)(1) through (3) herein;

        5.     In the event that property on the opposite side of any street or highway from the property line along which undergrounding is required is vacant, and a single set of poles carry the overhead utility lines for both sides of the street or highway, the subdivider shall pay fifty percent of the estimated cost of undergrounding. When the vacant property is developed, the subdivider of the property shall, as a condition of the issuance of building permits, be required to pay the remaining fifty percent of the cost of such undergrounding. Where the property is not vacant, or more than one set of poles carry utility lines along the street or highway, the subdivider shall pay the full cost of required undergrounding; and

        6.     Unless otherwise specified any other provision herein notwithstanding, the entire cost to underground utility lines, crossing a street, shall be the responsibility of the subdivider of the property served by the utility lines.

        D.    Deposit of payments for costs of undergrounding shall be as follows:

        1.     All payments collected pursuant to this section shall be deposited into a city administered line item account for undergrounding utilities. Separate accounts shall be maintained for undergrounding in defined geographic areas throughout the city, as established by the city engineer; and

        2.     In no event shall the payments from subdividers on both sides of the street exceed the total estimated cost for undergrounding utilities along that section of street plus reasonable costs of administering this section approved by the council. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.11.090 Street lighting.
        A.    The subdivider shall provide and install all required street lighting improvements, either within or outside the subdivision consistent with the city of Waterford’s improvement standards and in compliance with the policies and procedures of the department of public works and city engineer, as well as any utility company providing service within the proposed subdivision. These improvement requirements shall be treated as a condition of approval at the tentative map stage, and shall be completed or bonded for prior to recordation of the final map.

        B.     After final approval of the street lighting systems, it shall become the property of the city. The systems shall not be installed by a public utility or attached poles or to a system owned by a public utility.

        C.     The subdivider shall pay to the city the cost of electrical energy for the street lighting system installed for his or her subdivision for a period of forty-eight months from the date of acceptance by the director of public works. Payment shall be made to the city in one lump sum, prior to mapping, based on estimated rates approved by, and on file with the director of public works. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.11.100 Additional off-site improvements.
        The following off-site improvements may also be required:

        A.    Water storage, treatment, supply and transmission lines;

        B.     Sewage treatment and disposal facilities and sewerage collection systems;

        C.     Property access roads including land or easements, grading, paving and drainage facilities;

        D.    The extension of any other utilities from existing sources to served proposed development;

        E.     Fees for Drainage Facilities. As a condition of approval of the final map, the subdivider shall pay fees imposed by ordinance of the city enacted under the authority of (Business and Professions Code Section 11543.5) for the purpose of defraying actual or estimated costs of constructing planned drainage facilities for removal of surface and storm waters from drainage areas. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.11.110 Supplemental improvements and reimbursement agreements.
        A.    Supplemental Improvements Required. The subdivider may be required to install improvements for the benefit of the subdivision which may contain supplemental size, capacity or number for the benefit of property not within the subdivision as a condition precedent to the approval of a subdivision or parcel map, and thereafter to dedicate such improvements to the public.

        B.     The subdivider shall be reimbursed for that portion of the cost of such improvements equal to the difference between the amount it would have cost the subdivider to install such improvements to serve the subdivision only and the actual cost of such improvements pursuant to the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act Sections 66485, 66486 and 66487 and Section 16.11.020 of this title. The reimbursement shall be in conformance with an agreement approved by the council. No improvements shall be constructed prior to approval of the agreement. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

Chapter 16.12 IMPROVEMENT SECURITY
16.12.010 Deferred improvement agreements.
        A.    Subdivision of Four or Less Parcels. The frontage improvements may be deferred when deemed appropriate by the city engineer. Deferral will be allowed when the city engineer finds that construction is impractical due to physical constraints, or the surrounding neighborhood is absent similar improvements. When improvements are deferred, the subdivider shall enter into an agreement with the city for the installation of all frontage improvements at a future date as determined by the city. The agreement shall provide for the following:

        1.     The agreement shall be acceptable to the city engineer and city attorney;

        2.     Construction of required improvements shall begin within ninety days of the receipt of notice to proceed from the city;

        3.     In the event of default by the owner or successors, the city is authorized to cause the construction to be done and charge the entire cost and expense to the owner or successors, including interest from the date of notice of the cost and expense until paid in addition to such costs and expenses incurred by the city in the administration of this chapter;

        4.     This agreement shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder at the expense of the owner and shall constitute notice to all successors of title to the real property of the obligation set forth, and also a lien in an amount to fully reimburse the city, including interest as above, subject to foreclosure in event of default in payment;

        5.     In event of litigation caused by any default of the owner or successors, the owner or successors agree to pay all costs involved, including reasonable attorneys’ fees, which shall become a part of the lien against the real property;

        6.     The term “owner” shall include not only the present owner but also heirs, successors, executors, administrators and assigns, with the intent that the obligations undertaken shall run with the real property and constitute a lien against it; and

        7.     Any other provisions deemed necessary by the city.

        The agreement shall not relieve the owner from any other specific requirements of the Map Act or this Municipal Code.

        B.     Remainders. Where remainders are made part of a final or parcel map, the subdivider may enter into an agreement with the city to construct improvements within, and along exterior boundaries of the remainder at a future date and prior to the issuance of a permit or other entitlement for development of a remainder parcel. The improvements shall be at the subdivider’s expense. In absence of an agreement, the city may require completion of the construction improvements within a reasonable specified time following approval of the final or parcel map upon a finding that completion of the improvements is necessary for the following reasons:

        1.     The public health and safety; or

        2.     The required construction is a mandatory prerequisite to the orderly development of the area. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.12.020 Improvement plans.
        Improvement plans shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer licensed by the state of California, and shall include, but not be limited to, all improvements required in this chapter.

        A.    Form and Content. The form, content and supporting data of an improvement plan shall conform to the requirements of the city engineer.

        B.     Review and Approval by City Engineer. The subdivider shall submit the preliminary improvement plans and all supporting data to the city engineer for review. The subdivider shall revise the improvement plans until in final form as deemed by the city engineer. Upon completion of the improvement plans and satisfaction of all other requirements of this Municipal Code, the subdivider shall transmit the original set of improvement plans to the city engineer for final review and signature. The originals shall be retained by the city.

        C.     Approval by the city engineer shall in no way relieve the subdivider or the subdivider’s engineer from responsibility for the design of the improvements and for any error, omission or any deficiency resulting from the design or from any required conditions of approval of the tentative map. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.12.030 Revisions to approved plans.
        A.    By Subdivider. Requests by the subdivider for revisions to the approved plans, appearing necessary during construction, shall be submitted in writing to the city engineer and shall be accompanied by revised drawings showing the proposed revision(s). If found acceptable and consistent with the approved tentative map, the amended originals shall be initialed by the city engineer. Construction of any proposed revision(s) shall not proceed until the revised plans have been initialed by the city engineer.

        B.     By City Engineer. When revisions are deemed necessary by the city engineer to protect the public health and safety, or as field conditions may require, a request shall be made to the subdivider. The subdivider shall revise the plans and transmit the original(s) to the city engineer for initialing within the time specified by the engineer. Construction of all, or any portion of, the improvements may be stopped by the city engineer, in compliance with this Municipal Code, until the revised drawings have been submitted, approved and initialed. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.12.040 Improvement agreement.
        Upon approval by the city council, the improvement agreement shall be prepared and signed by the mayor or, in the absence of the mayor, the presiding official of the Waterford city council and approved as to form by the city attorney. The agreement shall provide for the following:

        A.    The period within which the subdivider shall complete the improvement work to the satisfaction of the city engineer, failing which city may complete the work and recover the cost thereof from the subdivider and his or her improvement security including any additional costs incurred by the city in the enforcement and administration of these provisions.

        B.     Inspection of all improvement work by the city engineer and provision for payment to the city for the cost thereof.

        C.     The agreement may also provide for the construction of improvements in units, for extensions of time for performance of the agreement, and for progress payments to the subdivider or his or her order from cash deposits which the subdivider may have made as improvement security; provided, however, that no such progress payment shall be made for more than ninety percent of the value of any installment of work provided. No progress payments from cash deposits shall be made except upon certification by the city engineer that the work covered thereby has been satisfactorily completed and upon approval and authorization by the city council.

        D.    That the subdivider shall file with the improvement agreement improvement security in accordance with the provisions of Sections 16.12.050 and 16.12.060. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.12.050 Improvement security.
        A.    Improvement Security Required. Any improvement agreement, contract or act required or authorized by the Subdivision Map Act, for which security is required, shall be secured in the manner provided for in Section 66499 of the Subdivision Map Act.

        B.     Special Assessment Proceeding—Reduction. In the event the required subdivision improvements are financed and installed pursuant to special assessment proceedings, the subdivider may apply to the city council for a reduction in the amount of the improvement security required hereunder up to an amount corresponding to the amount of faithful performance and labor and material bonds required by the special assessment act being used. The city council may grant such reduction if it finds that such bonds have been in fact provided and that the obligations secured thereby are substantially equivalent to that required by this title.

        C.     The subdivider shall pay all costs associated with the formation of the special assessment district but may be reimbursed from the debt proceeds as approved by the city and where such costs were provided for in the budget, and funded, of the district’s formation.

        D.    The subdivider shall also file with the aforesaid agreement, to insure his full and faithful performance thereof, a bond in an amount deemed sufficient by the city engineer, to cover the cost of said improvements, engineering, inspection and incidental expenses. Such bond shall be executed by a surety company authorized to transact a surety business in the state of California and must be satisfactory to and be approved by the city attorney as to form. In lieu of said bond the subdivider may deposit with the city clerk a sum of money in an amount fixed as aforesaid by the city engineer.

        E.     In the event the subdivider shall fail to complete all improvement work in accordance with the provisions of this title, and the city shall have to complete same or if the subdivider shall fail to reimburse the city for the cost of inspection, engineering, and general expenses, the city shall call on the surety for reimbursement. If the amount of surety bond or cash deposit shall exceed all cost and expense incurred by the city, it shall release the remained of such bond or cash deposit and should such bond or deposit be less than the cost and expense incurred by the city, the subdivider shall be liable to the city for such difference.

        F.     No extension of time, progress payments from cash deposits or release of surety bond or cash deposit shall be made except upon certification by the city engineer that work covered thereby has been satisfactorily completed and upon approval of the council. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.12.060 Security arrangements.
        A.    The subdivider shall file security to guarantee completion of public and private improvements with the improvement agreement as follows:

        1.     A faithful performance security in an amount deemed sufficient by the city engineer to cover up to one hundred percent of the total estimated cost of all required improvements including city administration and management costs, bonding requirements for grading as outlined in this Municipal Code and other related costs;

        2.     A labor and material security to cover up to fifty percent of the total estimated cost of all required improvements;

        3.     A grading security;

        4.     A monumentation security in an amount stipulated by the city engineer to cover the cost of placing lot corners and other related monuments; and

        5.     If the required subdivision improvements are financed and installed pursuant to special assessment proceedings, upon the furnishing by the contractor of the faithful performance and labor and material security required by the special assessment act being used, the city may reduce the improvement security of the subdivider by an amount corresponding to the amount of the security furnished by the contractor.

        B.     Security may be one of the following types subject to the approval of the city attorney as to form and listed on the California State Department of Insurance Surety List:

        1.     Bonds. All bonds shall be executed by a surety company authorized to transact business as a surety, and have an agent for service in California, identified as a surety company admitted to transact surety insurance in California on the state of California Department of Insurance Surety List and annual Surety List Update together with an “A” policy holder’s rating and a financial rating of at least “V” in compliance with the current “Best’s” ratings. The bond(s) shall contain the nearest street address of the institution providing the bond(s).

        2.     Cash Deposit. In lieu of the faithful performance, labor and material bonds, the subdivider may submit cash deposits or negotiable bonds of a kind approved for securing deposits of public monies under the conditions hereinafter described.

        3.     Disbursements from cash deposits shall be made in compliance with a separate agreement between the subdivider and the city. A bookkeeping fee of one percent of the total amount deposited with the city for each cash deposit shall be submitted with each security. Disbursements from a cash deposit in any instance shall not be permitted unless and until authorized in writing by the manager upon recommendation of the city engineer and public works director.

        C.     Letter of Credit. In lieu of faithful performance and labor and material bonds or cash deposits, the subdivider may submit a letter of credit subject to the California Commercial Code and under the conditions hereinafter described. The letter of credit shall be issued by a financial institution organized and doing business in, and subject to regulation by, the state of California or federal government, in a form, tent, and duration as approved by the city attorney, and shall pledge that the funds necessary to meet the performance are on deposit and guaranteed for payment and agree that the funds designated by the instrument shall become secured trust funds for the purposes set forth in the instrument. The letter of credit shall contain the nearest street address of the institution providing the instrument.

        D.    The city clerk shall not endorse or sign its certificate contained on the final map unless and until improvement security as herein above specified has been posted.

        E.     The requirements stipulated above are applicable to any parcel map for which the installation of any public improvements or grading is a condition of approval.

        F.     No final or parcel map shall be presented to the council for acceptance until the requirements of this section have been met and until all charges established by the council and pertaining to the property being subdivided have been paid. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.12.070 Improvement agreement not required with special permit.
        A.    Should the subdivider desire to do certain work prior to entering into an agreement with the city to install and complete all subdivision improvements and alteration work prior to recording a final map, the subdivider may make an application to do so under a special permit.

        B.     This application shall be accompanied by detailed plans, describing the work which is proposed.

        C.     The director and city engineer may issue a special permit to the subdivider upon submittal of an application, provided security has been posted in an amount which would insure the rehabilitation of the land, including grading, planting and costs for bidding and administration, in the event the subdivision map does not record. All costs shall reflect an estimate of all city costs which shall include state requirements for payment of prevailing wage on all construction and construction related contract services.

        D.    The security and contractor’s qualifications shall be in compliance with this section. When the special permit is for all work required in connection with the subdivision and the work has been completed and inspected prior to map recordation, an improvement agreement will not be required. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.12.080 Progressive payments.
        Progress payments may be made to the subdivider from any deposit money or letter of credit which the subdivider may have made in lieu of providing a security bond; provided, however, that no progress payment shall be made for more than ninety percent of the value of any installment of work. No progress payments from cash deposits shall be made except upon certification by the city engineer, and the subdivider that work covered thereby has been completed. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.12.090 Release of security.
        Improvement Security Release. The improvement security required hereunder shall be released in the following manner:

        A.    Security given for faithful performance of any act or agreement shall be released upon the final completion and acceptance of the act or work subject to the provisions of this title;

        B.     No security given for the guarantee or warranty of work shall be released until the expiration of the period thereof. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.12.100 Maintenance guarantee.
        The subdivider shall guarantee all public improvements for a period of one year from the date of final acceptance and shall correct any and all defects or deficiencies arising during that period of limitation outlined in Code of Civil Procedure Sections 337 and 337.15, as a result of the acts or omissions of the subdivider, its agents, or employees.

        A.    The subdivision guarantee shall be backed by a bond or cash deposit in the amount of not less than ten percent or more than fifty percent of the surety posted for improvements based on the circumstances of the improvement and the determination of the city engineer.

        B.     The city shall provide written notice of the defect or deficiency.

        C.     In any instance where the subdivider fails to take action within the specified time, or when immediate action is required to protect the public health, safety and/or welfare, the city may cause the work to be performed and call on the surety for reimbursement of all costs incurred including, but not limited to, procurement, additional engineering, administrative, legal work, etc.

        D.    The maintenance security shall be submitted prior to final acceptance of the public improvements by the city. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.12.110 Forfeiture of surety.
        In the event that subdivider fails to complete all improvement work in compliance with the provisions of this section and the improvement agreement, and the city shall have to complete the same, the city shall call on the security for funds necessary to complete the improvement, including all applicable costs, as reimbursement or shall appropriate from any cash deposit funds for reimbursement.

        A.    If the amount of any security shall be less than the cost and expense incurred by the city, the subdivider shall be liable to the city for such difference.

        B.     Any cash remaining in the possession of the city after completion of the improvement, shall be returned to the originator less all direct engineering, legal or project related costs and indirect city administrative costs. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.12.120 Construction and inspection.
        A.    The construction methods and materials for all subdivision improvements shall conform to city requirements.

        B.     Construction shall not commence until all required improvement plans have been reviewed by the public works director approved by the city engineer and all applicable city permits have been issued. All subdivision improvements are subject to inspection by the city engineer and shall comply with city requirements. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.12.130 Completion of improvements.
        A.    All Submissions. The subdivision improvements shall be completed by the subdivider within twelve months, or a later time as approved by the city engineer, not to exceed a total of twenty-four months, from final map recordation, unless an extension is granted by the council.

        If the subdivider fails to complete the subdivision improvements within the specified time limits, the council may, by resolution, cause any or all uncompleted improvements to be completed and the parties executing the security or securities shall be firmly bound for the payment of all estimated city direct engineering, legal or project related costs and indirect city administrative costs.

        B.     Extensions. The completion date may be extended by the council upon written request by the subdivider and submittal of adequate evidence to justify the extension. The request shall be made not less than thirty days prior to expiration of the subdivision improvement agreement.

        The subdivider shall enter into a subdivision improvement agreement extension with the city. The agreement shall be prepared by the city engineer, approved as to form by the city attorney, executed by the subdivider and surety and transmitted to the council for consideration. If approved by the council, the city clerk shall execute the agreement on behalf of the city.

        In consideration of a subdivision improvement agreement extension, the following adjustments may be required:

        1.     Revision of improvement plans to provide for current design and construction standards when required by the city engineer;

        2.     Revised improvement construction estimates to reflect current improvement costs as approved by the city engineer;

        3.     Increase of improvement securities in compliance with revised construction estimates;

        4.     Inspection fees may be increased to reflect current construction costs, but shall not be subject to any decrease or refund; and

        5.     Any fees then in effect.

        The council may impose additional requirements as recommended by the city engineer or as it may deem necessary as a condition to approving any time extension for the completion of subdivision improvements. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.12.140 Acceptance of improvements.
        After all improvement deficiencies have been corrected and drawings of record, improvement plans filed, the completed subdivision improvements shall be considered by the city engineer for acceptance. The developer shall be responsible for the cost of providing as built revisions to the approved original drawings of record on file in the office of the city engineer. Redlined drawings shall not be accepted for as built revisions. Electronic drawings may also be required at the option of the city.

        A.    Acceptance of the improvements shall imply only that the improvements have been completed satisfactorily and that public improvements have been accepted for public use.

        B.     Upon written report of the subdivider, the city engineer may accept a portion of the subdivision improvements. The improvements shall only be accepted if the city engineer and public works director finds that it is in the public interest, and the improvements are for the use of the general public.

        C.     Acceptance of a portion of the improvements shall not relieve the subdivider from any other requirements imposed by this Municipal Code. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

Chapter 16.13 DEDICATION, SITE RESERVATION, DISTRICTS
16.13.010 Dedication regulation for streets, alleys, easements.
        A.    The subdivider shall grant easements for underground wire lines at all lots except where alleys are provided and in contiguous locations to permit anchorage line continuity and ingress and egress, for extension of sewer, drainage, or utility lines.

        B.     Easements not less than ten feet wide shall be required on the front property line and, where necessary as determined by the city engineer, along side and rear lot lines for poles, underground utilities, cables, wires, drainage, conduit and water mains or other utilities. In condominium or other optional design subdivisions easements of varying widths and locations, upon recommendation of the city engineer, may be approved by the planning commission.

        C.     Where streets are less than fifty feet in width, additional easements for planting shall be required.

        D.    Dedication of easements shall be to the city for the purpose of installing utilities, planting strips and for other public easements.

        E.     The subdivider shall dedicate or make an irrevocable offer of dedication of all parcels of land within the subdivision that are needed for streets, alleys, including access rights and abutters’ rights, drainage, public utility easements, and other public easements pursuant to Map Act Section 66475. In addition, the subdivider shall improve or agree to improve all streets, alleys, including access rights and abutters’ rights, drainage, public utility easements, and other public easements.

        All dedications of property to the city for public purposes may be made in fee title, and that, at the city’s discretion, a grant of an easement may be accepted for open space, scenic, trails, parks, and/or public utility easements. All dedications in fee and grants of easements shall be free of liens and encumbrances except for those which the city finds would not conflict with the intended use. The city may accept an irrevocable offer of dedication in lieu of dedication. Environmental studies and clearances my be required at the expense of the developer.

        The subdivider, as a condition of approval of a tentative map, may be required to dedicate, or make an irrevocable offer of dedication, of land within the subdivision for local transit facilities (e.g., shelters, bus turn outs, etc.), pursuant to Map Act Section 66475.2.

        As required by Map Act Section 66475, regarding dedication of roadways to the public, the subdivider shall also dedicate additional land as may be necessary and feasible to provide bicycle paths and pedestrian paths for the use and safety of the residents of the subdivision, if the subdivision contains two hundred or more parcels in all phases of the proposed development, pursuant to Map Act Section 66475.1. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.13.020 Waiver of direct street access.
        The planning commission may impose a requirement that any dedication or offer of dedication of a street shall include a waiver of direct access rights, either vehicular, pedestrian, or both, to such street from any property shown on a final map as abutting thereon, and that if the dedications accepted, such waiver shall become effective in accordance with the provisions of the waiver of direct access. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.13.030 School site dedications.
        A.    Requirements. As a condition of approval of a final map, a subdivider who develops or completes the development of one or more subdivisions within the Waterford unified school district shall dedicate to the school district such lands as the council shall deem to be necessary to assure the residents of the subdivision adequate school service. The dedication and subsequent repayment to the subdivider shall comply with the provisions of Map Act Section 66478.

        B.     Procedure. The requirement of dedication shall be imposed at the time of approval of the tentative map. If, within a time period set forth in state law after the requirement of dedication is imposed by the city, the Waterford unified school district does not offer to enter into a binding commitment with the subdivider to accept the dedication, the requirement shall automatically be terminated. The required dedication shall be made any time before, or concurrently with the filing of the final map for any portion of the subdivision.

        C.     Payments to Subdivider. The Waterford unified school district shall, if it accepts the dedication, repay to the subdivider or his or her successors the original cost to the subdivider of the dedicated land, plus the sum equal to the total of the following amounts:

        1.     The cost of any improvements to the dedicated land since acquisition by the subdivider;

        2.     The taxes assessed against the dedicated land from the date of the school district’s offer to enter into the binding commitment to accept the dedication;

        3.     Any other reasonable direct costs incurred by the subdivider in maintenance of such dedicated land but not including real estate or holding costs, loan or interest fees and similar costs;

        4.     Nothing in these provisions applies to un-reimbursed dedications of land to the school district.

        D.    Exemptions. The provisions of this title shall not be applicable to a subdivider who has owned the land being subdivided for more than ten years prior to the filing of the tentative map. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.13.040 Site reservations.
        A.    Requirements. As a condition of approval of a map, the subdivider shall reserve sites appropriate in area and location, for parks, recreational facilities, fire stations, libraries or other public uses according to the standards and formula contained in this section in accordance with the provisions of Section 66479 of the Subdivision Map Act.

        B.     Standards and Formula for Reservation of Land. Where a park, recreational facility, fire station, library, or other public use is shown on an adopted specific plan or adopted general plan containing a community facilities element, recreation and parks element and/or a public building element, the subdivider may be required by the city council to reserve sites as so determined by the city in accordance with the definite principles and standards contained in the above-specified plan or general plan. The reserved area must be of such size and shape as to permit the balance of the property within which the reservation is located to develop in an orderly and efficient manner. The amount of land to be reserved shall not make development of the remaining land held by the subdivider economically infeasible. The reserved area shall conform to the adopted specific plan or general plan and shall be in such multiples of streets and parcels as to permit an efficient division of the reserved area in the event that it is not acquired within the prescribed period.

        C.     Procedure. The public agency for whose benefit an area has been reserved shall at the time of approval of the final map or parcel map enter into a binding agreement to acquire such reserved area within two years after the completion and acceptance of all improvements, unless such period of time is extended by mutual agreement.

        D.    Payment. The purchase price shall be the market value thereof at the time of the filing of the tentative map plus the taxes against such reserved area from the date of the reservation and any other costs incurred by the subdivider on the maintenance of such reserved area, including interest costs incurred on any loan covering such reserved area.

        E.     Termination. If the public agency for whose benefit an area has been reserved does not enter into such a binding agreement, the reservation of such area shall automatically terminate. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.13.050 Parks and recreation facilities.
        A.    General. The purpose of this section is to provide additional park and recreational facilities and open space. The park and recreational facilities for which payment of a fee and/or dedication of land is required by this section shall be in compliance with the policies, goals and standards contained in the parks, recreation element of the general plan and applicable fee studies and implementing regulations adopted pursuant to these plans, policies and studies.

        B.     Requirements. The subdivider, as a condition of approval of a tentative map, shall pay a fee in lieu, dedicate land, or both, at the discretion of the council for park and/or recreational purposes, pursuant to Map Act Section 66477.

        C.     Park Area Standard. It is hereby found and determined that the public interest, convenience, health, safety and welfare require that five acres of land for each one thousand persons residing within the city be devoted to public park and recreational purposes consistent with the park standards set forth in the city of Waterford’s general plan. Lands held as public open space, for wildlife habitat, shall not be included in this formula.

        D.    Park and Recreation Construction Fee. A park and recreation construction fee shall be assessed for any mobile home lot or residential dwelling unit constructed in the city. Any person securing a building permit to construct a residential dwelling unit, or to install electrical and/or plumbing equipment to provide service to a mobile home shall pay parks and recreation facilities construction fee in accordance with the standards established in the parks and recreation master plan and fees established by the city council in accordance with that plan.

        E.     General Plan. Where a public park or recreational facility has been designated in the general plan and is to be located in whole or in part within the proposed subdivision and is reasonably related to serving the needs of the residents of that subdivision, the subdivider shall dedicate land for park and recreational facilities sufficient in size and physical characteristics to meet that purpose. The amount of land shall be determined by the city in accordance with the requirements of state law.

        If there is no park or recreational facility designated in the general plan to be located in whole or in part within the proposed subdivision to serve the needs of the residents of that subdivision, the subdivider shall, pursuant to council determination, pay a fee in lieu of or dedicate land in compliance with this title and all policies, standards, plans established by the city for the purposes of providing parks and recreation facilities and programs in the city of Waterford.

        F.     Determination of Land or Fee. The council shall consider the following when evaluating the payment of fee in lieu of or the acceptance of land for dedication, or a combination of both.

        1.     Parks and recreation standards and related provisions of the general plan;

        2.     Topography, geology, access and location of land in the subdivision suitable for dedication and readily accessible to the public for public use;

        3.     Size and shape of the subdivision and land suitable for dedication;

        4.     Feasibility of dedication; and

        5.     Availability of previously acquired private property.

        G.    Payment of Park and Recreation Construction Fee. The fee required by this section shall be due and payable upon the issuance of a building permit for either construction of any residential dwelling unit, or installation of electrical and/or plumbing equipment to provide service to a mobile home. A refund of this fee may be made to the person who paid the fee in the event the building permit expires, pursuant to the Uniform Building Code less any applicable city direct applicable acquisition planning, improvement and legal costs and indirect administrative costs.

        H.    Use of Fees. All park and recreation construction fees collected pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be placed into a special fund which shall be known as the park and recreation construction fee fund. The fund shall be composed of a separate revenue and expense account. Fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall be deposited in the revenue and expense account called park and recreation construction fee fund, and shall be used solely for the acquisition, improvement and expansion of the public park, playground and recreational facilities of the city, and for the installation and development of playground and recreational facilities owned by the elementary and high school districts provided these facilities and improvements are accessible to the public outside of the school operating hours.

        I.      Credits for Land and Improvements Dedication. In lieu of the payment of all or portion of the park and recreation construction fee, the council may grant credit for land and improvements which are dedicated in fee to public recreation and park purposes and accepted by the city. Dedicated land to be eligible for the credit shall be certified by the commission as meeting the requirements of the recreation element and the city of Waterford parks and recreation master plan. The amount of dedicated land eligible for the credit, the amount of credit to be given under this section, and the terms and conditions of the credit, if any, between the city and the dedicator shall be determined by mutual agreement.

        J.      Subdivision Not Within City Limits. When the proposed subdivision lies within the sphere of influence of the city, and the subdivider intends to annex, the subdivider shall pay a fee in lieu thereof, dedicate land, or both in compliance with adopted park and recreational principles and standards of the city’s general plan, and pursuant to the provisions of Waterford Municipal Code. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.13.060 Formation of assessment or maintenance districts of parks and recreation facilities.
        As a condition of approval of any tentative subdivision map or any tentative parcel minor land division map, the city shall require that the applicants authorized to sign on the face of the final map shall petition to the city council for the formation of an assessment or maintenance district for the purpose of providing parks and recreational improvements to the dedicated land or payment of fees in lieu thereof, or condition of both, for parks and recreational purposes. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.13.070 Establishment of other special benefit assessment, improvement and maintenance districts.
        A.    Prior to the approval of any tentative map or parcel map, a developer shall declare their intention to petition the city for the establishment of any of the following:

        1.     A special assessment district under the Improvement Act of 1911;

        2.     A special assessment district under the Municipal Improvement Act of 1913;

        3.     A special assessment district under the Mello-Roos Community Facilities Act of 1982;

        4.     California Streets and Highways Code Section 10000 et seq.;

        5.     The Improvement Bond Act of 1915;

        6.     California Streets and Highways Code Section 8500; or

        7.     Any similar facilities improvement or maintenance assessment district or community services assessment district.

        B.     Even if a special assessment district or similar financing arrangement is proposed, the subdivider shall still be required to post the necessary public improvement bonds necessary for the completion of the required public improvements in accordance with Sections 16.12.050 and 16.12.060.

        C.     Prior to approval of said map, and commitment on the part of the city to proceed with the establishment of the requested district organization, the developer shall provide the city with necessary financial information, as required by the city manager and finance officer, to provide reasonable assurance that the city’s financial interests are protected. Financial information shall be prepared by an independent expert qualified to prepare such documentation and shall include, at a minimum:

        1.     A market study of the proposed development stating forecasted absorption rates, sales competition and market prices;

        2.     A project financial feasibility report.

        D.    Prior to filing of any final map or parcel map, the subdivider shall pay or cause to be paid any fees for defraying the actual or estimated costs of constructing planned drainage facilities for the removal of surface and storm waters from the local or neighborhood drainage areas, water and sanitary sewer facilities for local sanitary sewer areas established pursuant to Government Code. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.13.080 Major improvements and thoroughfares.
        The purpose of this section is to provide for improvements or the payment of fees to defray the actual or estimated cost of the construction of bridges over waterways, and highways and/or major thoroughfares as a condition of approval of a final map or as a condition of issuing a building permit, pursuant to Map Act Sections 66484 and 66489, consistent with the general plan and applicable specific plans.

        A.    Definitions. The following definitions apply specifically to this section:

        1.     Area of Benefit. A specified area for which it has been determined that the real property located therein will benefit from the construction of a bridge and/or major thoroughfare.

        2.     Major Facilities. Those situations identified in the circulation element requiring construction of, or addition to, a bridge spanning a waterway, railway, highway or that is part of a major thoroughfare.

        3.     Construction. Design, acquisition of right-of-way administration of construction contracts, actual construction and inspection(s).

        4.     Major Thoroughfares. A roadway designated as arterial, major or secondary highway, as identified in the circulation element, whose primary purpose is to carry through traffic and provide a network connecting to the state highway system.

        B.     Establishment Procedures. Action to establish an area of benefit requiring the payment of fees outlined in this section shall be accomplished, pursuant to the provisions of Map Act Section 66484.

        C.     Amendments. Resolutions establishing areas of benefit may be amended by the council to reflect modifications in either bridge and/or major thoroughfare facilities. These amendments shall be adopted in the same manner as the original resolution.

        D.    Payment of Fees. Fees required pursuant to this section shall be paid prior to the recordation of a final or parcel map or as otherwise set forth in Chapter 3.60 of this code. These fees shall be based on the city’s schedule of fees in effect on the date of payment as specified in Chapter 3.60 of Waterford Municipal Code.

        E.     In-Lieu Consideration. The council may approve the acceptance of consideration in lieu of payment of fees outlined in this section.

        F.     Reimbursement. If a subdivider, as a condition of approval of a tentative map, is required or desires to construct a bridge and/or major thoroughfare, the council may enter into a reimbursement agreement with the subdivider, to provide for payments to the subdivider from the applicable fund in accordance with the provision of Map Act Section 66485 and Waterford Municipal Code. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.13.090 Supplemental improvements—Reimbursement agreements.
        A.    The owner of property serviced by a sewer, water or stormwater main extended by the owner three hundred feet or more beyond the existing sewer facilities as measured from the point of connection with such existing facilities to the point where the extension enters the lot, parcel or tract to be served by such line, may file with the city engineer, two copies of an audited report of the costs incurred for the sewer line extension and manhole construction (except laterals) as an application for the reimbursement of the costs. The reports shall be filed within ninety calendar days after written acceptance of such extension by the city. The city engineer shall review such documentation and shall within forty-five calendar days after acceptance of same, make a recommendation to the city manager that:

        1.     All or a portion of the costs be accepted or denied;

        2.     The city enter into a payback agreement with the owner or subdivider. The agreement shall provide that persons making connection to the line be assessed a fee on a pro-rata basis as determined by the frontage of the lot, parcel, or tract serviced by the line extension and, that all collected shall be paid to the original builder of the line. Any such agreement shall have a maximum term of ten years;

        3.     The owner is eligible to receive payment from the applicable sewer, water and/or storm drain construction fund of the allowed costs of the construction.

        B.     The recommendation of the city engineer shall be based upon the following criteria:

        1.     That the extension represents a logical and reasonable extension of the line;

        2.     Properties along the extension have a reasonable probability development within the ensuing ten years;

        3.     If there are sufficient unencumbered funds in the sewer line construction fund to finance the line;

        4.     The extension does not conflict with or delay the five-year sewer construction plan;

        5.     The extension is in compliance with the general plan; and

        6.     The owner is not receiving any other form of government financing including but not limited to inducement, reimbursement, or fee waiver for such development.

        C.     Based on the above, the city manager shall submit a recommendation to the council.

        1.     No reimbursement shall be made hereunder unless and until the city manager determines that the audited report and verified claim have been filed within the allotted time periods and are otherwise acceptable to the city.

        2.     No change in an area of benefit or no local benefit district shall be established unless and until a public hearing in accordance with the provisions of Map Act Section 66451.3 is held thereon by the city council, and the city council finds that the fee or charge and the area of benefit or local benefit district is reasonably related to the cost of such supplemental improvements and the actual ultimate beneficiaries thereof.

        3.     In addition to the notice required by this title, written notice of the hearing shall be given to the subdivider and to those who own property within the proposed area of benefit as shown on the latest equalized assessment roll, and the potential users of the supplemental improvements insofar as they can be ascertained at the time. Such notices shall be mailed by the city clerk at least ten calendar days prior to the date established for hearing.

        4.     If the city has adopted a local drainage or sanitary sewer plan or map as required for the imposition of fees therefor, as provided in this title, the city may impose a reasonable charge on property within the area benefited and may provide for the collection of said charge as set forth in this title. The city may enter into reimbursement agreements with the subdivider who constructs said facilities, and charges collected by the city therefor may be utilized to reimburse the subdivider as set forth herein. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

Chapter 16.14 DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT
16.14.010 Authority and purpose.
        This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority of Government Code Sections 65864 through 65869.5. The purpose of this chapter is to provide assurance to an applicant for a development project that upon approval of the project, the applicant may proceed in accordance with existing policies, rules and regulations; and subject to conditions of approval, to strengthen the public planning process, encourage private participation in comprehensive planning and reduce the economic costs of development. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.14.020 Limitation of provisions.
        Unless otherwise provided by state law, the provisions in this chapter are the exclusive procedures and rules relating to development agreements. In the event of conflict, the provisions of state law shall prevail over any other provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.14.030 Initiation of agreement.
        A development agreement may be initiated by:

        A.    An application of one or more qualified applicants;

        B.     By resolution of intention of the city council;

        C.     By resolution of intention of the planning commission. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.14.040 Qualification of applicant.
        Only a qualified applicant may file an application pursuant to this chapter. A qualified applicant is a person or entity who (which) has legal or equitable interest in the real property which is the subject of the development agreement. The planning director may require an applicant to submit proof of the person(s) (its) interest in the real property and of the authority of the agent to act on behalf of the applicant. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.14.050 Application.
        Application for a development agreement shall be made in writing to the planning department on a form prescribed by the planning director. The application shall include the following data:

        A.    A map drawn to scale showing the property for which the development agreement is requested and the property lines for the properties within three hundred feet of the exterior boundary lines of the subject property;

        B.     A clear indication of the names of all streets and of the assessor’s parcel numbers of each parcel shown on the map that is the subject of the development agreement;

        C.     The names and mailing addresses as listed on the latest assessment roll of the owners of the property shown on the map;

        D.    The legal description or other description acceptable to the director of the planning department of the subject property which must be provided prior to approval of the city council;

        E.     The proposed use or uses, density or intensity of use of the property, the maximum height and size of any proposed buildings, the proposed duration of the development agreement, and any proposed reservations or dedications of land for public purposes;

        F.     The proposed term of the development agreement may range from one year to twenty years;

        G.    The developer shall provide a statement justifying the five findings to be made by the city council as specified in Section 16.14.130(C); and

        H.    In addition to the above information, the planning director may require a qualified applicant to submit any additional information and supporting data considered necessary to process the application. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.14.060 Withdrawal of application.
        An applicant may withdraw an application filed pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.14.070 Form of agreement.
        The development agreement shall be in a form approved by the city attorney; it shall specify the duration of the development agreement, not to exceed twenty years; the permitted uses of the property; the density or intensity of use; the maximum height and size of proposed buildings; and provisions for reservation or dedication of land for public purposes. The development agreement may include conditions, terms, restrictions, and requirements for subsequent discretionary actions; provided, that such conditions, terms, restrictions, and requirements for subsequent discretionary actions shall not prevent development of the land for the uses and to the density or intensity of development set forth in the agreement. The development agreement may provide that construction shall be commenced within a specified time and that the project or any phase thereof be completed within a specified time. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.14.080 Review of application.
        A.    The planning director shall review the application and shall accept it for filing if it is complete and accurate.

        B.     The planning director shall review the application and shall prepare a staff report and recommendation to the planning commission with regard to the proposed agreement.

        C.     The city attorney shall prepare a draft agreement and forward same to the planning director. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.14.090 Environmental review.
        A development agreement shall be subject to environmental review as required by the California Environmental Act and its implementing regulations. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.14.100 Transmittal to planning commission.
        The planning director shall transmit the application and the draft agreement to the planning commission for a public hearing when all of the necessary reports and recommendations are complete. Notice of the public hearing shall be given as provided in Section 16.14.110 of this chapter. The application for a development agreement may be considered concurrently with other discretionary permits or approvals for the project. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.14.110 Notice required for public hearing.
        A.    Notice of public hearings required by this chapter shall be given as provided in Sections 65854 and 65856 of the Government Code, in addition to such other notice as may be required for other such actions to be considered concurrently with the development agreement.

        B.     The notice requirements referred to in subsection A of this section are as required by the laws existing at the time of adoption of this chapter.

        C.     The failure of any person to receive notice required by law of any hearing as required by this chapter shall not affect the authority of the city to enter into a development agreement. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.14.120 Planning commission action.
        After one or more public hearings have been held by the planning commission, said commission shall render its decision in the form of a written recommendation and report. Such recommendation and report shall be forwarded to the city council. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.14.130 Action by city council.
        A.    Upon receipt of the commission’s recommendation and report, the city council shall promptly set the matter for public hearing. Notice of the public hearing shall be given as provided in this title.

        B.     After the city council has held a public hearing, it may approve, modify or disapprove the development agreement. Matters not previously considered by the planning commission during its hearing may, in the discretion of the city council, be referred back to the commission for report and recommendation. The commission may, but need not, hold a public hearing on such referrals.

        C.     The city council may approve the development agreement only if it finds in writing that the agreement:

        1.     Is consistent with the objectives, policies, general land uses and programs specified in the city’s general plan and any applicable specific plan;

        2.     Will not be detrimental to the health, safety and general welfare of persons residing in the immediate area nor detrimental to the general welfare of the residents of the city as a whole;

        3.     Will not adversely affect the orderly development of property or the preservation of property values;

        4.     Is consistent with the provisions of Government Code Sections 65864 through 65869.5; and

        5.     Contains a legal description of the property. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.14.140 Approval of development agreement.
        Any approval of the development agreement shall be by ordinance. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.14.150 Amendment, cancellation or assignment.
        A.    A development agreement may be amended or canceled, in whole or in part, by the mutual consent of the parties to the agreement, but only after notice of intention to amend or cancel has been given and public hearings have been held as required herein for the approval of the original development agreement.

        B.     The procedures for assignment of a development agreement, in whole or in part, shall be set forth in the development agreement. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.14.160 Recordation.
        Within ten days after the effective date of a development agreement, or any modification or the cancellation thereof, the city clerk shall have the agreement, the modification or the notice of cancellation recorded with the county recorder. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.14.170 Periodic review.
        A.    The planning commission shall, not less than once every twelve months from the effective date of the development agreement, review same for compliance with its terms and conditions.

        B.     The planning commission shall determine upon the basis of substantial evidence whether or not, for the period under review, there has been compliance in good faith with the terms and conditions of the agreement.

        C.     After the public hearing, the planning commission shall render its determination in the form of a written report to the city council. If the planning commission determines that there has not been compliance in good faith with the terms and conditions of the agreement, the planning commission may include in its report a recommendation for the modification or termination of the agreement. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.14.180 Hearing following periodic review.
        A.    The city council shall place the report of the planning commission on its agenda at the second regularly scheduled city council meeting following the receipt of the planning commission report by the city council.

        B.     If the planning commission reports that there has been compliance in good faith with the terms and conditions of the agreement for the period under review, the city council shall accept the report for filing and shall not take any further action unless:

        1.     The city council, on its own motion, votes to set the matter for public hearing;

        2.     An appeal is filed with the city council from the determination of the planning commission within fifteen days of the planning commission report.

        C.     If the planning commission reports that there has not been compliance in good faith with the terms and conditions of the agreement for the period under review, the city council shall hold a public hearing to consider the report and recommendation of the planning commission.

        D.    Whenever the planning commission report or an appeal is scheduled for hearing, notice of such hearing shall be given as provided in this title. Such notice shall include:

        1.     The time and place of the public hearing;

        2.     A statement that the planning commission has or has not determined that there has not been compliance in good faith with the terms and conditions of the agreement for the period under review; and

        3.     A statement that the city council may terminate or modify the agreement at the conclusion of the hearing.

        E.     At the conclusion of the public hearing, the city council may refer the matter to the planning commission for further report and recommendation or it may make a final determination on whether or not there has been compliance in good faith with the terms and conditions of the agreement. If the council finds and determines, on the basis of substantial evidence, that there has not been compliance on good faith with the terms and conditions of the agreement for the period under review, the council may terminate the agreement or impose those conditions which it considers necessary and appropriate to protect the interests of the city. Any court action or proceeding to attack, review, set aside, void or annul the final determination by the city council shall be commenced within sixty days from the date upon which a final determination is made by the city council. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.14.190 Rules, regulations and policies.
        Unless otherwise provided by the development agreement, the rules, regulations and official policies of the city which govern permitted uses of land, density, design, improvement and construction standards and specifications, applicable to the development of the property subject to the development agreement, shall be those rules, regulations and official policies in force at the time of the execution of the agreement. A development agreement shall not prevent the city, in subsequent actions applicable to the property which is the subject of the development agreement, from applying new rules, regulations, and policies which do not conflict with those rules, regulations, and policies applicable to the subject property at the time the agreement was executed; nor shall a development agreement prevent the city from denying or conditionally approving any subsequent development project application on the basis of such existing or new rules, regulations, and policies. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

Chapter 16.15 ENFORCEMENT
16.15.010 Generally.
        Except as otherwise provided herein, the planning director is authorized and directed to enforce these regulations and the Subdivision Map Act for subdivisions within the city in accordance with the requirements of the provisions of Waterford Municipal Code and the requirements of state law. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.15.020 Illegal subdivision—Notices.
        Any officer or employee of the city who has knowledge that real property has been divided in violation of the Subdivision Map Act or these regulations, shall immediately so notify the planning director.

        A.    Upon receipt of said information and careful review of the matter to assure that a violation does indeed exist, the planning director shall file a notice in the manner and form prescribed by the Subdivision Map Act Section 66499.36.

        B.     The planning director shall also schedule a hearing before the planning commission for the purpose of determining whether a final notice of violation shall be recorded in the manner and form as prescribed by the Subdivision Map Act.

        C.     The owner of the real property shall be notified of the time, date, and place of the hearing, of his or her right to present evidence at the hearing, and shall be advised that if the planning commission determines a violation to have occurred a final notice of violation shall be recorded. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.15.030 Certificate of compliance.
        Any person owning real property or a vendee or such person pursuant to a contract of sale of such real property may file an application for a certificate of compliance to determine whether such real property complies with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act Section 66499.35 and of this title at the time such parcel was created.

        A.    Such application shall be filed with the planning director who shall be responsible for the issuance and recordation of same. The form of the application shall be prescribed by the city planning director. A nonrefundable fee in an amount specified by resolution of the city council for each lot or parcel for which a certificate is sought shall accompany the application.

        B.     A subdivision shall be deemed established on the date of recordation of the final map or parcel map for purposes of subdivision (d) of Section 66499.30 of the Subdivision Map Act and this code except that in the case of: (1) maps filed for approval prior to March 4, 1972, and subsequently approved by the local agency; or (2) subdivision exempted from map requirements by a certificate of exception (or the equivalent) applied for prior to March 4, 1972, and subsequently issued by the local agency pursuant to local ordinance. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.15.040 Issuance of certificate of compliance.
        After the filing of the application for a certificate of compliance, the planning director shall grant or conditionally grant the certificate.

        A.    If, at any time during the processing of the application for a certificate of compliance, the planning director determines that additional information or data is required, the applicant shall be promptly advised in writing, by mail, of the additional material to be supplied before further action may be taken on the application.

        B.     If the application for a certificate of compliance is to be conditionally granted, the planning director shall impose all conditions necessary to assure compliance with the general plan and protect the public health, safety and welfare.

        C.     The applicant shall be notified, in writing, of the action taken on the application and of the findings of fact supporting the decision.

        D.    If, during the process of reviewing the application for a certificate of compliance, it is determined that the subject property was created in violation of the Subdivision Map Act and this chapter, a notice of violation shall be filed in accordance with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this title.

        E.     A copy of said notice shall be filed with the county office of the district attorney for possible prosecution in accordance with the requirements and standards of state law and the Subdivision Map Act. Issuance of a conditional certificate of compliance shall set forth the requirements necessary for correcting the violation. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.15.050 Recordation of a certificate of compliance.
        The certificate of compliance shall be filed for record with the Stanislaus County recorder by the planning director.

        A.    Such certificate shall identify the real property and shall state that the configuration thereof complies with applicable provisions of this code regulating the division of land within the city.

        B.     When appropriate, such certificate shall contain a statement setting forth all on-site and off-site improvements which must be constructed prior to the issuance of a permit or other grant of approval for the development of such parcel.

        C.     A certificate of compliance granted with conditions shall not be recorded until all conditions have been met, or until assurance that such conditions will be met, in a form approved by the city attorney, is accepted by the planning director. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.15.060 Illegal subdivisions—Permits.
        No board, commission, officer or employee or agent of the city shall knowingly issue any certificate or permit, or grant any approval necessary to develop any real property within the city that has been divided, or which resulted from a division, in violation of the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act or this title. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

 

16.15.070 Violations—Penalties.
        Any offer to sell, contract to sell, or sale contrary to the provisions of this title shall be a misdemeanor, and any person who violates any of the provisions or does any of the acts so declared to be a misdemeanor, upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in Chapter 1.12 of this code, except that nothing herein contained shall be deemed to bar any legal, equitable, or summary remedy to which the city or any other political subdivision or person may otherwise be entitled, and the city or any other political subdivision may file a suit or pursue criminal prosecution in accordance with state and federal law. (Ord. 08-01 §1, 2008).

Title 17 ZONING
Chapter 17.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 17.02 DEFINITIONS
Chapter 17.03 REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION
Chapter 17.04 USE CLASSIFICATIONS
Chapter 17.06 ZONING DISTRICTS, PLAN AND MAPS
Chapter 17.08 AG AGRICULTURAL GENERAL DISTRICT
Chapter 17.10 RE RURAL ESTATES DISTRICT
Chapter 17.14 OS OPEN SPACE DISTRICT
Chapter 17.18 PS PUBLIC AND SEMIPUBLIC DISTRICT
Chapter 17.20 R GENERAL RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Chapter 17.22 RM MOBILE HOME PARK DISTRICT
Chapter 17.24 C COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Chapter 17.26 I INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
Chapter 17.30 PC PLANNED COMMUNITY DISTRICT
Chapter 17.32 SP SPECIFIC PLAN DISTRICT
Chapter 17.34 DBO DENSITY BONUS OVERLAY DISTRICT
Chapter 17.36 MOBILE LIVING UNITS
Chapter 17.40 GENERAL REGULATIONS
Chapter 17.42 GENERAL MIXED USE COMPATIBILITY STANDARDS
Chapter 17.44 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Chapter 17.45 LANDSCAPING STANDARDS
Chapter 17.50 WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
Chapter 17.52 ARCHITECTURAL AND DESIGN REVIEW PROCEDURES
Chapter 17.53 HOME OCCUPATIONS
Chapter 17.54 OFF-STREET PARKING
Chapter 17.55 MOBILE FOOD SERVICE
Chapter 17.56 PRODUCE STANDS AND PRODUCE MARKETS
Chapter 17.57 MOBILE AND MANUFACTURED HOMES
Chapter 17.58 ALTERNATIVE ENERGY SYSTEMS
Chapter 17.59 WIND TURBINE ENERGY SYSTEMS
Chapter 17.60 SIGNS
Chapter 17.61 MURALS
Chapter 17.62 FENCING, WALLS AND HEDGES
Chapter 17.63 NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES
Chapter 17.64 BED AND BREAKFAST INN
Chapter 17.65 SIDEWALK VENDING
Chapter 17.70 GENERAL ADMINISTRATION OF ZONING
Chapter 17.71 MONITORING COST RECOVERY
Chapter 17.72 STANDARDS OF REVIEW
Chapter 17.73 ADMINISTRATIVE USE PERMITS
Chapter 17.74 TEMPORARY USE PERMITS
Chapter 17.75 USE PERMITS
Chapter 17.76 VARIANCES
Chapter 17.77 AMENDMENTS
Chapter 17.78 APPEALS
Chapter 17.79 PUBLIC HEARINGS
Chapter 17.80 ENFORCEMENT

Chapter 17.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
17.01.010 Zoning plan—Adoption.
There is adopted a zoning plan for the city, said zoning plan being a districting plan as provided by law. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.01.012 Components.
The zoning ordinance (plan) shall have the following components:

A.    Regulations, known as the zoning regulations, establishing various classes of zoning districts and governing the use of land and the placement of buildings and improvements within districts.

B.     Zoning standards to include, but not be limited to, the density of population, the uses and location of structures, the height and bulk of structures, the open spaces around structures, the appearance of certain uses and structures, the areas and dimensions of sites, access, street and sidewalk improvements, the location, size and illumination of signs, and requiring the provision of off-street parking and off-street loading facilities as necessary.

C.     A map or set of maps, known as the zoning map, delineating the boundaries of zoning districts within the city.

A copy of the zoning regulations and the zoning map, together with a record of all amendments, shall be kept on file with the city clerk and shall constitute the original record. A copy of the zoning regulations and zoning map currently in effect shall also be kept on file with the planning department. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.01.020 Zoning plan—Purpose.
The zoning plan is adopted to promote and protect the public health, safety, peace, morals, comfort, convenience and general welfare, and for the accomplishments thereof is adopted, among other purposes, for the following more particularly specified purposes:

A.    To provide a zone plan to guide the physical development of the city in such a manner as to achieve progressively the general arrangement of land use described and depicted in the city of Waterford’s general plan.

B.     To implement the goals, policies and implementation measures of the general plan with respect to promoting new urbanist design and sustainability.

C.     To promote urban design policies and development standards that improves the ability of the city to provide cost-effective public protection services.

D.    To foster a wholesome, serviceable and attractive living environment, the beneficial development of areas which exhibit conflicting patterns of use, and the stability of existing land uses which conform with objectives, policies, principles, and standards of the general plan.

E.     To prevent unhealthy population densities and overcrowding of land with structures that would detract from the city’s quality of life while promoting compact urban form that minimizes the city’s adverse impact on surrounding farmland.

F.     To promote a safe, effective traffic circulation system, the provision of off-street parking and truck loading facilities, and the appropriate location of community facilities.

G.    To promote a safe community through the application of the principals of “Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design” (CEPTED) by creating an urban environment where the design and use can lead to the reduction in the fear and incidence of crime and an improvement in the quality of life.

H.    To protect and promote appropriately located commercial and industrial activities in order to preserve and strengthen the city’s economic and employment base.

I.      To protect and enhance real property values in the city and promote quality investment in the city.

J.      To ensure development of such new urban expansion that is logical, desirable and in conformance with objectives and policies of the general plan.

K.    To enhance and protect the city’s open space and natural resources, including natural and man-made waterways, in accordance with policies of the general plan. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.01.025 Short title.
This title shall be known by the following short title: “The City of Waterford Zoning Ordinance.” (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.01.030 Interpretation.
A.    When interpreting and applying provisions of this title, such provisions shall be held to the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Except as specifically provided in this title, it is not intended by the enactment of this title to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way to impair or interfere with any existing provision of law, ordinance, or any rules, regulations or permits previously adopted or issued, or which shall be adopted or issued pursuant to law relating to the erection, construction, establishment, moving, alteration or enlargement of any building or improvement; nor is it intended by this title to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easement, covenant or other agreement between parties; provided, however, that in cases in which this title imposes a greater restriction upon the erection, construction, establishment, moving, alteration or enlargement of building or the use of any such building or premises in the several districts or any of them, than is imposed or required by such existing provisions of law or ordinance or by such case the provisions of this title shall control.

B.     The planning commission and/or the city council has interpretative authority and may by minute action define and establish uses as permitted, permitted subject to a conditional use permit or prohibited in any zone district. Further, where ambiguity exists in this title, the planning commission and/or the city council has interpretative authority. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.01.040 Zoning permits required.
Zoning permits shall be required for all buildings and structures hereafter erected, constructed, altered, repaired or moved within or into any district established by this title, and for the use of vacant land or for a change in the character of the use of land, within any district established by this title. Such permit may be a part of the building permit. There shall be no fee for a zoning permit. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.01.050 Application.
This title shall apply to all property whether owned by private persons, firms, corporations or organizations; by the United States of America or any of its agencies; by the state of California or any of its agencies or political subdivision; by any county or city, including the city or any of its agencies; or by any authority or district organized under the laws of the state of California, all subject to the following exceptions:

A.    Public streets and alleys;

B.     Underground utility lines and facilities;

C.     Overhead communication lines;

D.    Overhead and underground electric and gas distribution and transmission facilities;

E.     Other exemptions specifically allowed by state law or amendments thereto. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.01.060 Other requirements may apply.
Nothing in the zoning code eliminates the need for obtaining any other permits required by the city, or any permit, approval or entitlement required by any other applicable special district or agency, and/or the regulations of any state, or federal agency. (Ord. 2007-06 §2).

 

17.01.070 No illegal uses.
No use that is illegal under local, state, or federal law shall be allowed in any zone within the city. (Ord. 2007-06 §2).

Chapter 17.02 DEFINITIONS
17.02.010 Purpose and applicability.
The purpose of this chapter is to ensure precision in the interpretation of the zoning regulations. The meaning and construction of words and phrases defined in this chapter shall apply throughout the zoning regulations, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning or construction. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.02.020 Rules for construction language.
In addition to the general provisions of the municipal code, the following rules of construction shall apply:

A.    The particular shall control the general.

B.     Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, the following conjunctions shall be interpreted as follows:

1.     “And” indicates that all connected words or provisions shall apply.

2.     “Or” indicates that the connected words or provisions may apply singly or in any combination.

3.     “Either...or” indicates that the connected words or provisions shall apply singly but not in combination.

C.     In case of conflict between the text and a diagram, the text shall control.

D.    All references to departments, commissions, boards, or other public agencies are to those of the city of Waterford, unless otherwise indicated.

E.     All references to public officials are to those of the city of Waterford, and include designated deputies of such officials, unless otherwise indicated.

F.     All references to days are to calendar days unless otherwise indicated. If a deadline falls on a weekend or holiday, it shall be extended to the next working day. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.02.030 Definitions.
“Abutting or adjoining” means having district boundaries or lot lines in common.

“Accessory structure” means a structure that is accessory and incidental to a dwelling located on the same lot.

Acre, Gross. “Gross acre” means the area of a lot or site, including easements and right-of-way to be dedicated, but excluding existing public rights-of-way.

Acre, Net. “Net acre” means the area of a lot or site remaining after dedication of all required rights-of-way.

“Agent” means a person or individual authorized, by written statement of a property owner to act on behalf of a property owner with respect to an application for permit or entitlement authorized under the provisions of this title. Note that the written authorization shall be executed by the property owner, and notarized not more than sixty days prior to the date of the submittal of the application to the city.

 

“Agricultural land” shall mean all real property within the city of Waterford’s incorporated boundaries currently used for agricultural operations, or annexed as an agricultural operation and zoned for agricultural (AG) use in accordance with this title.

“Agricultural processing” includes the changing of an agricultural product (fruits, nuts and vegetables but not including animals) from its natural state to a different form, such as grapes to wine, apples to juice or sauce, etc. Incidental activities such as packing, sizing, polishing, hulling and the like shall not be considered to be agricultural processing such as the manufacture of tomato paste or similar types of canneries or processes involving heat or chemical industrial techniques. Agricultural processing shall be limited to crops grown on the subject property, fifty percent of which may be grown within a one-mile radius of the subject property.

“Agricultural service establishment” includes businesses engaging in activities designed to aid production agriculture. “Service” does not include the provision of tangible goods except those sold directly to farmers and used specifically to aid in production of farm animals or crops. Nor does service include any business which has the primary function of manufacturing products.

“Agriculture-limited” includes agricultural activities, conducted within the city of Waterford on lands not zoned as agricultural land (AG) but is conducted in such a manner so as to not create a nuisance to adjacent properties and uses. Such agricultural activities may include the tilling of the soil, the raising of limited crops, horticulture, viticulture, limited livestock and small livestock farming, aquaculture, or limited animal husbandry such as FFA or 4H projects, including all uses customarily incidental thereto but not including poultry ranching, dairying, slaughterhouses, fertilizer yards, bone yards or plants for the reduction of animal matter or any other industrial or agricultural use or activity which is similarly objectionable because of noise, odor, smoke, dust or fumes.

“Agriculture-rural” includes an agricultural activity, operation or facility (herein collectively referred to as “agricultural operations”) and shall mean, but not be limited to, cultivation and tillage of soil (including typical fallow periods), the production, irrigation, cultivation, growing, harvesting, processing and storing of any agricultural commodity, including viticulture, horticulture, agriculture, the raising of livestock, dairying, fish, poultry, and commercial practices performed as incident to or in conjunction with such agricultural operation, including preparation for market, delivery to storage or market, or to carriers or transport to market; but not including poultry ranching, dairying, slaughterhouses, fertilizer yards, bone yards or plants for the reduction of animal matter or any other industrial or agricultural use or activity which is similarly objectionable because of noise, odor, smoke, dust or fumes.

“Alley” means a public way permanently reserved and designated by the city of Waterford primarily for vehicular service access to the rear or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street.

“Alter” means to make a change in the exterior appearance or the supporting members of a structure, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, or girders, that will prolong the life of the structure.

Animal, Domestic. “Domestic animal” means small animals of the type generally accepted as pets, including dogs, cats, rabbits, hens, fish, and the like, but not including roosters, ducks, geese, pea fowl, goats, sheep, hogs or the like.

Animal, Exotic. “Exotic animal” means any wild animal not customarily confined or cultivated by man for domestic or commercial purposes but kept as a pet or for display.

Animal, Large. “Large animal” means an animal larger than the largest breed of dogs. This term includes horses, cows, and other mammals customarily kept in corrals or stables.

 

Animal, Small. “Small animal” means an animal no larger than the largest breed of dogs. This term includes fish, birds, and mammals customarily kept as domestic pets within a dwelling unit.

“Antenna” means any system of wires, poles, panels, rods, reflecting discs or similar devices used for the transmission or reception of electromagnetic radio frequency waves, including but not limited to antennas or towers used for transmitting or receiving television, radio, citizen’s band or cellular phone communication.

Antenna, Monopole. A “monopole antenna” is a single, ground-mounted freestanding pole, post piling, tower or similar structure, often tubular in shape, made of metal, reinforced concrete or wood, used to support equipment associated with a wireless communication facility.

Apartment. See “dwelling, multifamily.”

Arbor. An arbor, patio cover, lath house, pergola, trellis or other similar structure without walls or a solid roof, intended specifically to enhance the appearance of the garden or which has a function relating to the use of outdoor space, but not including a house, garage, carport or storage building provided that it is not located within the front-yard setback or side-yard setback area of a main building.

“Area,” “lot,” “parcel” or “site” means the horizontal area within the property lines excluding access corridors, vehicular easements, and areas to be included in future street rights-of-way as established by easement, dedication, or ordinance.

Areas, Specified Anatomical. “Specified anatomical areas” means human genitals (pubic region), buttocks, or female breasts below a point immediately above the areola when less than completely and opaquely covered; or human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.

Automobile Wrecking. See “Junkyards.”

“Balcony” means a platform, less than three feet wide, that projects from the wall of a building, typically above the first level, and is surrounded by a rail, balustrade or parapet.

“Bed and breakfast inn” means an owner-occupied single-family dwelling with not more than three guest rooms in which overnight lodging and breakfast are provided for a fee.

“Blockface” means the properties abutting on one side of a street and lying between the two nearest intersecting or intercepting streets, or nearest intersecting or intercepting street and irrigation canal right-of-way, unsubdivided land, or city boundary.

“Boarding house” means a dwelling other than a hotel, wherein lodging and/or meals for five or more persons is provided for compensation.

“Building” means any structure having a roof supported by columns and/or walls and intended for the shelter, housing and/or enclosure of any person, animal or chattel. When any portion thereof is completely separated from every other portion thereof by a masonry division or fire wall without any window, door or other opening therein, which wall extends from the ground to the upper surface of the roof at every point, then each such portion shall be deemed to be a separate building.

Building, Accessory. “Accessory building” means a subordinate building, the use of which is incidental to that of a main building on the same lot.

“Building height” means the vertical distance from the grade to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof or to the average height of the highest gable of a pitch or hip roof.

Building, Main. “Main building” means a building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot upon which it is situated. In any “R” district any dwelling shall be deemed to be a main building upon the lot upon which the same is situated.

“Campground” means land or premises used or intended to be used, let or rented for occupancy by campers traveling by automobiles or otherwise, or for temporary occupancy by or of trailers, recreational vehicles (RVs), or movable sleeping quarters of any kind.

“Cannabis” means all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa Linnaeus, Cannabis indica, or Cannibas ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin. “Cannabis” also means the separated resin, whether crude or purified, obtained from cannabis. “Cannabis” does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks (expect the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination. “Cannabis” does not mean “industrial hemp” as defined by Section 11018.5 of the Health and Safety Code.

“Cannabis cultivation business” means any cannabis business that, pursuant to a Type 1, Type 1A, Type 1B, Type 1C, Type 2, Type 2A, Type 2B, Type 3, Type 3A, Type 3B, Type 4, Type 5, Type 5A, Type 5B, or Type 12 state cannabis license, or their successors, cultivates cannabis or cannabis products.

“Cannabis delivery” means the commercial transfer of cannabis or cannabis products to a customer. “Cannabis delivery” also includes the use by a retailer of any technology platforms.

“Cannabis product” means cannabis that has undergone a process whereby the plant material has been transformed into a concentrate, including, but not limited to, concentrated cannabis, or an edible or topical product containing cannabis or concentrated cannabis and other ingredients.

“Caretaker’s quarters” means a dwelling unit on the site of a commercial, industrial, public or semipublic use, occupied by a guard or caretaker.

“Carnival” means a traveling or itinerant commercial amusement enterprise consisting of sideshows, vaudeville, games, merry-go-rounds or other mechanical amusement devices temporarily located within the city. A carnival shall not be construed to include or mean a festival or amusement enterprise set up and conducted by any permanent religious, charitable or nonprofit organization whose principal place of business is within the city upon real property owned by such organization and conducted within an area of twenty thousand square feet or less.

“Carport” means a permanently roofed structure which is open on at least one side and has no door closure, for the purpose of vehicle storage; see also the definition of “garage, private.”

“Carriage unit” means a dwelling unit or apartment constructed above a residential garage.

“Certified farmers’ market (CFM)” means the activity of sales by California farmers of their own California produced agricultural goods directly to the consuming public, all in accordance with Chapter 10.5 (commencing with Section 47000) of Division 17 of the California Food and Agricultural Code, and the California Code of Regulations adopted pursuant thereto (Title III, Division 3, Chapter 1, Subchapter 4, Article 6.5). The operator of a certified farmers’ market shall possess a permit as a certified farmers’ market location from the county agricultural commissioner’s office or such other governmental office that has jurisdiction for the issuance of such permit. In addition, a certified farmers’ market shall be operated and permitted in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 12 (commencing with Section 114345) of Part 7, Division 104 of the California Health and Safety Code.

“Circus” means a traveling or itinerant commercial amusement enterprise utilizing an enclosure of any kind, but usually circular or rectangular, partially surrounded by seats, used for exhibitions of horsemanship, acrobatic performances, acts of clown, feats of animal training or the like, temporarily located within the city.

“City” means the city of Waterford.

“Collection buildings” means buildings with a gross floor area of two hundred twenty-five square feet or less used for the deposit and storage of household articles or recyclables donated to a nonprofit organization.

“Collocation” means the location of two or more wireless communication facilities on a single support structure. For the purposes of this chapter, collocation shall also include the location of wireless communication facilities with other facilities such as water tanks, light standards, communication towers and other facilities and structures.

“Community noise equivalent level (CNEL)” means the average noise level during a twenty-four-hour day, in decibels, weighted to account for the lower tolerance of people to noise during evening (7:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m.) and night (10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.) hours relative to daytime hours.

“Conditionally permitted” means permitted subject to approval of a conditional use permit or temporary conditional use permit.

“Confined animal facility” means a confined animal facility as defined by state or federal statute and regulations adopted by the Regional Water Quality Control Board.

“Convenience market” means retail sales of food, beverages and small convenience items primarily for off-premises consumption and typically found in establishments with long or late hours of operation and a relatively small building. This definition excludes delicatessens and other specialty food shops and establishments having a sizeable assortment of fresh fruits and vegetables, and fresh cut meat.

Court. See “yard or court.”

Coverage, Lot or Site. “Lot coverage” or “site coverage” means the percentage of a site covered by roofs, soffits, or overhangs extending more than two and one-half feet from a wall and by decks more than thirty inches in height.

“Day care center” means a dwelling or building or structure in which persons not of the immediate family are provided with care for compensation for a portion of the day not exceeding twelve hours in any twenty-four-hour period. A day care center shall not include twenty-four-hour care and shelter.

“dBA” means a number in decibels read from a sound level meter with the meter switched to a weighing scale “A.” The number is an approximate measurement of the relative noisiness or annoyance level of common sounds.

“Deck” means a platform, either freestanding or attached to a building, that is supported by pillars or posts (see also “balcony”).

“Depth” means the horizontal distance between the front and rear property lines of a site measured along a line midway between the side property lines.

“Development plan” means a plan for the ultimate development of a site that may or may not include a subdivision map, proposed in accordance with Title 16 of the WMC but shall include existing and proposed uses, building improvements, utilities, parking, access and other related and necessary improvements for the site or property that will be necessary for the ultimate use of the property, as set forth in Section 17.52.050. The plan shall also include a proposal for the timing of all proposed improvements.

“Distribution line” means an electric power line bringing power from a distribution substation to consumers.

“District” means a portion of the city within which the use of land and structures and the location, height, and bulk of structures are governed by this title.

“Domestic fowl” means a gallinaceous bird kept chiefly for its eggs and flesh (hens only).

Dwelling, Multiple. “Multiple dwelling” means a building or portion thereof used and/or designed as a residence for three or more families living independently of each other, and doing their own cooking in said building.

Dwelling, One-Family. “One-family dwelling” means a detached building designed for and/or occupied exclusively by one family.

Dwelling, Two-Family. “Two-family dwelling” means a detached building designed for and/or occupied exclusively by two families living independently of each other.

“Dwelling unit” means a building, or portion thereof, with one or more rooms and a single kitchen, designed for occupancy by one family for living and sleeping purposes.

“Efficiency unit” has the same meaning as defined in Section 17958.1 of the Health and Safety Code.

“Emergency shelters” means housing with minimal supportive services for homeless persons that is limited to occupancy of six months or less by a homeless person. No individual or household may be denied emergency shelter because of an inability to pay. (Health and Safety Code Section 50801(e))

“Employee housing” includes, but is not limited to, farmworker housing. Employee housing for six or fewer workers shall be deemed to be a single-family structure with a residential land use, and shall be treated the same as a single-family dwelling of the same type in the same zone. The permitted occupancy in employee housing in a zone allowing agricultural uses shall include agricultural employees who do not work on the property where the employee housing is located, and may consist of no more than thirty-six beds in a group quarters or twelve units or spaces designed for use by a single-family or household on land zoned for agricultural uses. Such employee housing shall be considered to be an activity that in no way differs from an agricultural use.

Entertainment, Live. “Live entertainment” means regulations pertaining to live entertainment in this title apply to the following activities where they occur on a scheduled basis three or more days during a calendar year on the site of a use other than a public or semipublic use:

1.     A comedy act, musical, theatrical, or dance recital performed by one or more persons, regardless of whether performers are compensated;

2.     Any form of dancing by patrons or guests at a business establishment;

3.     A fashion show, except when conducted within an enclosed building used primarily for the manufacture or sale of clothing.

“Environmental impact report (EIR)” means a report complying with the requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) and its implementing guidelines.

 

Exemption, Categorical. “Categorical exemption” means an exception from the requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) for a class of projects, based on a finding by the California Secretary for Resources that the class of projects does not have a significant effect on the environment.

“Family” means one or more persons occupying a premises and living as a single, nonprofit housekeeping unit, as distinguished from a group occupying a hotel, club, fraternity or sorority house. A family shall be deemed to include necessary servants.

“Fence” means an artificially constructed barrier of any material or combination of materials erected to enclose or screen areas of land.

Floor Area, Gross. “Gross floor area” means the total enclosed area of all floors of a building measured to the outside face of the structural members in exterior walls, and including halls, stairways, elevator shafts at each floor level, service and mechanical equipment rooms, and basement or attic areas having a height of more than seven feet but excluding area used exclusively for vehicle parking or loading and, in industrial areas, storage sheds with less than one hundred fifty square feet of space, bunkers, electrical substations, smoking shelters, instrument shelters and similar enclosures.

“Floor area ratio (FAR)” means the gross floor area of a building or buildings on a lot divided by the lot area or site area.

“Front building line” means the line, parallel to the street line, which passes through the point of the principal building face or corner closest to the front lot line.

“Game centers” means a space within a building or outdoors, accessible to the general public and occupying more than one hundred fifty square feet in total floor area.

Garage, Private. “Private garage” means a building for the private use of the owner or occupant of a principal building situated on the same lot as the principal building for the storage of motor vehicles, with no facilities for mechanical service or repair of a commercial or public nature; see also the definition of “carport.”

Garage, Public. “Public garage” means any premises, except those defined in this chapter as a private or storage garage, used for the storage and/or care of self-propelled vehicles or where any such vehicles are equipped for operation or repair, or kept, for remuneration, hire or sale.

“Garden structure” means an arbor, deck, fountain, lath house, pergola, raised planting bed, trellis or other similar structure intended specifically to enhance the appearance of the garden or which has a function relating to the use of outdoor space, but not including a house, garage, carport or storage building.

“General plan” means the city of Waterford general plan, as amended.

Grade, Existing. “Existing grade” means the surface of the ground or pavement at a stated location as it exists prior to disturbance in preparation for a project regulated by this title.

Grade, Street. “Street grade” means the top of the curb, or the top of the edge of the pavement or traveled way where no curb exists.

“Guest room” means a room which is intended, arranged or designed to be occupied or which is occupied by one or more guest, but in which no provision is made for cooking and not including dormitories for sleeping purposes.

“Height” means a vertical dimension measured from existing grade, unless otherwise specified.

 

Height Measurement of Fencing. Except as otherwise provided, the height of fences or walls between the setback line and lot line shall be measured from finished grade adjacent to the structure to the top of the structure as determined by the planning director.

“Home occupation” means a use conducted in a dwelling unit or accessory building which is clearly incidental and subordinate to the use of the dwelling for residential purposes.

“Home occupations” means occupations conducted in a dwelling unit, garage, or accessory building in a residential “R” district that are incidental to the principal residential use of the lot or site.

“Hotel” means any building or portion thereof containing six or more guest rooms used, designed or intended to be used, let or hired out.

Illumination, Direct. “Direct illumination” means illumination by means of light that travels directly from its source to the viewer’s eye.

Illumination, Indirect. “Indirect illumination” means illumination by means only of light cast upon an opaque surface from a concealed source.

“Junkyards” means the use of more than one hundred square feet of the area of any lot for the storage or keeping of junk, including scrap metals or other scrap materials, surplus materials, secondhand material, used building materials, bottles, appliances, and/or for the dismantling or wrecking of automobiles or other vehicles or machinery.

“Kennel” means a place where more than three animals over four months old are kept.

“Land use” means the existing use of property.

“Land use-general plan” means the use of land as set forth in the Waterford general plan land use element.

“Living area” means the interior habitable area of a dwelling unit, including basements and attics, but does not include a garage or accessory structure.

“Lot” means a legal site, plot or parcel of land under one ownership that has been legally subdivided, re-subdivided, or combined in accordance with applicable local ordinance and the California State Subdivision Map Act.

“Lot area” means the total horizontal area included within lot lines.

Lot, Corner. “Corner lot” means a lot situated at the intersection of two or more streets, or bounded on two or more adjacent sides by street lines.

“Lot depth” means the average distance from the street line of the lot to its rear line measured in the general direction of the side lines of the lot.

Lot, Double-Frontage. “Double-frontage lot” means an interior lot having frontage on more than one street. Each frontage from which access is permitted shall be deemed a front lot line.

Lot, Flag or Corridor. “Flag lot” or “corridor lot” means a lot connected to a street by an access corridor.

 

“Lot frontage” means the line separating lot from the street, in the case of an interior lot, and the line separating the narrowest street frontage from the street in the case of a corner lot.

Lot, Interior. “Interior lot” means a lot other than a corner lot.

Lot, Key. “Key lot” means the first interior lot to the rear of a reversed corner lot.

Lot, Reversed Corner. “Reversed corner lot” means a corner lot the side line of which is substantially a continuation of the front property line of the first lot to its rear.

“Lot or property lines” means the lines bounding a lot as defined in this chapter.

Lot or Property Line, Front. “Front lot or property line” means, on an interior lot, the lot line abutting the street; or, on a corner lot, the shorter lot line abutting a street; or, on a flag lot, the interior lot line most parallel to and nearest the street from which access is obtained.

Lot or Property Line, Interior. “Interior lot or property line” means a lot line not abutting a street.

Lot or Property Line, Rear. “Rear lot or property line” means ordinarily, that line of a lot which is generally opposite the lot line along the frontage of said lot. In cases in which this definition is not applicable, the planning commission shall designate the rear lot line.

Lot or Property Line, Street. “Street lot or property line” means a lot line abutting a street.

“Mobile food vendor” means any vehicle used in conjunction with a commissary or other permanent food facility upon which food is sold or distributed at retail pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Section 113831 that is permitted pursuant to Chapter 17.55. Does not include sidewalk vendor as defined by Senate Bill 946.

“Mobile home” means a vehicle designed and equipped for human habitation and includes a travel trailer and recreational vehicle as defined by the California Health and Safety Code. The vehicle must bear an insignia of approval issued by the California Department of Housing and Community Development, pursuant to Section 18056 of the Health and Safety Code. This definition is for zoning purposes only and shall not be construed to affect the definition of mobile home parks in the State Mobile Home Parks Act (Health and Safety Code Section 18200, et seq.) or to affect enforcement of the provisions of such act.

“Mobile home park” means a lot or parcel of land which is used exclusively for the parking thereon of ten or more mobile homes for a rental charge, or for rent or lease of mobile homes, and for appurtenant facilities for the exclusive use of the occupants such as laundry, restrooms, recreation and storage facilities, and mobile home or office facility for the owner or manager. For mobile home parks of twenty-five spaces or more, there may be maintained a dwelling for the owner or manager. This definition is for zoning purposes only and shall not be construed to affect the definition of mobile home parks in the State Mobile Home Parks Act (Health and Safety Code, Section 18200, et seq.) or to affect enforcement of the provisions of the Act.

“Motel” means a building or buildings containing apartments and/or rooming units, with automobile storage space serving such rooms or apartments provided in connection therewith, providing sleeping accommodations for automobile travelers, including auto parks, motor lodges and similar designations.

“Municipal code” means the municipal code of the city of Waterford, as amended.

“Nuisance” shall have the meaning ascribed to that term in California Civil Code Section 3479.

“Nonconforming sign” means a sign, outdoor advertising structure, or display of any character which was lawfully erected or displayed, but which does not conform with standards for location, size, or illumination for the district in which it is located by reason of adoption or amendment of this title or by reason of annexation of territory to the city.

“Nonconforming structure” means a structure which was lawfully erected, but which does not conform with the standards for yard spaces, height of structures, or distances between structures prescribed in the regulations for the district in which the structure is located by reason of adoption or amendment of this title or by reason of annexation of territory to the city.

“Nonconforming uses” means a use of a structure or land which was lawfully established and maintained, but which does not conform to the use regulations or required conditions for the district in which it is located by reason of adoption or amendment of this title or by reason of annexation of territory to the city.

“Off-street loading facilities” means a site or portion of a site devoted to the loading or unloading of motor vehicles or trailers, including loading berths, aisles, access drives, and landscaped areas.

“Off-street parking facilities” means a site or portion of a site devoted to the off-street parking of motor vehicles, including parking spaces, aisles, access drives, and landscaped areas.

Open Space, Private. “Private open space” means a usable open space, adjoining and directly accessible to a dwelling unit, reserved for the exclusive use of residents of the dwelling unit and their guests.

Open Space, Shared. “Shared open space” means an open space within a residential development reserved for the exclusive use of residents of the development and their guests.

Open Space, Total. “Total open space” means the sum of private open space and shared open space.

Opposite. Walls, windows, signs, districts, or property lines shall be deemed opposite if a line perpendicular to a vertical plane through one element and having its widest horizontal dimension would intersect a similar vertical plane through another element.

“Outdoor advertising sign” means any card, cloth, paper, metal, painted glass, wooden, plaster, stone or other sign of any kind or character whatsoever placed for outdoor advertising purposes on the ground or on any tree, wall, bush, rock, post, fence, building, structure or thing whatsoever. The term “placed” as used in the definitions of “outdoor advertising sign” and “outdoor advertising structure” shall include erecting, constructing, posting, painting, printing, tacking, nailing, gluing, sticking, carving or otherwise fastening, affixing or making visible in any manner whatsoever.

“Outdoor advertising structure” means any structure of any kind or character erected or maintained for outdoor advertising purposes, upon which any outdoor advertising sign may be placed, including also outdoor advertising statuary.

“Permitted” means permitted without a requirement for approval of a use permit or temporary use permit.

“Planned street line” means the street line of any street, road or highway at its ultimate width as defined or delineated within the circulation element of the county general plan.

“Porch” means a covered platform, usually having a separate roof, at an entrance to a dwelling, or an open or enclosed gallery or room, which is not heated or cooled, that is attached to the outside of a building.

“Preexisting” means in existence prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title.

“Private stable” means an accessory building or space where horses are kept for the private use of the owner and guests.

“Produce market” means structures and/or areas up to three thousand five hundred square feet in size, including any outside display area, that are accessory to on-site agricultural operations and are primarily used to sell raw, unprocessed fruits, vegetables, nuts and other agricultural produce in their raw or natural state. Produce markets also may be used for limited sales of processed foods and non-food items.

“Produce stand” means structures and/or areas up to six hundred square feet in size, including any outside display area, that are accessory to on-site agricultural operations and are used to sell only raw, unprocessed fruits, vegetables, nuts and other agricultural produce in their raw or natural state that is produced or grown exclusively on the site whereon the produce stand is located.

“Production agriculture” means agriculture for the purpose of producing any and all plant and animal commodities for commercial purposes.

“Project” means any proposal for new or changed use, or for new construction, alteration, or enlargement of any structure, that is subject to the provisions of this title.

“Property owner” means the person, individual or corporation, or any combination thereof or multiple owners with fee title interest in the property subject to a permit or entitlement authorized by the provisions of this title. Such proof of ownership would typically be reflected in the latest county assessor’s records for the property. Where there are complex ownership questions, the planning director may request a preliminary title report be submitted as part of any formal permit application.

“Proposed dwelling” means a dwelling that is the subject of a permit application and that meets the requirements for permitting.

“Public garage” means any premises, except those defined in this chapter as a private or storage garage, used for the storage and/or care of self-propelled vehicles or where any such vehicles are equipped for operation or repair, or kept, for remuneration, hire or sale.

“Public stable” means a building other than a private stable for the commercial rental, training, or boarding of horses.

“Public transit” means a location, including, but not limited to, a bus stop or train station, where the public may access buses, trains, and other forms of transportation that charge set fares, run on fixed routes, and are available to the public.

“Recreational vehicle” is a collective term which may refer to any or all of the following: motor home, travel trailer, fifth wheel trailer, van or pickup with camper; having sleeping and/or cooking facilities.

Recreational Vehicle Cover, Portable. “Portable recreational vehicle cover” means a detached structure intended solely for the purpose of providing cover of a recreational vehicle using a framework and cover made of lightweight materials and having a footprint of no larger than seven hundred fifty square feet, which does not need a permanent foundation.

“Residence” means a home, abode or place where an individual is actually living at a specific point in time.

“Residential care home” means a home operated as a boarding home and in which nursing, dietary and other personal services are furnished to convalescent, invalid or aged persons in return for compensation but in which are performed no surgical or other primary treatments such as are customarily provided in sanitariums or hospitals.

“Retail food law,” for purposes of this chapter, means any chapter of any California Code regulating health and sanitation standards for retail food facilities. Retail food law is administered and enforced by the Stanislaus County department of environmental resources (DER), unless another agency is specifically identified by law.

“Roaming sidewalk vendor” means a sidewalk vendor who moves from place to place and stops only to complete a transaction.

Room, Habitable. “Habitable room” means a room meeting the requirements of the Waterford building and construction code (Title 15 of the WMC) for sleeping, living, cooking, or dining purposes, excluding such enclosed places as closets, pantries, bath or toilet rooms, service rooms, connecting corridors, laundries, unfinished attics, foyers, storage spaces, cellars, utility rooms, garages, and similar spaces.

“Roominghouse” means a dwelling, building or structure occupied by five or more persons each of whom have agreed to pay a specific rent for a specific space as distinguished from guests subject to innkeeper’s liability.

“Shade structure” is a detached or attached structure that is no higher than the first story of a home and may have a roof but does not have walls or covering on the sides, such as a patio cover, arbor, or similar structure.

“Shade structures-lot coverage” shall not be included when calculating maximum aggregate lot coverage of all buildings in any zoning district.

“Sidewalk vendor” means a person who sells food or merchandise from a pushcart, stand, display, pedal-driven cart, wagon, showcase, rack, or other nonmotorized conveyance, or from one’s person, upon a public sidewalk or pedestrian path.

“Single ownership” means holding a record title, possession under a contract to purchase, or possession under a lease by a person, firm, corporation, or partnership, individually, jointly, in common or in any other manner where the property is or will be under unitary or unified control.

“Site” means a lot, or group of contiguous lots not divided by an alley, street, other right-of-way, or city limit, that is proposed for development in accord with the provisions of this title, and is in a single ownership or has multiple owners, all of whom join in an application for development.

“Small wind energy system” means a wind energy conversion system consisting of a wind turbine, a tower, and associated control or conversion electronics, which has a rated capacity that does not exceed the allowable rated capacity under the Emerging Renewables Fund of the Renewables Investment Plan administered by the California Energy Commission and which will be used primarily to reduce onsite consumption of utility power. “Tower height,” as it pertains to such systems, means the height above grade of the fixed portion of the tower, excluding the wind turbine.

“Soundproofed” means a structure or portion of a structure which is insulated or constructed in such a manner that sound will not penetrate from it in excess of the ambient noise levels specified in Section 8.22.037.

“Specific plan” means a plan for a defined area that is consistent with the general plan and with the provisions of the California Government Code Section 65450 et seq. (Specific Plans).

“Stationary sidewalk vendor” means a sidewalk vendor who vends from a fixed location.

“Statuary structures” means decorative objects such as birdbaths, fountains, ornamental wells and other similar landscape or garden figures.

“Story” means that portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the next floor above it, or if there is no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it.

“Street” means a public or private thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to abutting property, including avenue, place, way, drive, lane, boulevard, highway, road and any other thoroughfare except an alley as defined in this chapter.

“Street line” means the boundary between a street and abutting property.

“Structural alterations” means any change in the supporting member of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders.

“Structure” means anything constructed or erected that requires a location on the ground, including a building, portable carport, canopy, gazebo, awning or a swimming pool but not including a fence or a wall used as a fence, if the height does not exceed six feet, or access drives or sidewalks, walkways, walks or surfaced patio area.

“Sunroom” means an enclosed and covered porch, deck, or patio area attached to a residence in which at least sixty percent of the exterior wall area is comprised of glazing or similar transparent material, and which, if directly accessible from the indoor living area of the residence, is separated from that area of the residence by a closable door.

“Supportive housing” means housing with no limit on length of stay, that is occupied by the target population, and that is linked to an onsite or offsite service that assists the supportive housing resident in retaining the housing, improving his or her health status, and maximizing his or her ability to live and, when possible, work in the community. (California Government Code Section 65582, Senate Bill 745)

“Swimming pools and hot tubs” means water-filled enclosures, having a depth of eighteen inches or more, used for swimming or recreation.

“Tandem parking” means that two or more automobiles are parked on a driveway or in any other location on a lot, lined up behind one another.

“Target population” means persons with low incomes who have one or more disabilities, including mental illness, HIV or AIDS, substance abuse, or other chronic health condition, or individuals eligible for services provided pursuant to the Lanterman Developmental Disabilities Services Act (Division 4.5 (commencing with Section 4500) of the Welfare and Institutions Code) and may include, among other populations, adults, emancipated minors, families with children, elderly persons, young adults aging out of the foster care system, individuals exiting from institutional settings, veterans, and homeless people. (California Government Code Section 65582, Senate Bill 745.)

“Tasting room” means a facility in which agricultural products grown or processed on the premises may be tasted and sold. A restaurant, where complete meals are served and consumed, shall not be considered to be a tasting room.

“Transitional housing” means buildings configured as rental housing developments, but operated under program requirements that require termination of assistance and recirculating of the assisted unit to another eligible program recipient at a predetermined future point in time that shall be no less than six months from the beginning of the assistance. (California Government Code 65582, Senate Bill 745.)

“Transmission line” means an electric power line bringing power to a receiving or distribution substation.

Tree, Mature. “Mature tree” means any tree with a diameter of twelve inches or more, measured twenty-four inches above existing grade.

“Use” means the purpose for which a site or structure is arranged, designed, intended, constructed, erected, moved, altered, or enlarged for which either a site or structure is or may be occupied or maintained.

Use, Accessory. “Accessory use” means a use that is appropriate, subordinate, and customarily incidental to the main use of the site and which is located on the same site as the main use.

“Vehicle storage yard” means any location consisting of parcel(s) or lot(s) where three or more vehicles (as defined by Section 670 California Vehicle Code), or vessels (as defined by Section 651 of the Harbors and Navigation Code), or combinations of both, which are disabled, under repair or restoration, and/or vehicles or vessels which are not currently registered with the State Department of Motor Vehicles are stored. For purposes of this section, a vessel and a trailer designed to carry a vessel that are used together as one unit shall count as one vehicle or one vessel.

“Visible” means likely to be noticed by a person of average height walking on a street or sidewalk two years after installation of any planting intended to screen a view.

“Water-related” means a use or activity that directly or indirectly serves industries that use water for recreation, sports open space or similar activities, thereby gaining sufficient economic benefits by fronting on or being in close proximity to a river, stream, lake or similar body of water.

“Wholesale and distribution” means establishments engaged in selling merchandise to retailers; to commercial, industrial, farm, or professional business users; or to other wholesalers; or acting as agents or brokers in buying merchandise for selling merchandise to such persons or companies. Includes such establishments as: agents, merchandise or commodity brokers, commission merchants, assemblers, merchant wholesaler stores primarily selling electrical, plumbing, heating and air conditioning and equipment.

“Wholesale retail stores” means stores that emphasize the packing and sale of products in large quantities or volumes, some at discounted prices, where products are typically displayed in their original shipping containers. Sites and buildings are usually large and industrial in character. Patrons may be required to pay membership fees.

“Width” means the horizontal distance between the side property lines of a site, measured at right angles to the depth at the rear of a required front yard.

Window, Required. “Required window” means an exterior opening in a habitable room meeting the area requirements of the Waterford building and construction code (Title 15 of the WMC).

“Wireless communication facility” means an unstaffed facility containing communication towers and/or antennas and any related equipment for the purpose of transmitting or receiving electromagnetic radio frequency waves, including, but not limited to, the following technologies: cellular, personal communication services (PCS), general mobile radio services (GMRS), family radio service (R/C), interactive video and data services (IVDS), low power radio service (LPRS) and paging systems. It includes antennas and all other types of equipment used in the transmission or receipt of such signals, structures designed and placed specifically to support this equipment; associated equipment cabinets and/or buildings; and other accessory development. It does not include radio and television towers, antennas or related equipment for commercial broadcast or amateur use; citizens band and any other miscellaneous telemetric and control communications systems.

“Yard or court” means an open space on the same site as a structure, unoccupied and unobstructed by structures from the ground upward or from the floor level of the structure requiring the yard or court upward except as otherwise provided in this title, including a front yard, side yard, rear yard, or court between structures.

Yard, Front. “Front yard” means a yard extending across the full width of a site, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the front property line and a line parallel thereto on the site.

 

Yard, Rear. “Rear yard” means a yard extending across the full width of a site, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the rear property line and a line parallel thereto on the site, except that on a corner lot the rear yard shall extend only to the side yard abutting a street.

Yard, Side. “Side yard” means a yard extending from the rear line of the required front yard, or the front property line of the site where no front yard is required, to the front line of the required rear yard, or the rear property line of the site where no rear yard is required, the width of which is the horizontal distance between the side property line and a line parallel thereto on the site, except that the side yard on the street side of a corner lot shall extend to the rear lot line.

“Zoning ordinance” means the zoning ordinance of the city of Waterford, as amended. (Ord. 2019-08 §1; Ord. 2019-07 §3; Ord. 2015-07 §2; Ord. 2015-06 §1; Ord. 2011-02 §1).

Chapter 17.03 REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION
17.03.010 Purpose.
It is the policy of the city of Waterford, pursuant to the Federal Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988 and the California Fair Employment and Housing Act, to provide individuals with disabilities reasonable accommodation in rules, policies, practices and procedures to ensure equal access to housing and facilitate the development of housing for individuals with disabilities. This chapter establishes a procedure for making requests for reasonable accommodation in land use, zoning and building regulations, policies, practices and procedures of the jurisdiction to comply fully with the intent and purpose of fair housing laws. (Ord. 2015-06 §4).

 

17.03.020 Applicability.
Reasonable accommodation in the land use and zoning context means providing individuals with disabilities or developers of housing for people with disabilities, flexibility in the application of land use and zoning and building regulations, policies, practices and procedures, or even waiving certain requirements, when it is necessary to eliminate barriers to housing opportunities.

An individual with a disability is someone who has a physical or mental impairment that limits one or more major life activities; anyone who is regarded as having such impairment; or anyone with a record of such impairment.

A request for reasonable accommodation may be made by any individual with a disability, his or her representative, or a developer or provider of housing for individuals with disabilities, when the application of a land use, zoning or building regulation, policy, practice or procedure acts as a barrier to fair housing opportunities. (Ord. 2015-06 §4).

 

17.03.030 Notice to the public of availability of accommodation process.
Notice of the availability of reasonable accommodation shall be prominently displayed at public information counter in the planning department, advising the public of the availability of the procedure for eligible individuals. Forms for requesting reasonable accommodation shall be available to the public in the planning department. (Ord. 2015-06 §4).

 

17.03.040 Requesting reasonable accommodation.
A.    In order to make housing available to an individual with a disability, any eligible person as defined in Section 17.03.020 may request a reasonable accommodation in land use, zoning and building regulations, policies, practices and procedures.

B.     Requests for reasonable accommodation shall be in writing and provide the following information:

1.     Name and address of the individual(s) requesting reasonable accommodation;

2.     Name and address of the property owner(s);

3.     Address of the property for which accommodation is requested;

4.     Description of the requested accommodation and regulation(s), policy or procedure for which accommodation is sought; and

5.     Reason that the requested accommodation may be necessary for the individual(s) with the disability to use and enjoy the dwelling.

C.     Any information identified by an applicant as confidential shall be retained in a manner so as to respect the privacy rights of the applicant and shall not be made available for public inspection.

D.    A request for reasonable accommodation in regulations, policies, practices, and procedures may be filed at any time that the accommodation may be necessary to ensure equal access to housing. A reasonable accommodation does not affect an individual’s obligations to comply with other applicable regulations not at issue in the requested accommodation.

E.     If an individual needs assistance in making the request for reasonable accommodation, the city of Waterford will provide assistance to ensure that the process is accessible. (Ord. 2015-06 §4).

 

17.03.050 Reviewing authority.
A.    Requests for reasonable accommodation shall be reviewed by the planning manager, using the criteria set forth in Section 17.03.060.

B.     The planning manager shall issue a written decision on a request for reasonable accommodation within thirty days of the date of the application and may either grant, grant with modifications, or deny a request for reasonable accommodation in accordance with the required findings set forth in Section 17.03.060.

C.     If necessary to reach a determination on the request for reasonable accommodation, the planning manager may request further information from the applicant consistent with fair housing laws, specifying in detail the information that is required. In the event that a request for additional information is made, the thirty-day period to issue a decision is stayed until the applicant responds to the request. (Ord. 2015-06 §4).

 

17.03.060 Required findings.
The written decision to grant, grant with modifications, or deny a request for reasonable accommodation shall be consistent with fair housing laws and based on the following factors:

A.    Whether the housing, which is the subject of the request for reasonable accommodation, will be used by an individual with disabilities, as defined and protected under federal and state fair housing laws;

B.     Whether the requested accommodation is necessary to make housing available to an individual with disabilities protected under the fair housing laws;

C.     Whether the requested accommodation would impose an undue financial or administrative burden on the city; and

D.    Whether the requested accommodation would require a fundamental alteration in the nature of the city’s land use and zoning or building program. (Ord. 2015-06 §4).

 

17.03.070 Written decision on the request for reasonable accommodation.
A.    The written decision on the request for reasonable accommodation shall explain in detail the basis of the decision, including the planning manager’s findings on the criteria set forth in Section 17.03.060. All written decisions shall give notice of the applicant’s right to appeal and to request reasonable accommodation in the appeals process as set forth below. The notice of decision shall be sent to the applicant by certified mail.

B.     The written decision of the planning manager shall be final unless an applicant appeals it to the planning commission.

C.     If the reviewing authority fails to render a written decision on the request for reasonable accommodation within the thirty-day time period allotted by Section 17.03.050 the request shall be deemed granted.

D.    While a request for reasonable accommodation is pending, all laws and regulations otherwise applicable to the property that is the subject of the request shall remain in full force and effect. (Ord. 2015-06 §4).

 

17.03.080 Appeals.
A.    Within thirty days of the date of the planning manager’s written decision, an individual may appeal an adverse decision. Appeals from the adverse decision shall be made in writing.

B.     If an individual needs assistance in filing an appeal on an adverse decision, the city will provide assistance to ensure that the appeals process is accessible.

C.     All appeals shall contain a statement of the grounds for the appeal. Any information identified by an applicant as confidential shall be retained in a manner so as to respect the privacy rights of the applicant and shall not be made available for public inspection.

D.    Appeal procedures are set forth by Waterford Municipal Code Chapter 17.78: Appeals. Decisions by staff may be appealed to the planning commission and decisions of the planning commission may be appealed to the city council.

E.     Nothing in this procedure shall preclude an aggrieved individual from seeking any other state or federal remedy available. (Ord. 2015-06 §4).

 

17.03.090 Severability.
The provisions of these sections of the code are declared to be separate and severable. The invalidity of any clause, sentence, paragraph, subdivision, or portion of these sections, or the invalidity of the application thereof to any person or circumstances, shall not affect the validity of the remainder of this section, or the validity of its application to other persons or circumstances. (Ord. 2015-06 §4).

Chapter 17.04 USE CLASSIFICATIONS
17.04.010 Purpose and applicability.
A.    This chapter is intended to supplement specific zoning district descriptions and use definitions in an effort to characterize the nature of the basic four “use” classifications of residential, public-quasi-public, commercial and industrial. It should be noted that there is limited ability to mix different uses within a specific district (i.e., public/quasi public uses within a residential district, residential uses within a commercial district and commercial uses within an industrial district) but the use that is permitted or conditionally permitted must be operated and maintained in such a manner as to protect the viability and character of the primary district purpose.

B.     Use classifications describe one or more uses having similar characteristics, but do not list every use or activity that may appropriately be within the classification. The planning director shall determine whether a specific use shall be deemed to be within one or more use classifications or not within any classification in this title. The planning director may determine that a specific use shall not be deemed to be within a classification, whether or not named within the classification, if its characteristics are substantially incompatible with those typical of uses named within the classification. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.04.020 Uses not classified.
Any new use, or any use that cannot be clearly determined to be in an existing use classification, may be incorporated into the zoning regulations by a zoning ordinance text amendment, as provided in Chapter 17.72. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.04.030 Residential use classifications.
A.    Single-Family Residential Unit and One Accessory Residential Unit. A building containing one dwelling unit located on a single lot. This classification includes mobile home and factory-built housing.

B.     Multifamily Apartments Residential. Two or more dwelling units on a site. This classification includes mobile home and factory-built housing.

C.     Day Care, Limited. Non-medical care and supervision of eight or fewer persons on a less than twenty-four-hour basis. This classification includes nursery schools, preschools, and day care centers for children and adults.

D.    Group Residential. Shared living quarters without separate kitchen or bathroom facilities for each room or unit. This classification includes boardinghouses, dormitories, fraternities, sororities, and private residential clubs.

E.     Private Garage. A building used in conjunction with a residential activity for the exclusive purpose of storing a residential vehicle and some additional household materials, furniture, or household items. Limited maintenance of the “family vehicle” is typically permitted but use of electric or powered tools that can generate noise or other disturbances to adversely impact a residential neighborhood are prohibited.

F.     Garage, Patio or Yard Sales. Limited to the infrequent sale of used household items sold by the owner of a residence and limited with respect to frequency, area and time of operation.

G.    The Keeping of Domestic Animals and Pets. This includes a limited number of household pets and domestic animals that are maintained within a “home” and/or a fenced yard and do not create a public nuisance by virtue of odor or noise (see definition).

H.    Home Occupations. The city of Waterford recognizes that home-based businesses, primarily of an information processing nature, is a central part of the economy of the future as a result of advances in telecommunication/Internet technology. Waterford encourages a business occupation that is conducted entirely within the home of the business person and does not distract from the residential neighborhood within which it is located (see definition).

I.      Residential Care, Limited. Twenty-four-hour non-medical care for six or fewer persons in need of personal services, supervision, protection, or assistance essential for sustaining the activities of daily living. This classification includes only those services and facilities licensed by the state of California. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.04.040 Public and semipublic use classifications.
A.    Cemetery. A place for burying the dead.

B.     Clubs and Lodges. Meeting, recreational or social facilities of a private or nonprofit organization primarily for use by members or guests. This classification includes union halls, social clubs, and youth centers.

C.     Convalescent Facilities. Establishments providing care on a twenty-four-hour basis for persons requiring regular medical attention, but excluding facilities providing surgical or emergency medical services.

D.    Cultural Institutions. Nonprofit institutions displaying or preserving objects of interest in one or more of the arts or sciences. This classification includes libraries, museums, and art galleries.

E.     Day Care, General. Provision of non-medical care for nine or more persons on a less than twenty-four-hour basis. This classification includes nursery schools, preschools, and day care centers for children or adults.

F.     Detention Facilities. Publicly owned and operated facilities providing housing, care, and supervision for persons confined by law.

 

G.    Government Offices. Administrative, clerical, or public contact offices of a government agency, including postal facilities, together with incidental storage and maintenance of vehicles.

H.    Heliports. Pads and facilities enabling takeoffs and landings by helicopters.

I.      Hospitals. Facilities providing medical, surgical, psychiatric, or emergency medical services to sick or injured persons, primarily on an inpatient basis. This classification includes incidental facilities for outpatient treatment, as well as training, research, and administrative services for patients and employees.

J.      Maintenance and Service Facilities. Facilities providing maintenance and repair services for vehicles and equipment, and materials storage areas. This classification includes corporation yards, equipment service centers, and similar facilities.

K.    Parks and Recreation Facilities. Noncommercial parks, playgrounds, recreation facilities, and open spaces.

L.     Public Safety Facilities. Facilities for public safety and emergency services, including police and fire protection.

M.    Religious Assembly. Facilities for religious worship and incidental religious education, but not including private schools as defined in this section.

N.    Residential Care, General. Twenty-four-hour non-medical care for seven or more persons, including wards of the juvenile court, in need of personal services, supervision, protection, or assistance essential for sustaining the activities of daily living. This classification includes only those services and facilities licensed by the state of California.

O.    Schools, Public and Private. Educational institutions having a curriculum comparable to that required in the public schools of the state of California.

P.     Utilities, Major. Generating plants greater than five megawatts in size, electrical substations, aboveground electrical transmission lines, refuse collection or disposal facilities, water reservoirs, water or wastewater treatment plants, and similar facilities of public agencies, public utilities or private utilities. A structure that may have a significant effect on surrounding uses shall be regulated under this classification.

Waste Facility. A facility that provides for on-site waste stabilization or neutralization. This classification excludes hazardous waste disposal facilities.

Q.    Utilities, Minor. Utility facilities that are necessary to support legally established uses and involve only minor structures such as electrical distribution lines and underground water and sewer lines. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.04.050 Commercial use classifications.
A.    Live/Work Quarters. An area comprised of one or more rooms or floors in a building originally designed for industrial or commercial occupancy that includes cooking space and sanitary facilities and working space for artists, artisans and similarly situated individuals.

B.     Ambulance Services. Provision of emergency medical care or transportation, including incidental storage and maintenance of vehicles.

C.     Animal Sales and Services.

1.     Animal Boarding and Kennels. Provision of shelter and care for small animals on a commercial basis. This classification includes activities such as feeding, exercising, grooming, and incidental medical care.

2.     Animal Grooming. Provision of bathing and trimming services for small animals on a commercial basis. This classification includes boarding of domestic animals for a maximum period of forty-eight hours.

3.     Animal Hospitals. Establishments where small animals receive medical and surgical treatment. This classification includes only facilities that are entirely enclosed, soundproofed, and air-conditioned. Grooming and temporary (thirty days) boarding of animals is included if incidental to the hospital use.

4.     Animals—Retail Sales and Pet Stores. Retail sales and boarding of small animals, provided such activities take place within an entirely enclosed building. This classification includes grooming, if incidental to the retail use, and boarding of animals not offered for sale for a maximum period of forty-eight hours.

D.    Artists’ Studios. Work space for artists and artisans, including individuals practicing one of the fine arts or performing arts, or skilled in an applied art or craft.

E.     Banks and Savings and Loans. Financial institutions that provide retail banking services to individuals and businesses. This classification includes only those institutions engaged in the on-site circulation of cash money.

With Drive-up Service. Institutions providing services accessible to persons who remain in automobiles.

F.     Building Materials and Services. Retailing, wholesaling, or rental of building supplies or equipment. This classification includes lumber yards, tool and equipment sales or rental establishments, and building contractors’ yards, but excludes retail sales of paint and hardware, except as an accessory use to a lumber yard, and activities classified under “vehicle/equipment sales and services.”

G.    Cannabis Delivery Business. Any cannabis business that, pursuant to a Type 10 state cannabis license, or its successors, delivers, makes available, or distributes cannabis and cannabis products to a consumer.

H.    Cannabis Dispensary. Any cannabis business where medicinal or adult-use cannabis or cannabis products are sold at retail, pursuant to a Type 10 state cannabis license, or its successors. A cannabis dispensary includes a cannabis business that provides cannabis deliveries.

I.      Cannabis Testing Laboratory. A cannabis business that tests cannabis or cannabis products pursuant to a Type 8 state cannabis license, or its successors.

J.      Catering Services. Preparation and delivery of food and beverages for off-site consumption without provision for on-site pickup or consumption. (See also “eating and drinking establishments.”)

K.    Commercial Filming. Commercial motion picture or video photography at the same location more than six days per quarter of a calendar year.

L.     Commercial Recreation and Entertainment. Provision of participant or spectator recreation or entertainment. This classification includes theaters, sports stadiums and arenas, amusement parks, bowling alleys, billiard parlors, ice/roller skating rinks, golf courses, miniature golf courses, scale-model courses, shooting galleries, tennis/racquetball courts, health/fitness clubs, pinball arcades or electronic games centers having three or more coin-operated game machines, card rooms, subject to the regulation of Chapter 5.20, and facilities used exclusively for bingo games, as regulated by Chapter 5.24.

1.     Game center, billiard parlor.

2.     Limited. Indoor movie theaters and performing arts theaters.

M.    Communications Facilities. Broadcasting, recording, and other communication services accomplished through electronic or telephonic mechanisms, but excluding “Utilities (major).” This classification includes radio, television, or recording studios; telephone switching centers; and telegraph offices.

N.    Conference and Meeting Facilities. Facilities providing indoor and/or outdoor event space for conferences, meetings, weddings, banquets, luncheons or similar events on a commercial basis.

O.    Eating and Drinking Establishments. Businesses serving prepared food or beverages for consumption on or off the premises.

1.     With Wine and Beer Service. Alcoholic beverages served are limited to wine and beer.

2.     With full alcoholic beverage service.

3.     With Live Entertainment. Establishments offering live entertainment, as defined in Chapters 5.16 and 5.38.

4.     With Take-Out Service. Establishments at which twenty percent or more of the transactions are sales for off-site consumption, and which serve or deliver prepared food to persons in vehicles or have more than two work stations at which employees package or service prepared food and receive payment.

a.     Drive-Up. Service from a building to persons in vehicles through an outdoor service window.

b.     Limited. Establishments that do not serve persons in vehicles.

5.     Truck Stop. A facility geared primarily to providing services for truckers, including on-site fueling, repair and servicing of freight trucks; restaurant facilities; restrooms; towing services; overnight accommodations and related services.

P.     Food and Beverage Sales. Retail sales of food and beverages for off-site preparation and consumption. Typical uses include groceries, liquor stores, or delicatessens. Establishments at which twenty percent or more of the transactions are sales of prepared food for on-site or take-out consumption shall be classified as “catering services” or “eating and drinking establishments.”

Q.    Funeral and Interment Services. Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of services involving the care, preparation or disposition of human dead other than in cemeteries. Typical uses include crematories, columbariums, mausoleums or mortuaries.

R.     Laboratories. Establishments providing medical or dental laboratory services or establishments with less than two thousand square feet providing photographic, analytical, or testing services. Other laboratories are classified as “limited industry.”

S.     Maintenance and Repair Services. Establishments providing appliance repair, office machine repair, bicycle repair or building maintenance services. This classification excludes maintenance and repair of vehicles (see “vehicle/equipment repair”) or boats or ships (see “marine sales and services”).

T.     Boat and Associated Water Sports Sales and Services. Establishments providing supplies and equipment for shipping or related services, or pleasure boating. Typical uses include chandleries, yacht brokerage and sales, boat yards, boat docks, and sail-making lofts.

U.    Nurseries. Establishments in which all merchandise other than plants is kept within an encased building or fully screened enclosure, and fertilizer of any type is stored and sold in package form only.

V.    Offices, Business and Professional. Offices of firms or organizations providing professional, executive, management, or administrative services, such as architectural, engineering, real estate, insurance, investment, legal, and medical/dental offices. This classification includes medical/dental laboratories incidental to an office use, and pharmacies, eyeglass shops, and similar prescription-dispensing services as an accessory to a medical office complex, but excludes banks and savings and loan associations.

W.    Pawn Shops. Establishments engaged in retail sales of new or secondhand merchandise and offering loans secured by personal property.

X.    Personal Improvement Services. Provision of instructional services or facilities, including photography, fine arts, crafts, dance or music studios, driving schools, business and trade schools, and diet centers.

Y.    Personal Services. Provision of recurrently needed services of a personal nature. This classification includes barber and beauty shops, seamstresses, tailors, shoe repair shops, dry cleaning agencies (excluding plants), and self-service laundries.

Z.     Research and Development Services. Establishments primarily engaged in industrial or scientific research, including limited product testing. This classification includes electron research firms or pharmaceutical research laboratories, but excludes manufacturing or medical testing and analysis.

AA.  Produce Stand. Are temporary produce sales locations that do not have continuous sales of more than thirty days during any three-month period of time and all produce sold at the site are agricultural products grown on the site where the sale is occurring. The sales area, access and parking, does not create a public nuisance or create a potential traffic hazard.

BB.  Produce Market. Are commercial produce sales enterprises which are principally carried out within a building but may include outdoor sales/display areas and are conducted principally within C districts and the AG zone and may involve the sales of some agricultural products that are not grown and produced on the site.

CC.  Retail Sales. The retail sale of merchandise not specifically listed under another use classification. This classification includes department stores, clothing stores, and furniture stores and businesses retailing the following goods: toys, hobby materials, handcrafted items, jewelry, cameras, photographic supplies, electronic equipment, records, sporting goods, kitchen utensils, hardware, appliances, antiques, art supplies and services, paint and wallpaper, carpeting and floor covering, office supplies, bicycles, and new automotive parts and accessories (excluding service and installation).

DD.  Secondhand Appliance and Clothing Sales. The retail sale of used appliances and clothing carried on entirely within a building and not displayed or merchandised outside of building or enclosure and not visible from any public right-of-way. This classification excludes antique shops primarily engaged in the sale of used furniture and accessories other than appliances.

EE.   Swap Meets, Recurring. Retail sale or exchange of new, handcrafted, or secondhand merchandise for a maximum period of forty-eight hours, conducted by a sponsor on a more than twice yearly basis.

FF.   Vehicle/Equipment Sales and Services.

1.     Automobile Rentals. Rental of automobiles, taxicab services, and limousine services, including storage and incidental maintenance, but excluding maintenance requiring pneumatic lifts.

2.     Automobile Washing. Washing, waxing, or cleaning of automobiles or similar light vehicles.

3.     Service Stations. Establishments engaged in the retail sale of gas, diesel fuel, lubricants, parts and accessories. This classification includes incidental maintenance and repair of automobiles and light trucks, but excludes body and fender work or repair of heavy trucks or vehicles.

4.     Vehicle/Equipment Repair. Repair of automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, mobile homes, recreational vehicles, or boats, including the sale, installation, and servicing of related equipment and parts. This classification includes auto repair shops, auto detailing shops, body and fender shops, wheel and brake shops, and tire sales and installation, but excludes vehicle dismantling or salvage and tire re-treading or recapping.

5.     Vehicle/Equipment Sales and Rentals. Sale or rental of automobiles, motorcycles, trucks, tractors, construction or agricultural equipment, mobile homes, and similar equipment, including storage and incidental maintenance.

6.     Vehicle Storage. Storage of operative or inoperative vehicles. This classification includes storage of parking tow-a-ways, impound yards, and storage lots for automobiles, trucks, buses and recreational vehicles, but does not include vehicle dismantling.

GG.  Visitor Accommodations.

1.     Bed and Breakfast Inns. Establishments offering lodging on a less than weekly basis typically in a converted single-family or multifamily dwelling, with incidental eating and drinking service, for lodgers only, provided from a single kitchen.

2.     Hotels and Motels. Establishments offering lodging on a less than weekly basis, and having kitchens in no more than sixty percent of guest units. This classification includes eating, drinking, and banquet service.

3.     Boarding or Rooming House. Establishments where people live a more or less transient state but meals are served or limited kitchen facilities are present in the facility.

4.     Campground. Public recreation facilities operated in conjunction with Tuolumne River and lake recreation facilities.

HH.  Wholesales Distribution. Selling of wholesale to retail establishments exclusively. No general public sales.

II.     Wholesale Retail Stores. Selling of wholesale and retail goods to the general public. (Ord. 2019-08 §2; Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.04.060 Industrial use classifications.
A.    Cannabis Cultivation Business. Any cannabis business that, pursuant to a Type 1, Type 1A, Type 1B, Type 1C, Type 2, Type 2A, Type 2B, Type 3, Type 3A, Type 3B, Type 4, Type 5, Type 5A, Type 5B, or Type 12 state cannabis license, or their successors, cultivates cannabis or cannabis products.

 

B.     Cannabis Distribution Business. Any cannabis business that, pursuant to a Type 11 or Type 13 state cannabis license, or their successors, procures, sells, or transports cannabis or cannabis products.

C.     Cannabis Manufacturing Business. Any cannabis business that, pursuant to a Type 6, Type 7, or Type 12 state cannabis license, or their successors, manufacturers cannabis or cannabis products.

D.    Cannabis Testing Laboratory. A cannabis business that tests cannabis or cannabis products pursuant to a Type 8 state cannabis license, or its successors.

E.     Industry, Custom. Establishments primarily engaged in off-site production of goods by hand manufacturing involving the use of hand tools and small-scale equipment.

1.     Limited. Includes mechanical equipment not exceeding two horsepower or a single kiln not exceeding eight kilowatts and the incidental direct sale to consumers of those goods produced on-site. Typical uses include ceramic studios, candle-making shops, and custom jewelry manufacture.

2.     Boat or watercraft building, custom automobile or motorcycle fabrication.

F.     Industry, General. Manufacturing of products primarily from extracted or raw materials, or bulk storage and handling of such products and materials. Uses in this classification typically involve a high incidence of truck or rail traffic, and/or outdoor storage of products, materials, equipment, or bulk fuel. This classification includes chemical manufacture or processing, food processing and packaging, laundry and dry cleaning plants, auto dismantling within an enclosed building, oil and gas refining, stonework and concrete products manufacture (excluding concrete ready-mix plants) within an enclosed building, and accessory power generation facilities of five megawatts or less in conjunction with a permitted use.

G.    Junkyards, salvage and wrecking yards where scrap metal, automobiles and equipment can be dismantled and resold as parts or for scrap and all activities are conducted entirely within a building or enclosed area and cannot be viewed from a public street or roadway.

H.    Industry, Limited. Manufacturing of finished parts or products, primarily from previously prepared materials; and provision of industrial services; both within an enclosed building. This classification includes processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, and packaging, but excludes basic industrial processing from raw materials, food processing, and vehicle/equipment sales and services.

Small-Scale. Limited to a maximum gross floor area of five thousand square feet.

I.      Industry, Research and Development. Establishments primarily engaged in the research, development, and controlled production of high-technology electronic, industrial or scientific products or commodities for sale, but prohibit uses that may be objectionable, in the opinion of the planning director, by reason of production of offensive odor, dust, noise, vibration, or storage of hazardous materials. Uses include biotechnology, films, and nontoxic computer component manufacturers.

J.      Wholesaling, Distribution and Storage.

1.     Wholesaling and Distribution. Facilities primarily engaged in the selling of goods, merchandise, products or materials to retailers, contractors, professional business users, other wholesalers or to agents or brokers. May include related storage, break-bulk activity, redistribution and delivery.

2.     Warehousing and Transportation. Storage of products or goods, including household goods, with related local or long-distance trucking and transfer of stored items.

 

3.     Trucking Terminal/Freight Transfer Station. A facility where goods and products are transferred, often directly, from one vehicle to another without the storage of such goods and products on a long-term basis within a warehouse building or storage yard. Includes break-bulk facilities. May include related maintenance facilities and incidental storage of trucks on-site when not in use.

4.     Package Distribution. A warehousing and distribution facility used primarily to gather and distribute for delivery, packages and mail.

K.    Temporary Residential Shelter (Small). A small temporary residential shelter consisting of not more than twenty-four beds that provides temporary housing for homeless people and is operated by a “not-for-profit” organization to the sole purpose of meeting the temporary housing needs of the city of Waterford’s indigent population.

L.     Temporary Residential Shelter (Large). A large temporary residential shelter consisting of more than twenty-four beds, that provides temporary housing for homeless people and is operated by a “not-for-profit” organization to the sole purpose of meeting the temporary housing needs of the city of Waterford’s indigent population. (Ord. 2019-08 §3; Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.04.070 Agricultural use classifications.
A.    General Agriculture. Includes activities such as the tilling of the soil, the raising of crops, horticulture, viticulture, limited livestock and small livestock farming, aquaculture, or limited animal husbandry such as FFA or 4H projects, including all uses customarily incidental thereto but not including poultry ranching, dairying, slaughterhouses, fertilizer yards, bone yards or plants for the reduction of animal matter or any other industrial or agricultural use or activity which is similarly objectionable because of noise, odor, smoke, dust or fumes.

 

B.     Small Animal Husbandry. Raising of small animals or production of animal products, such as eggs or dairy products, on an agriculturally designated property for domestic or personal consumption or as part of an FFA or 4H youth project and subject to the city’s animal standards.

C.     Crop Production. Raising and harvesting of tree crops, row crops, or field crops on an agricultural or commercial basis, including packing and processing.

D.    Limited Agricultural Processing. Includes the changing an agricultural product (fruits, nuts and vegetables but not including animals) from its natural state to a different form, such as grapes to wine, apples to juice or sauce, etc. Limited agricultural processing shall be limited to crops grown on the subject property, fifty percent of which may be grown within a one-mile radius of the subject property.

E.     General Agricultural Processing. Includes activities such as packing, sizing, polishing, hulling and the like. The manufacture of tomato paste or similar types of canneries or processes involving heat or chemical industrial techniques shall not be considered to be general agricultural processing.

F.     Agricultural Service Establishments. Includes businesses engaging in activities designed to aid production agriculture. Service does not include the provision of tangible goods except those sold directly to farmers and used specifically to aid in production of farm animals or crops. Nor does service include any business which has the primary function of manufacturing products.

G.    Production Agriculture. Includes producing of plant and animal commodities for commercial purposes.

H.    Small Livestock Farming. Includes the raising or keeping of more than twelve chicken hens, turkeys or twelve pigeons or twelve similar fowl or twelve rabbits or twelve similar animals, or four permanent standard beehives, or any roosters, quacking ducks, geese, guinea fowl, peafowl, goats, sheep, worms or similar livestock provided that the term “small livestock farming” as used in this title shall not include hog farming, dairying or the raising or keeping for commercial purposes of horses, mules or similar livestock as determined by the city council.

I.      Private and Public Stables. Includes accessory buildings or space where horses are kept for the private use of the owner and guests or for the commercial rental, training, or boarding of horses.

J.      Tasting Room and Fruit Stand. Includes a facility in which agricultural products, grown or processed on the premises, may be tasted and sold. A restaurant, where complete meals are served and consumed, shall not be considered to be a tasting room.

K.    Private or Public Kennel. Includes a place where five or more dogs or cats over four months of age are kept for commercial or noncommercial purposes.

L.     Horticulture, Limited. Includes the raising of vegetables, flowers, ornamental trees and shrubs as a commercial enterprise; provided, that no nursery equipment or materials shall be stored and no structures erected. Commercial horticulture accessory to a dwelling unit shall be regulated as a home occupation. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.04.080 Accessory use classifications.
Accessory Uses and Structures. Uses and structures that are incidental to the principal permitted or conditionally permitted use or structure on a site and are customarily found on the same site. This classification includes accessory dwelling units (ADUs) and junior accessory dwelling units (JADUs), home occupations, and construction trailers.

A.    Nonresidential Accessory Structures. Structures with no bedrooms, kitchens, or cooking facilities.

 

B.     Accessory Dwelling Unit. An attached or detached residential dwelling unit that provides complete independent living facilities for one or more persons and is located on a lot with a proposed or existing primary residence. It shall include permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation on the same parcel as the single-family or multifamily dwelling is or will be situated. An accessory dwelling unit also includes the following:

1.     An efficiency unit.

2.     A manufactured home, as defined in Section 18007 of the Health and Safety Code.

C.     Junior Accessory Dwelling Unit. A unit that is no more than five hundred square feet in size and contained entirely within a single-family residence. A junior accessory dwelling unit may include separate sanitation facilities or may share sanitation facilities with the existing structure. (Ord. 2020-05 §2; Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.04.090 Temporary use classifications.
A.    Animal Shows. Exhibitions of domestic or large animals for a maximum of seven days.

B.     Seasonal Sales. Includes, but is not limited to, retail sale of Christmas trees, pumpkins and related Halloween decorations and 4th of July fireworks sales.

C.     Circuses and Carnivals. Provision of games, eating and drinking facilities, live entertainment, animal exhibitions, or similar activities in a tent or other temporary structure for a maximum of seven days as set forth in Chapter 5.08. This classification excludes events conducted in a permanent entertainment facility.

D.    Commercial Filming, Limited. Commercial motion picture or video photography at the same location six or fewer days per quarter of a calendar year.

E.     Personal Property, Yard, Garage or Patio Sales. Sales of personal property.

F.     Religious Assembly. Religious services conducted on a site that is not permanently occupied by a religious assembly use, for a period of not more than three days during any three-month period.

G.    Retail Sales, Special Outdoor. Retail sales of new merchandise on the site of a legally established retail business.

H.    Street Fairs and Farmers Markets. Provision of games, eating and drinking facilities, live entertainment, or similar activities not requiring the use of roofed structures.

I.      Swap Meets, Nonrecurring. Retail sale or exchange of new, handcrafted, or secondhand merchandise for a maximum period of forty-eight hours, conducted by a sponsor no more than twice in any year.

J.      Trade Fairs. Display and sale of goods or equipment related to a specific trade or industry for a maximum period of five days.

K.    Temporary Bake Sales, Car Washes or Similar Charity or Organizational Fundraising Activities. Activity to be provided within a parking lot or sidewalk area in such a manner that it does not block public vehicular or pedestrian traffic or create a traffic pedestrian hazard and subject to city encroachment permits where applicable.

L.     Temporary Schools, Outdoor Classroom Events. Conducted on public or private open space in a non-residential area and subject to city permits where applicable.

 

M.    Other Uses. Other uses of a clearly temporary nature as determined to be appropriate by the planning director. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

Chapter 17.06 ZONING DISTRICTS, PLAN AND MAPS
17.06.010 Districts—Established.
The districts indicated in Section 17.06.020 are established and the designations, locations and boundaries thereof are shown on the official zoning map of the city of Waterford. This map and all notations, references and other information shown on it are made a part of this chapter by reference. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.06.020 Districts—Designated.
The several districts are as follows:

OS open space district

AG agricultural district

RE rural estates district

PS public and semipublic district

Residential districts:

RS residential single-family district

RH residential high density district

RM residential medium density district

MHP mobile home park district

DBO density bonus district

Commercial districts:

CH commercial highway service district

CC central commercial district

CG general commercial district

CR regional commercial district

Industrial districts:

IL limited industrial district

IG general industrial district

IP industrial park district

PC planned community district

 

SP specific plan district

(Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.06.030 Zoning plan.
A.    In order to classify, regulate, restrict and segregate the uses of land and buildings; to regulate and restrict the height and bulk of buildings; to regulate the area of yards and other open spaces about buildings; and to regulate the density of housing and population, the zoning districts in Section 17.06.020 are established.

B.     Previous Zoning. All uses and structures legally established prior to June 1, 2011 under previous zoning regulations shall be deemed consistent with the zoning district regulations contained herein in accordance with the following schedule:

1.     All uses and structures established in the P-F district shall be deemed consistent with the PS district.

2.     All uses and structures established in the R-1 district shall be deemed consistent with the RS district.

3.     All uses and structures established in the R-2 district shall be deemed consistent with the RM district.

4.     All uses and structures established in the R-3 district shall be deemed consistent with the RH district.

5.     All uses and structures established in the C-1 district shall be deemed consistent with the CC district.

6.     All uses and structures established in the C-2 district shall be deemed consistent with the CG district.

7.     All uses and structures established in the M district shall be deemed consistent with the IL district.

8.     All uses and structures established in the L-M district shall be deemed consistent with the IL district. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.06.040 Boundary determination.
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any of the aforementioned districts as described in this chapter or as shown on the sectional district maps, the planning commission, upon written application or upon its own motion shall determine the boundaries of such district. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.06.050 Compliance with district provisions required.
In districts indicated on the official zoning map of the city of Waterford adopted as part of this title, no building shall be erected and no existing building shall be moved, altered, added to or enlarged, nor shall any land or building be used, or designed to be used for any purpose or in any manner, nor shall any yard or other open space surrounding any building be encroached upon or reduced, except as permitted by and in conformity to the regulations specified herein for the district in which such building or yard or other open space is located. No building shall be erected, reconstructed, or structurally altered to exceed the height limit hereinafter designed for the district in which such building is located. No yard or open space provided about any building for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this title shall be considered as providing a yard or open space for any other lot. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.06.060 Proximity to right-of-way line.
No building shall hereafter be erected, nor shall any use of land be conducted, except the use of land for agricultural purposes, so that the same will be closer to the right-of-way line of any street than any official plan line or any building line which has been established for such street by the circulation element, or section thereof of the general plan of the city. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

Chapter 17.08 AG AGRICULTURAL GENERAL DISTRICT
17.08.010 Intent.
The city of Waterford declares that it is the policy and intent of the city and this chapter to declare a statement of policy to preserve and protect existing potential future agricultural operations consistent with goals, policies and standards of the Waterford general plan within the incorporated city limits and those unincorporated agricultural lands adjacent to the city’s boundaries. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.08.020 Purpose.
A.    In addition to the general purposes listed in Section 17.01.020, it is the purpose of these district regulations to support and enhance agriculture as the interim land use in the incorporated areas of the city adjacent to the unincorporated areas of the county.

B.     This district may also be appropriately applied to areas where limited agricultural uses serve as a long-term buffer between unincorporated Stanislaus County agricultural lands and residential areas within the incorporated areas of the city of Waterford.

C.     These district regulations are also intended to protect open space lands pursuant to Government Code Section 65910. The procedures contained in this chapter are specifically established to ensure that all land uses are compatible with agriculture and open space, including natural resources management, outdoor recreation and enjoyment of scenic beauty. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.08.030 Land use regulations.
A.    Schedule 08-1 below prescribes the land use regulations for single-family residential districts. The regulations for each district are established by letter designations as follows:

1.     “P” designates use classifications permitted in the AG district.

2.     “L”   designates use classifications that are permitted, subject to certain limitations.

3.     “T”   designates use classifications that are permitted to be conducted for a limited period of time and that require a temporary use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.74.

4.     “AU” designates a use classification permitted in the district but requiring an administrative use permit as provided in Chapter 17.73 due to the nature of the use or the area within which the use is proposed requiring special review/approval procedures.

5.     “U” designates use classifications that may be permitted upon approval of a conditional use permit, as provided in Chapter 17.75.

6.     Where letters in parentheses are opposite a use classification heading, referenced regulations shall apply to all use classifications under the heading.

7.     Letters in parentheses in the “Special Regulations” column refer to subsections in Section 17.08.040.

B.     Use classifications are defined in Chapter 17.04. In cases where a proposed use is not included in a use classification, the planning director shall determine whether the proposed use is substantially similar in character to a permitted use classification and in that event shall assign the proposed use to a permitted use classification. Use classifications not listed in Schedule 08-1 below are prohibited. Supplemental use regulations for the AG district are set forth in Section 17.08.040.

Schedule 08-1 AG District Use Table (see Ch. 17.04, Use Classifications)

 

Use Classification*

AG

Special Regulations

Agricultural Use Classifications (see §17.04.070)

 

(T) & (U)

Buildings, appurtenances & uses

P, L

(A) (B)

Raising of crops and orchards

P

 

Vineyards

P

 

Temporary uses related to agriculture

P, L

(C)

Employee housing

P, L

(D)

Raising of large animals

U, L

(E) (G) (M)

Raising of small animals

U, L

(E) (G) (M)

Soil reclamation

P

 

Commercial Use Classifications (see §17.04.050)

 

(T) & (U)

Produce markets

U

(F) (G)

Produce stand

P

 

Commercial or municipal composting

U

(L) (F) (G)

Agricultural service establishment

U, L

(H) (G)

Other

U, L

(N)

Industrial Use Classifications (see §17.04.060)

 

(T) & (U)

Stationary installations

U, L

(O)

Agricultural processing plants & facilities

U, L

(I) (G)

Residential Use Classifications (see §17.04.030)

 

(T) & (U)

Single-family residence

L

On more than 3-acre parcel

Second single-family residence

L

On 20 acres or more

Employee housing

P

No more than 12 units or 36 beds

Public and Semipublic Use Classifications (see §17.04.040)

 

(T) & (U)

 

*       See indicated code section with respect to use classification. Uses indicated are a subset of the uses that may occur in this district. Other uses, which are not listed below, may be approved subject to AU procedures provided that they are similar to the indicated uses with respect to impacts on surrounding uses and the stated purpose and intent of the AG district (Sections 17.08.010 and 17.08.020).

(Ord. 2015-06 §3; Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.08.040 AG district—Supplemental land use regulations.
A.    Buildings, appurtenances, and uses such as custom contract harvesting or land preparation where the buildings, appurtenances, or uses are incidental and accessory to the use of the subject property for farming purposes.

B.     Detached accessory buildings, the use of which are incidental to, and reasonably related to, a main building on the same lot or to the primary use of the property as determined by the director of planning and community development.

C.     Temporary uses subject to limitations and provisions of Chapter 17.74.

D.    Permanent housing for persons employed on a full-time basis in connection with the agricultural use of the property or other property owned or leased by the same owner. The parcel(s) shall be large enough in terms of acreage, crops, production, number of animals, to clearly support and justify the establishment of an additional dwelling(s) for a full-time employee. Applicants will be required to substantiate that the employee is, in fact, a full-time employee. Permits granted for employee housing shall require that new residences be placed in close proximity to existing dwelling to minimize the disruption of agricultural land and to take maximum advantage of existing facilities, including utilities and driveways.

E.     The raising of animals, large or small, shall not result in the creation of a nuisance.

F.     Produce markets as defined and regulated in Chapter 17.56.

G.    Uses listed must be agriculture-related commercial and industrial uses that may be allowed when the planning commission or city council, as required in accordance with this title, finds that, in addition to the findings required under Chapter 17.75:

1.     The establishment as proposed will not be substantially detrimental to or in conflict with agricultural use of other property in the vicinity; and

2.     The establishment as proposed will not create a concentration of commercial and industrial uses in the vicinity; and

3.     It is necessary and desirable for such establishment to be located within the agricultural area as opposed to areas zoned for commercial or industrial usage.

H.    Agricultural service establishments primarily engaging in the provision of agricultural services to farmers, including contract harvesting. Such establishments shall be designed to serve the immediately surrounding area as opposed to having a widespread service area.

I.      Agricultural processing plants and facilities, such as wineries, dehydrators, canneries, and similar agriculture-related industrial uses, provided:

1.     The plant or facility is operated in conjunction with, or as a part of, a bona fide agricultural production operation;

2.     At least fifty percent of the produce to be processed is grown on the premises or on property located in Stanislaus County in the same ownership or lease; and

3.     The number of full-time, year-round employees involved in the processing shall not exceed ten, and the number of part-time, seasonal employees shall not exceed twenty.

J.      In conjunction with an agricultural processing plant or facility, incidental retail sales, tasting rooms and/or facilities for on-site consumption of agricultural produce processed on the premises, provided:

1.     The primary purpose is to promote sales of the agricultural product(s) produced and processed on the premises;

2.     The use is subordinate to the production of such product and the use of such agricultural processing facility; and

3.     The number of full-time, year-round employees involved in the operation shall not exceed ten, and the number of part-time, seasonal employees shall not exceed twenty.

K.    Soil reclamation, or the process of cleaning or decontaminating soil that has been contaminated by gasoline or other toxic materials.

L.     Commercial or municipal composting, processing and/or spreading of whey, treated sludge or biosolids (including Class A and Class B), or other organic matter when the matter to be composted, processed and/or spread is not generated on-site and the composting, processing and/or spreading is not part of a routine farming practice. Composting operations with less than one thousand cubic yards or three hundred tons of active composting material on site at any given time shall be considered an agricultural use and shall be exempt from this provision. (This provision is intended to apply to operations whose primary function is the composting, processing and/or spreading of organic matter; it is not intended to apply to composting and/or the use of fertilizers and other soil amendments or feed additives in conjunction with agricultural production.)

M.    New confined animal facility and expansions of existing confined animal facility requiring a new or modified permit, waiver, order or waste discharge requirements from the Regional Water Quality Control Board, where the issuance of such permit, waiver, order or waste discharge requirements requires compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act. Lagoons or ponds for the storage of animal wastes shall be located a minimum of fifty feet from any property line and three hundred feet from any dwelling on an adjacent property.

N.    Uses that are not directly related to agriculture but may be necessary to serve the AG district or may be difficult to locate in non-agricultural area of the city. Some of these uses can be people-intensive and, as a result, have the potential to adversely impact agriculture; these uses may be allowed when the planning commission finds that, in addition to the findings required under Chapter 17.75:

1.     The use as proposed will not be substantially detrimental to or in conflict with agricultural use of other property in the vicinity; and

2.     The parcel on which such use is requested is not located on Class “A” or “prime” soils as designated on the most recent soils map for the area; or the character of the use that is requested is such that the land may reasonably be returned to agricultural use in the future.

a.     Public stables, including boarding and training, and kennels;

b.     Bridle paths, riding academies, roping arenas and similar facilities for the training, exercising or exhibiting of horses, dogs or other animals;

c.     Recreational camps without housing for permanent residents and dude or guest ranches;

d.     Cemeteries;

e.     Schools offering general academic instruction equivalent to the standards prescribed by the State Board of Education;

f.      Day care centers when accessory to a school offering general academic instruction equivalent to the standards prescribed by the State Board of Education;

g.     Golf courses (excluding miniature golf), golf driving ranges and practice putting greens, athletic fields and facilities (when operated by a nonprofit organization or club), and related facilities (including, but not limited to, clubhouse, pro shop and food and drink facilities);

h.     Commercial excavation of earth, minerals, building materials or removal of oil or gas, together with the necessary apparatus and appurtenances incidental thereto.

O.    Stationary installations such as alfalfa and feed dehydrators; commercial viners; fuel alcohol stills designed to serve a localized area; nut hulling, shelling, and drying; agricultural experiment stations; warehouses for storage of grain and other farm produce; weighing, loading and grading stations; wholesale nurseries and landscape contractors when conducted in conjunction with a wholesale nursery; agricultural backhoe services; sale of firewood; and similar agricultural facilities.

P.     Lagoons or ponds for the storage of animal wastes, except when a use permit is required under Chapter 17.75. Such lagoons or ponds shall be located a minimum of fifty feet from any property line and three hundred feet from any dwelling on an adjacent property. Other standards may be imposed by other county or state agencies.

Q.    Christmas tree sales lots and Halloween pumpkin sales lots provided they meet the required setbacks and provide at least ten accessible and usable off-street parking spaces in addition to one space per employee on a maximum shift. Such lots shall be limited to two double-faced signs not to exceed twelve square feet on each face. No off-site signs shall be permitted. Such Halloween pumpkin sales lots may not be established prior to October 1st of any year and shall be removed and the property returned to its previous condition by November 15th; Christmas tree sales lots may not be established prior to November 15th of any year and shall be removed and the property returned to its previous condition by January 1st.

R.     Small-family day care homes for eight or fewer persons.

S.     Large-family care homes for seven through fourteen persons when the following criteria are met:

1.     One off-street parking space shall be provided for each employee plus two spaces;

2.     The two additional parking spaces shall be located so that vehicles will head-in and head-out and not use the public road for maneuvering, loading, or unloading;

3.     There shall be no other day care facilities for more than eight persons within three hundred feet of the exterior boundary of the property.

T.     All uses and activities conducted within the AG district shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.44 (Performance Standards) unless specifically exempted or modified by the provisions of the AG district.

U.    All development or use activities shall be conducted within the AG district in conformance with the regulations set forth in Chapter 17.40 (General Regulations) unless specifically exempted or modified by provisions of the AG district. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.08.050 AG district—Property development regulations.
The following schedule prescribes development regulations for the AG district. The first two columns establish basic requirements for permitted and conditional uses; letters in parentheses in the “Additional Regulations” column refer to the “additional development regulations” outlined in the subsections of this section following the schedule.

 

Schedule 08-2 AG District Property Development Regulations

 

Development

AG Standard

Additional Regulations

Residential development

 

(A) (H) (I) (K)

Minimum lot area (acres)

20 acres

(B) (C) (H) (I)

Minimum yards:

 

 

Front (ft.)

 

(D)

Side & rear (ft.)

 

(E) (G)

Corner side rear (ft.)

 

(E) (F) (G)

Maximum height (ft.) of structures

50

See §17.40.080

Signs

See Ch. 17.60

(J)

 

A.    Development in an AG district shall comply with the RS development regulations for site area per unit.

B.     All divisions of land on property zoned AG (Agriculture) shall conform to the minimum 20-acre parcel standard. Exemptions to minimum parcel sizes shall apply to parcels created or used for general public purposes, public utility or communication purposes.

C.     The minimum allowable area for creation of a parcel shall be twenty acres in any AG district. Minimum parcel size may be determined by including internal area occupied by irrigation canals, laterals and other facilities and area up to the centerline of public roads, railroads, transmission lines, aqueducts or irrigation laterals which are located at a parcel’s boundary.

D.    Front yards in any AG district shall be:

1.     Not less than seventy feet from the existing centerline of the street, nor less than fifteen feet from the planned street line on a major street or expressway, whichever is the greater. The vehicle opening of any building shall be no closer than twenty feet to the property line toward which the opening faces;

2.     Not less than forty-five feet from the existing centerline of the street on a collector street sixty feet wide, nor less than fifteen feet from the planned street line where a specific plan has been adopted. The vehicle opening of any building shall be no closer than twenty feet to the property line toward which the opening faces;

3.     Not less than forty feet from the existing centerline of the street on a minor street (fifty feet wide), nor less than fifteen feet from the planned street line where a specific plan has been adopted. The vehicle opening of any building shall be no closer than twenty feet to the property line toward which the opening faces.

E.     Side yards, interior lot line and rear yards: Five feet.

F.     Side yards, corner lot: The main building and accessory building or garages not having direct access to the street may be five feet closer to the planned street line than at the front yard.

G.    A ten-foot side or rear yard shall adjoin an R district, and structures shall not intercept a 1:1 or forty-five-degree daylight plane inclined inward from a height of twelve feet above existing grade at the R district boundary line.

H.    See Section 17.40.090, Development on substandard lots.

I.      See Section 17.40.230, Development on lots divided by district boundaries.

J.      One identification or informational sign not more than twelve square feet in area nor more than six feet in height may be permitted in the front yard or side yard adjacent to each street frontage of a property which contains a lawful agricultural use, or commercial, or industrial nonconforming use in lieu of any other freestanding sign which may be permitted, provided that:

1.     It does not bear any advertising message;

2.     It is non-flashing, nonmoving and non-animated;

3.     It is located wholly on private property on the premises to which it pertains;

4.     A plot plan and elevation of the sign is approved by the planning director prior to request for building and electrical permits and installation.

K.    See Section 17.40.090, Development on substandard lots. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.08.060 AG district—Williamson Act regulations.
A.    As required by Government Code Section 51238.1, the planning commission and/or board of supervisors shall find that uses requiring use permits that are approved on lands under California Land Conservation Contracts (Williamson Act Contracts) shall be consistent with all of the following principles of compatibility:

1.     The use will not significantly compromise the long-term productive agricultural capability of the subject contracted parcel or parcels or on other contracted lands in the AG zoning district.

2.     The use will not significantly displace or impair current or reasonably foreseeable agricultural operations on the subject contracted parcel or parcels or on other contracted lands in the AG zoning district. Uses that significantly displace agricultural operations on the subject contracted parcel or parcels may be deemed compatible if they relate directly to the production of commercial agricultural products on the subject contracted parcel or parcels or neighboring lands, including activities such as harvesting, processing, or shipping.

3.     The use will not result in the significant removal of adjacent contracted land from agricultural or open-space use.

B.     Unless the planning commission and/or the city council makes a finding to the contrary, the following uses are hereby determined to be consistent with the principles of compatibility and may be approved on contracted land:

1.     The erection, construction, alteration, or maintenance of gas, electric, water, communication facilities;

2.     Farm labor camps and farm employee housing; and

3.     All uses requiring use permits as listed in Table 08-1.

C.     The following uses are hereby determined to be inconsistent with the principles of compatibility and shall not be approved on contracted land:

1.     Churches;

2.     Schools; and

3.     Day care centers when accessory to a school offering general academic instruction equivalent to the standards prescribed by the State Board of Education.

D.    Mineral extraction on contracted land may be approved consistent with Government Code Section 51238.2.

E.     Uses on nonprime contracted land may be approved consistent with subdivision (c) of Government Code Section 51238.1.

F.     All other uses requiring use permits on contracted lands, except those specified in subsections B, C, D and E of this section, shall be evaluated on a case-by-case basis by the planning commission and/or city council to determine whether they are consistent with the principles of compatibility set forth in Government Code Section 51238.1. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

Chapter 17.10 RE RURAL ESTATES DISTRICT
17.10.010 Intent.
The city of Waterford declares that it is the policy and intent of the city and this chapter to declare a statement of policy to create agriculturally compatible “estate” type of development that can accommodate non-intensive agricultural uses, residential and some types of commercial and industrial uses while serving as a buffer between agricultural and residential lands within an adjacent to the city of Waterford consistent with goals, policies and standards of the Waterford general plan. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.10.020 Purpose.
A.    In addition to the general purposes listed in Section 17.01.020, it is the purpose of these district regulations to support and enhance non-intensive agriculture uses and similar uses on large lots or parcels, in a manner that is compatible with both adjacent residential and agricultural uses in the incorporated areas of the city adjacent to the unincorporated areas of the county.

B.     These district regulations are also intended to protect open space lands pursuant to Government Code Section 65910.  The procedures contained in this chapter are specifically established to ensure that all land uses are compatible with agriculture and open space, including natural resources management, outdoor recreation and enjoyment of scenic beauty. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.10.030 Land use regulations.
A.    Schedule 10-1 below prescribes the land use regulations for the RE district. The regulations are established by letter designations as follows:

1.     “P” designates use classifications permitted in the RE district.

2.     “L”   designates use classifications that are permitted, subject to certain limitations.

3.     “T”   designates use classifications that are permitted to be conducted for a limited period of time and that require a temporary use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.74.

4.     “AU” designates a use classification permitted in the district but requiring an administrative use permit as provided in Chapter 17.73 due to the nature of the use or the area within which the use is proposed requiring special review/approval procedures.

5.     “U” designates use classifications that may be permitted upon approval of a conditional use permit, as provided in Chapter 17.75.

6.     “S”   designates a use classification that is subject special regulations.

7.     Where letters in parentheses are opposite a use classification heading, referenced regulations shall apply to all use classifications under the heading.

8.     Letters in parentheses in the “Supplemental Regulations” column refer to subsections in Section 17.10.040 following the schedule.

B.     Use classifications are defined in Chapter 17.04. In cases where a proposed use is not included in a use classification, the planning director shall determine whether the proposed use is substantially similar in character to a permitted use classification and in that event shall assign the proposed use to a permitted use classification. Use classifications not listed in Schedule 10-1 below are prohibited. Supplemental use regulations for the RE district are set forth in Section 17.10.040 below.

Schedule 10-1 RE District Use Table (see Ch. 17.04, Use Classifications)

 

Use Classifications*

RE

Supplemental Regulations

Residential Use Classifications (see §17.04.030)

 

(Y) (Z)

Single-family residence

P, L on minimum lot size of 3 acres or more

Second single-family residence

P, L

(A) on 3 acres or more

Day care (limited)

P

 

Group residential

U, L

(E) (N) (W) on 3 acres or more

Private garage

P

(G)

Garage, patio or yard sales

P, L

(Q)

The keeping of domestic animals and pets

P

(K) (R)

Home occupations

P, L

(E) on 3 acres or more

Residential care (limited)

U, L

(K) on 3 acres or more

Public and Semipublic Use Classifications (see §17.04.040)

 

(Y) (Z)

Parks and recreation facilities

P

 

Public safety facilities

P

 

Utilities (minor)

P

 

Commercial Use Classifications (see §17.04.050)

 

(Y) (Z)

Bed and breakfast inns

U, L

Subject to the standards of Chapter 17.64 on 3 acres or more

Agricultural Use Classifications (see §17.04.070)

 

(Y) (Z)

Horticulture (limited)

P

(T)

Raising of crops and orchards

P, L

(T) on 3 acres or more

Vineyards

P, L

(T) on 3 acres or more

Temporary uses related to agriculture

P, L

(S) (V) (Q) on 3 acres or more

Raising of large animals

AU, L

(R) (U) on 3 acres or more

Raising of small animals

AU, L

(R) (U) on 3 acres or more

Accessory Use Classifications (see §17.04.080)

 

(Y) (Z)

Accessory uses and structures

P

(P) (T) on 3 acres or more

Temporary Use Classifications (see §17.04.090)

 

(Y) (Z)

Personal property, yard, garage or patio sales

P

(Q) (S)

Religious assembly

AU

(Q) (S) subject to §17.40.180

Other uses

AU, L

(W)

*       See indicated code section with respect to use classification. Uses indicated are a subset of the uses that may occur in this district. Other uses not listed below may be approved subject to AU procedures provided that they are similar to the indicated uses with respect to impacts on surrounding uses and the stated purpose and intent of the RE district (Sections 17.10.010 and 17.10.020).

(Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.10.040 RE district—Supplemental use standards.
A.    Secondary or accessory residential units are permitted in the RE district on parcels of three acres or more in total gross lot area and the requirements of Section 17.40.160 are met.

B.     Approval of a use permit shall require a finding that (1) the proposed use will have no significant unmitigated environmental impacts; and (2) the building design is compatible with surrounding buildings.

C.     Architectural design review shall be required on all buildings located on property abutting an “R” (residential) or “C” (commercial) district; see Chapter 17.52.

D.    Rooms in a dwelling unit may be rented for occupancy by not more than three persons who are not members of a single housekeeping unit; provided that not more than two bedrooms shall be rented in each unit.

E.     See Chapter 17.53, Home Occupations in R Districts.

F.     See Section 17.40.140, Accessory buildings generally, and Section 17.40.150, Nonresidential accessory structures.

G.    See Section 17.54.190, Driveways and carports—Design and location in R districts.

H.    See Section 17.40.130, Swimming pools.

I.      See Chapters 17.75 (Use Permits), 17.73 (Administrative Permits), 17.72 (Standards of Review) and 17.76 (Variances).

J.      See Section 17.40.120, Mobile homes and travel trailers.

K.    See Section 17.40.300, Animals.

L.     See Chapter 17.63, Nonconforming Uses and Structures.

M.    See Section 17.40.180, Religious assembly yard requirements.

N.    Planning commission use permit required, except that the planning director may approve use permits for general family day care homes caring for nine to fourteen children, as defined in Chapter 3.4 of the California Health and Safety Code.

O.    Buildings, appurtenances, and uses such as custom contract harvesting or land preparation where the buildings, appurtenances, or uses are incidental and accessory to the use of the subject property for farming purposes.

P.     Detached accessory buildings, the use of which are incidental to, and reasonably related to, a main building on the same lot or to the primary use of the property as determined by the director of planning and community development.

Q.    Temporary uses subject to limitations and provisions of Chapter 17.74.

R.     The raising of animals, large or small, on parcels of three acres or larger and shall not result in the creation of a nuisance.

S.     Produce stands and markets as defined and regulated in Chapter 17.56.

T.     In conjunction with agricultural production activities, incidental retail sales, tasting rooms and/or facilities for on-site consumption of agricultural produce processed on the premises, provided:

1.     The primary purpose is to promote sales of the agricultural product(s) produced and processed on the premises;

2.     The use is subordinate to the production of such product and the use of such agricultural processing facility; and

3.     The number of full-time, year-round employees involved in the operation shall not exceed ten, and the number of part-time, seasonal employees shall not exceed twenty.

U.    New confined animal facility and expansions of existing confined animal facility requiring a new or modified permit, waiver, order or waste discharge requirements from the Regional Water Quality Control Board, where the issuance of such permit, waiver, order or waste discharge requirements requires compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act. Lagoons or ponds for the storage of animal wastes shall be located a minimum of one hundred fifty feet from any property line and three hundred feet from any dwelling on an adjacent property.

V.    Christmas tree sales lots and Halloween pumpkin sales lots provided they meet the required setbacks and provide at least ten accessible and usable off-street parking spaces in addition to one space per employee on a maximum shift. Such lots shall be limited to two double-faced signs not to exceed twelve square feet on each face. No off-site signs shall be permitted. Such Halloween pumpkin sales lots may not be established prior to October 1st of any year and shall be removed and the property returned to its previous condition by November 15th; Christmas tree sales lots may not be established prior to November 15th of any year and shall be removed and the property returned to its previous condition by January 1st.

W.    Large family care homes for seven through fourteen persons when the following criteria are met:

1.     One off-street parking space shall be provided for each employee plus two spaces;

2.     The two additional parking spaces shall be located so that vehicles will head-in and head-out and not use the public road for maneuvering, loading, or unloading;

3.     There shall be no other day care facilities for more than eight persons within three hundred feet of the exterior boundary of the property.

X.    See the WMC regarding development on substandard lots.

Y.    All uses and activities conducted within the RE district shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.44 (Performance Standards) unless specifically exempted or modified by the provisions of the RE district.

Z.     All development or use activities shall be conducted within the RE district in conformance with the regulations set forth in Chapter 17.40 (General Regulations) unless specifically exempted or modified by provisions of the RE district. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.10.050 RE district—Property development regulations.
The following schedule prescribes development regulations for the RE district. The first two columns establish basic requirements for permitted and conditional uses; letters in parentheses in the “Additional Regulations” column refer to the additional development regulations outlined in the subsections of this section following Schedule 10-2 below. It should be noted that all development within the RE district is subject to the requirements set forth in Chapter 17.40 unless otherwise indicated below.

Schedule 10-2 RE District Development Regulations

 

Development

RE

Additional Regulations

Minimum site area (acres)

3

(A) (B)

Gross site area per unit (acres)

3

(A) (B)

Minimum yards

Varies

(C) (D) (E) (F)

Maximum height (ft.)

35

(G)

Maximum height (ft.) accessory building

45

(G)

Fences and walls

See Ch. 17.62

 

Off-street parking and loading

See Ch. 17.54

 

Signs

See Ch. 17.60

 

Outdoor facilities

See §17.40.300, Outdoor displays & facilities, and Ch. 17.50, Wireless and Communications Facilities

 

Performance standards

See Ch. 17.44

 

Nonconforming uses & structures

See Ch. 17.63

 

 

A.    All divisions of land on property zoned RE (residential estates) shall conform to the minimum three-acre parcel standard. Exemptions to minimum parcel sizes shall apply to parcels created or used for general public purposes, public utility or communication purposes. Minimum parcel size may be determined by including internal area occupied by irrigation canals, laterals and other facilities and area up to the centerline of public roads, transmission lines, aqueducts or irrigation laterals which are located at a parcel’s boundary.

B.     See Section 17.40.090, Development on substandard lots.

C.     Front Yards. In any RE district where street curbs, gutters and sidewalks do not exist, the front yard setback standards shall be:

1.     Not less than seventy feet from the existing centerline of the street, nor less than fifteen feet from the planned street line on a major street or expressway, whichever is the greater. The vehicle opening of any building shall be no closer than twenty feet to the property line toward which the opening faces;

2.     Not less than forty-five feet from the existing centerline of the street on a collector street sixty feet wide, nor less than fifteen feet from the planned street line where a specific plan has been adopted. The vehicle opening of any building shall be no closer than twenty feet to the property line toward which the opening faces;

3.     Not less than forty feet from the existing centerline of the street on a minor street (fifty feet wide), nor less than fifteen feet from the planned street line where a specific plan has been adopted. The vehicle opening of any building shall be no closer than twenty feet to the property line toward which the opening faces;

4.     On properties where street curbs, gutters and sidewalks have been constructed, the front yard set-back shall conform to RS residential district standards as set forth in Section 17.20.050.

D.    Minimum front yard is fifteen feet; twenty feet from the entrance of a garage or carport. See Section 17.40.100, Front yards in R districts.

E.     Side yards, interior lot line and rear yards: Ten feet.

F.     A fifteen-foot side or rear yard shall adjoin an R district.

G.    Building Height and Required Yards. The width of a required interior side or rear yard adjoining a building wall exceeding thirty-five feet in height, excluding any portion of a roof, shall be increased five feet over the basic requirement.

H.    See Section 17.40.230, Development on lots divided by district boundaries.

I.      One identification or informational sign not more than twelve square feet in area nor more than six feet in height may be permitted in the front yard or side yard adjacent to each street frontage of a property which contains a lawful agricultural use, provided that:

1.     It does not bear any advertising message;

2.     It is non-flashing, nonmoving and non-animated;

3.     It is located wholly on private property on the premises, to which it pertains;

4.     A plot plan and elevation of the sign is approved by the planning director prior to request for building and electrical permits and installation. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

Chapter 17.14 OS OPEN SPACE DISTRICT
17.14.010 Specific purposes.
In addition to the general purposes listed in Chapter 17.04, th e specific purposes of the OS district are to:

A.    Provide a suitable classification for large public or private sites permanently designated for park or open space use;

B.     Protect public health and safety by limiting lands subject to flooding, slides, or other hazards to open space use;

C.     Allow the planning commission and city council to consider the most appropriate use of a site following discontinuance of a large public or private open space use without the encumbrance of a base zoning district that may or may not provide appropriate regulations for development of the site. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.14.020 Applicability.
A.    The OS district shall be applied to lands within the city of Waterford that contain open space resources, such special status as wildlife habitat, or exhibits special hazardous characteristics which would render extensive development of these lands as a hazard to public health and safety.

B.     Where the OS district is applied to areas where flood hazards exist, all uses and improvements shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 15.32, Flood Damage Prevention. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.14.030 OS district land use regulations.
A.    Schedule 14-1 below prescribes the land use regulations for the OS district. The regulations for the district are established by letter designations as follows:

1.     “P” designates use classifications permitted in the OS district.

2.     “L” designates use classifications that are permitted, subject to certain limitations.

3.     “T”   designates use classifications that are permitted to be conducted for a limited period of time and that require a temporary use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.74.

4.     “AU” designates a use classification permitted in the district but requiring an administrative use permit as provided in Chapter 17.73 due to the nature of the use or the area within which the use is proposed requiring special review/approval procedures.

5.     “U” designates use classifications that may be permitted upon approval of a conditional use permit, as provided in Chapter 17.75.

6.     Where letters in parentheses are opposite a use classification heading, referenced regulations shall apply to all use classifications under the heading.

7.     Letters in parentheses in the “Additional Regulations” column refer to additional use regulations outlined in the subsections of Section 17.14.040 following the schedule.

B.     Use classifications are defined in Chapter 17.04. In cases where a proposed use is not included in a use classification, the planning director shall determine whether the proposed use is substantially similar in character to a permitted use classification and in that event shall assign the proposed use to a permitted use classification. Use classifications not listed in Schedule 14-1 below are prohibited. Supplemental use regulations for the OS district are set forth in Section 17.14.040 below.

 

Schedule 14-1 OS District Use Table (see Ch. 17.04, Use Classifications)

 

Use Classifications*

OS

Additional Regulations

Residential Use Classifications (see §17.04.030)

 

(F) (G) (H)

Single-family residential

AU

(A)

Public and Semipublic Use Classifications (see §17.04.040)

 

(F) (G) (H)

Government offices/facilities

L1

 

Parks and recreation facilities

AU

 

Religious assembly

AU

 

Utilities (minor)

AU

 

Commercial Use Classifications (see §17.04.050)

L3

(F) (G) (H)

Take-out food service

L2

 

Agricultural Use Classifications (see §17.04.070)

 

(F), (G) (H)

Horticulture (limited)

P

 

Animal husbandry

P

(B)

Crop production

P

 

Accessory Use Classifications (see §17.04.080)

 

(C) (E) (F) (G) (H)

Temporary Use Classifications (see §17.04.090)

 

(F) (G) (H)

Circuses and carnivals

T

 

Craft fairs, trade fairs, certified farmers markets

T

 

Commercial filming (limited)

T

 

*       See indicated code section with respect to use classification. Uses indicated are a subset of the uses that may occur in this district. Other uses that are not listed below may be approved subject to AU procedures provided that they are similar to the indicated uses with respect to impacts on surrounding uses and the stated purpose and intent of the OS district (Sections 17.14.010 and 17.14.020).

1        Permitted as part of a park or recreational facility, public safety facility, or utility.

2            Only “limited” facilities, as defined in Chapter 17.04, allowed by use permit.

3            Use permit required, and no on-site retail sales permitted.

(Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.14.040 OS district—Additional use regulations.
A.    Permitted only when accessory to a primary open space use. Limited to one primary dwelling unit and one accessory dwelling unit per site, subject to the requirements of Section 17.70.060, Accessory dwelling units.

B.     See Section 17.70.300, Animals.

C.     Limited to facilities incidental to an open space use.

D.    See Chapter 17.63, Nonconforming Uses and Structures.

E.     Allowed only if no urban services are provided.

F.     All uses and activities conducted within the OS district shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.44 (Performance Standards) unless specifically exempted or modified by the provisions of the OS district.

G.    All development or use activities shall be conducted within the OS district in conformance with the regulations set forth in Chapter 17.40 (General Regulations) unless specifically exempted or modified by provisions of the OS district.

H.    Evaluate a non-open space project against the following criteria when considering findings for use permits or variances:

1.     Will the project create substantial conflicts with existing traffic?

2.     Will the project potentially generate excessive glare, noise or vibration and degrade existing or potential open space uses? (Refer to general plan for noise criteria and Chapter 17.44, Performance Standards.)

3.     Will the project generate hazardous materials or create risks that would create health and safety hazards for persons occupying or visiting existing or potential future open space uses in the area? (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.14.050 OS district—Property development regulations.
The following schedule prescribes development regulations for the OS district. The first two columns establish basic requirements for permitted and conditional uses; letters in parentheses in the “Additional Regulations” column refer to the additional development regulations outlined in the subsections of this section following Schedule 14-2 below. It should be noted that all development with the OS district is subject to the requirements set forth in Chapter 17.40 unless otherwise indicated below.

Schedule 14-2 OS District Development Regulations

 

Development

OS

Additional Regulations

Subdivision development

 

(A)

Minimum site area (acres)

3

(B) (H)

Minimum yards

Varies

(C) (D) (E) (F)

Maximum height (ft.)

35

(G)

Maximum height (ft.) accessory building

45

(G)

Design review

See §17.52.090

 

Fences and walls

See Ch. 17.62

 

Off-street parking and loading

See Ch. 17.54

 

Signs

See Ch. 17.60

 

Outdoor facilities

See §17.40.300, Outdoor displays & facilities, and Ch. 17.50, Wireless and Communications Facilities

 

A.    All divisions of land on property zoned OS (open space) shall conform to the minimum lot area standard of the applicable OS district; provided, however, that no subdivision shall be approved within an OS district unless it is part of an approved development plan for the site. Such development plan shall be, and related subdivision must be, for the purpose of improving the usefulness of the site for open space type uses. Exemptions to minimum parcel sizes shall apply to parcels created or used for general public purposes, public utility or communication purposes.

B.     See Section 17.40.090, Development on substandard lots.

C.     Front Yards. In any OS district where street curbs, gutters and sidewalks do not exist, the front yard set-back standards shall be:

1.     Not less than seventy feet from the existing centerline of the street, nor less than fifteen feet from the planned street line on a major street or expressway, whichever is the greater. The vehicle opening of any building shall be no closer than twenty feet to the property line toward which the opening faces;

2.     Not less than forty-five feet from the existing centerline of the street on a collector street sixty feet wide, nor less than fifteen feet from the planned street line where a specific plan has been adopted. The vehicle opening of any building shall be no closer than twenty feet to the property line toward which the opening faces;

3.     Not less than forty feet from the existing centerline of the street on a minor street (fifty feet wide), nor less than fifteen feet from the planned street line where a specific plan has been adopted. The vehicle opening of any building shall be no closer than twenty feet to the property line toward which the opening faces;

4.     On properties where street curbs, gutters and sidewalks have been constructed, the front yard set-back shall conform to OS district standards as set forth in Section 17.20.050.

D.    Minimum front yard is fifteen feet; twenty feet from the entrance of a garage or carport. See Section 17.40.100, Front yards in R districts.

E.     Side yards, interior lot line and rear yards: Ten feet.

F.     A fifteen-foot side or rear yard shall adjoin an R district.

G.    Building Height and Required Yards. The width of a required interior side or rear yard adjoining a building wall exceeding thirty-five feet in height, excluding any portion of a roof, shall be increased five feet over the basic requirement.

H.    See Section 17.40.230, Development on lots divided by district boundaries. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.14.060 Supplemental development regulations.
Development regulations shall be as specified by the use permit or administrative permit; provided that if the permit fails to regulate an element regulated by an abutting base district, the regulations of the nearest base district shall apply to each portion of the OS district. For existing uses which do not have a use or administrative permit, or for uses that do not require a use or administrative permit, the regulations of the nearest district within which the use or uses are permitted or conditionally permitted shall apply to the OS use. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.14.070 Review of plans.
All projects, which involve issuance of a building permit in accordance with Title 15 of the WMC, shall require design review (see Chapter 17.52); all projects shall require development plan review in accordance with the standards of review of this title (see Chapter 17.72). (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

Chapter 17.18 PS PUBLIC AND SEMIPUBLIC DISTRICT
17.18.010 Specific purposes.
In addition to the general purposes listed in Chapter 17.04, the specific purposes of the PS public and semipublic district are to:

A.    Allow consideration of a large public or semipublic use separately from regulations for an underlying base zoning district that may or may not be appropriate in combination with the public or semipublic use;

B.     Allow consideration of establishment or expansion of a large public or semipublic use at rezoning hearings rather than at use permit hearings only, and give notice to all of the extent of a site approved for a large public or semipublic use by delineating it on the zoning map;

C.     Allow the planning commission and city council to consider the most appropriate use of a site following discontinuance of a large public or semipublic use without the encumbrance of a base zoning district that may or may not provide appropriate regulations for reuse of the site. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.18.020 Land use regulations.
A.    Schedule 18-1 below prescribes the land use regulations for the PS district. The regulations for the district are established by letter designations as follows:

1.     “P” designates use classifications permitted in the PS district.

2.     “L”   designates use classifications that are permitted, subject to certain limitations.

3.     “T”   designates use classifications that are permitted to be conducted for a limited period of time and that require a temporary use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.74.

4.     “AU” designates a use classification permitted in the district but requiring an administrative use permit as provided in Chapter 17.73 due to the nature of the use or the area within which the use is proposed requiring special review/approval procedures.

5.     “U” designates use classifications that may be permitted upon approval of a conditional use permit, as provided in Chapter 17.75.

6.     Where letters in parentheses are opposite a use classification heading, referenced regulations shall apply to all use classifications under the heading.

7.     Letters in parentheses in the “Additional Regulations” column refer to the subsections of Section 17.18.030, Additional use regulations, following the schedule.

B.     Use classifications are defined in Chapter 17.04. In cases where a proposed use is not included in a use classification, the planning director shall determine whether the proposed use is substantially similar in character to a permitted use classification and in that event shall assign the proposed use to a permitted use classification. Use classifications not listed in Schedule 18-1 below are prohibited. Supplemental use regulations for the PS district are set forth in Section 17.18.030 below.

Schedule 18-1 PS District Use Table (see Ch. 17.04, Use Classifications)

 

Use Classifications*

PS

Additional Regulations

Residential Use Classifications (see §17.04.030)

 

(C) (D) (F)

Single-family residential

L**

 

Public and Semipublic Use Classifications (see §17.04.040)

 

 

Cemetery

U

 

Clubs and lodges

AU

 

Convalescent facilities

AU

 

Cultural institutions

AU

 

Day care (general)

U

 

Detention facilities

U

 

Government offices

P

 

Heliports

U

(E)

Hospitals (20 beds or less)

AU

 

Hospitals (more than 20 beds)

U

 

Maintenance and service facilities

U

 

Park and recreation facilities

P

 

Public safety facilities

AU

 

Religious assembly

AU

Subject to Ch. 17.70

Residential care (general)

U

 

Schools, public or private

U

 

Utilities (major)

U

 

Waste facility

AU

 

Utilities (minor)

P

 

Commercial Use Classifications (see §17.04.050)

 

(C) (D) (F)

Commercial recreation and entertainment

AU

 

Agricultural Use Classifications (see §17.04.070)

 

(C) (D)

Horticulture (limited)

P

 

Crop production

P

 

Accessory Use Classifications (see §17.04.080)

 

(C) (D) (F)

Temporary Use Classifications (see §17.04.090)

 

(C) (D) (F)

Animal shows

T

 

Circuses and carnivals

T

 

Commercial filming (limited)

T

 

Craft fairs, trade fairs, certified farmers markets

T

 

*       See indicated code section with respect to use classification. Uses indicated are a subset of the uses that may occur in this district. Other uses, that are not listed below, may be approved subject to AU procedures provided that they are similar to the indicated uses with respect to impacts on surrounding uses and the stated purpose and intent of the PS district (Sections 17.18.010 and 17.18.020).

**    Permitted only when accessory to a primary PS district use. Limited to one primary dwelling unit and one accessory dwelling unit per site, subject to the requirements of Section 17.70.060, Accessory dwelling units. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.18.030 PS district—Additional use regulations.
A.    See Section 17.70.300, Animals.

B.     See Chapter 17.63, Nonconforming Uses and Structures.

C.     All uses and activities conducted within the PS district shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.44 (Performance Standards) unless specifically exempted or modified by the provisions of the PS district.

D.    All development or use activities shall be conducted within the PS district in conformance with the regulations set forth in Chapter 17.40 (General Regulations) unless specifically exempted or modified by provisions of the PS district.

E.     Allowed with use permit and heliport permit from California Department of Transportation, Division of Aeronautics if located more than one thousand feet from an R district.

F.     Evaluate a non-public or quasi-public project against the following criteria when considering findings for use permits or variances:

1.     Will the project create substantial conflicts with existing public or quasi-public traffic?

2.     Will the project potentially generate excessive glare, noise or vibration and adversely impact adjacent public or quasi-public uses? (Refer to general plan for noise criteria, and Chapter 17.44, Performance Standards.)

3.     Will the project potentially generate hazardous materials or risks that would create health and safety hazards for persons occupying or visiting an existing or potential public or quasi-public use?

4.     Will the project be located on an arterial street, or located in an area which would conflict with non-public or quasi-public traffic in the area? (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.18.040 PS district—Property development regulations.
The following schedule prescribes development regulations for the PS district. The first two columns establish basic requirements for permitted and conditional uses; letters in parentheses in the “Additional Regulations” column refer to the subsections of this section following Schedule 18-2 below. It should be noted that all development with the PS district is subject to the requirements set forth in Chapter 17.40 unless other-wise indicated below.

 

Schedule 18-2 PS District Development Regulations

 

Development

PS

Additional Regulations

Subdivision development

 

(A)

Minimum site area (acres)

3

(B) (H)

Gross site area per unit (acres)

3

(B) (H)

Minimum yards

Varies

(C) (D) (E) (F)

Maximum height (ft.)

35

(G)

Maximum height (ft.) accessory building

45

(G)

Fences and walls

See Ch. 17.62

 

Off-street parking and loading

See Ch. 17.54

 

Signs

See Ch. 17.60

 

Development

PS

Additional Regulations

Outdoor facilities

See §17.40.300, Outdoor displays & facilities and Ch. 17.50, Wireless and Communications Facilities

 

Performance standards

See Ch. 17.44

 

Nonconforming uses & structures

See Ch. 17.63

 

 

A.    All divisions of land on property zoned PS (public semipublic) shall conform to the minimum three-acre parcel standard. Exemptions to minimum parcel sizes shall apply to parcels created or used for general public purposes, public utility or communication purposes. Minimum parcel size may be determined by including internal area occupied by irrigation canals, laterals and other facilities and area up to the centerline of public roads, transmission lines, aqueducts or irrigation laterals which are located at a parcel’s boundary.

B.     See Section 17.40.090, Development on substandard lots.

C.     Front Yards. In any PS district where street curbs, gutters and sidewalks do not exist, the front yard set-back standards shall be:

1.     Not less than seventy feet from the existing centerline of the street, nor less than fifteen feet from the planned street line on a major street or expressway, whichever is the greater. The vehicle opening of any building shall be no closer than twenty feet to the property line toward which the opening faces;

2.     Not less than forty-five feet from the existing centerline of the street on a collector street sixty feet wide, nor less than fifteen feet from the planned street line where a specific plan has been adopted. The vehicle opening of any building shall be no closer than twenty feet to the property line toward which the opening faces;

3.     Not less than forty feet from the existing centerline of the street on a minor street (fifty feet wide), nor less than fifteen feet from the planned street line where a specific plan has been adopted. The vehicle opening of any building shall be no closer than twenty feet to the property line toward which the opening faces;

4.     On properties where street curbs, gutters and sidewalks have been constructed, the front yard setback shall conform to PS district standards as set forth in Section 17.18.020.

D.    Minimum front yard is fifteen feet; twenty feet from the entrance of a garage or carport. See Section 17.40.100, Front yards in R districts.

E.     Side yards, interior lot line and rear yards: Ten feet.

F.     A fifteen-foot side or rear yard shall adjoin an R district.

G.    Building Height and Required Yards. The width of a required interior side or rear yard adjoining a building wall exceeding thirty-five feet in height, excluding any portion of a roof, shall be increased five feet over the basic requirement.

H.    See Section 17.40.230, Development on lots divided by district boundaries. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.18.050 Signs.
Signs are permitted in PS districts as provided in Chapter 17.60. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.18.060 Parking.
See Chapter 17.54 for off-street parking requirements for all uses in all districts. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.18.070 Review of plans.
Certain projects shall require design review (see Chapter 17.52); all projects shall require plan review in accordance with Waterford’s standards of review (see Chapter 17.72). (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

Chapter 17.20 R GENERAL RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
17.20.010 General purpose.
A.    In addition to the general purposes listed in Section 17.01.020, the specific purposes of residential districts are to:

1.     Provide appropriately located areas for residential development that are consistent with the general plan and with standards of public health and safety established by the municipal code;

2.     Ensure adequate light, air, privacy, and open space for each dwelling, and protect residents from the harmful effects of excessive noise, population density, traffic congestion, and other adverse environmental effects;

3.     Promote development of housing affordable by low- and moderate-income households by providing a density bonus for projects in which a portion of the units are affordable for such households;

4.     Protect residential areas from fires, explosions, landslides, toxic fumes and substances, and other public safety hazard;

5.     Protect adjoining single-family residential districts from excessive loss of sun, light, quiet, and privacy resulting from proximity to multifamily development;

6.     Achieve design compatibility with surrounding neighborhoods;

7.     Provide sites for public and semipublic land uses needed to complement residential development or requiring a residential environment;

8.     Ensure the provision of public services and facilities needed to accommodate planned population densities.

B.     The regulations set forth in this chapter shall apply to all general residential districts including the RS (single-family residential) district, RM (medium density residential) district and RH (multifamily residential) district.

1.     RS Single-Family Residential District. The purpose of the RS district is to provide single-family residential dwellings served by city services throughout the city of Waterford. This designation consists primarily of single-family detached housing, but a diversity of other single-family housing types, such as condominium and zero-lot-line residential units can be developed subject to new urbanism development standards. RS areas may be designated throughout the city with lower densities typically toward the edges of the city’s growth, adjacent urban “buffer” areas. This residential classification can also be applied along special planning areas such as scenic corridors and open space areas.

2.     RM Medium Density Residential District. The purpose of the RM district is to provide duplexes, triplexes, four-plexes, condominiums, units on appropriate sized lots. RM areas are typically designated close to commercial or other services and adjacent to parks and playgrounds. This land use classification should be applied in areas near major streets and thoroughfares for convenient access and on in-fill sites.

3.     RH Multifamily Residential District. The purpose of the RH district is to provide apartments, multiple dwelling groups, condominiums, co-op housing studios, lofts and live-work units on appropriate sized lots. RH areas are typically designated adjacent to commercial and other services in close proximity to parks and playgrounds with direct access to major roadways and public transportation. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.20.020 Land use regulations.
A.    Schedule 20-1 below prescribes the land use regulations for the R districts. The regulations for each district are established by letter designations as follows:

1.     “P” designates use classifications permitted in residential districts.

2.     “L”   designates use classifications that are permitted, subject to certain limitations.

3.     “T”   designates use classifications that are permitted to be conducted for a limited period of time and that require a temporary use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.74.

4.     “AU” designates a use classification permitted in the district but requiring an administrative use permit as provided in Chapter 17.73 due to the nature of the use or the area within which the use is proposed requiring special review/approval procedures.

5.     “U” designates use classifications that may be permitted upon approval of a conditional use permit, as provided in Chapter 17.75.

6.     Where letters in parentheses are opposite a use classification heading, referenced regulations shall apply to all use classifications under the heading.

7.     Letters in parentheses in the “Additional Regulations” column refer to subsections in Section 17.20.030 following the schedule.

B.     Use classifications are defined in Chapter 17.04. Uses not listed or not similar to the uses listed in Schedule 20-1 below are prohibited. Supplemental use regulations for R districts are set forth in Section 17.20.040 below.

C.     All uses and activities conducted within R districts shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.44 (Performance Standards) unless specifically exempted or modified by the provisions of the R district.

D.    All development or use activities shall be conducted within R districts in conformance with the regulations set forth in Chapter 17.40 (General Regulations) unless specifically exempted or modified by provisions of the R district.

E.     Other uses similar to but not specifically listed in Schedule 20-1 may be approved subject to AU procedures provided that they do not have impacts on surrounding land and uses, in accordance with Chapter 17.72 (Standards of Review), and that they support and further the stated purpose and intent of the R districts (Sections 17.20.010 and 17.20.020). (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.20.030 RS, RM and RH districts—Land use regulations.
 

Schedule 20-1 Residential Use Table (see Ch. 17.04, Use Classifications)

 

Use Classifications

RS

RM

RH

Supplemental Regulations

Residential Use Classifications (see §17.04.030)

 

 

 

 

Single-family residential unit

P

P

AU

(A) L2

Multifamily apartments residential

—

P

P

(A)

Day care (limited)

P

AU

AU

(B)

Group residential

U

AU

AU

(A) (C) (D)

Private garage

P

P

P

L3

Garage, patio or yard sales

L

L

AU

 

The keeping of domestic animals and pets

P

P

P

 

Home occupations

P

AU

AU

L1

Residential care (limited)

P

P

P

 

Emergency shelters

—

—

P

 

Transitional and/or supportive housing

P

P

P

 

Employee housing

P

—

—

No more than 6 workers

Public and Semipublic Use Classifications (see §17.04.040)

 

 

 

 

Clubs and lodges

U

U

U

(C) (D)

Convalescent facilities

—

U

AU

(C) (D)

Cultural institutions

U

U

U

(C) (D)

Day care (general)

—

AU

AU

(C) (D)

Parks and recreation facilities

P

P

P

(C)

Public safety facilities

—

AU

AU

(C) (D)

Religious assembly

U

U

U

(C) (H)

Residential care (general)

—

U

U

(A) (C)

Schools, public and private

U

U

U

(C) (D)

Utilities (minor)

P

P

P

(C)

Commercial Use Classifications (see §17.04.050)

 

 

 

 

Bed and breakfast inns

U

—

—

(C) (D) L5

Agricultural Use Classifications (see §17.04.070)

 

 

 

 

Horticulture (limited)

AU

AU

AU

 

Produce stand

T

T

T

(C) (D) L4

Accessory Use Classifications (see §17.04.080)

 

 

 

 

Accessory uses and structures

P

P

P

L7

Accessory dwelling unit

P

P

—

L7

Junior accessory dwelling unit

P

P

—

L7

Temporary Use Classifications (see §17.04.090)

 

 

 

 

Personal property, yard, garage or patio sales

P

P

AU

(C) L6

Religious assembly

AU

AU

AU

(C) (E)

Note: — means not permitted.

1        See Chapter 17.53 Home Occupations in R Districts.

2        See Section 17.40.120, Mobile Homes and Travel Trailers.

3        See Section 17.40.110, Keeping of Animals.

4        See Chapter 17.56, Produce Stands.

5        See Chapter 17.64, Bed and Breakfast Inn.

6        See Chapter 5.28, Garage Sales.

7        See Sections 17.40.150, Nonresidential accessory structures, and 17.40.160, Accessory dwelling units.

(Ord. 2020-05 §3; Ord. 2017-10 §1; Ord. 2017-09 §2; Ord. 2015-06 §2; Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.20.040 RS, RM and RH districts—Supplemental use regulations.
A.    Rooms in a dwelling unit may be rented for occupancy by not more than three persons who are not members of a single housekeeping unit; provided that not more than two bedrooms shall be rented in each unit.

B.     Planning commission use permit required, except that the planning director may approve use permits for general family day care homes caring for nine to fourteen children, as defined in Chapter 3.4 of the California Health and Safety Code.

C.     Approval of a use permit shall require a finding that (1) the proposed use will have no significant unmitigated environmental impacts, does not have impacts on surrounding land and uses, in accordance with Chapter 17.72 (Standards of Review); and (2) the building design is compatible with surrounding buildings.

D.    See Chapters 17.75 (Use Permits), 17.73 (Administrative Use Permits), 17.72 (Standards of Review) and 17.76 (Variances).

E.     See Section 17.40.180, Religious assembly yard requirements. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.20.050 RS, RM and RH districts—Property development regulations.
The following schedules prescribe development regulations for residential districts. The first three columns establish basic requirements for permitted and conditional uses; letters in parentheses in the “Additional Regulations” column refer to the subsections of this section following the schedule.

 

Schedule 20-2 Residential Development Regulation Table

 

Development

RS

RM

RH

Additional Regulations

GP density/gross acre

4-6

6-12

12-36

(A) (C) (J)

Minimum site area (sq. ft.)

6,000

6,000

7,500

(B) (C) (H) (U)

Gross site area per unit (sq. ft.)

7,200

3,600

2,000

(B) (C) (J) (U)

Duplex on corner lot (sq. ft.)

8,000

-

-

(H) (E)

With density bonus for:

 

 

 

 

Low- or moderate-income housing

4,800

2,400

1,600

(A) (H) (L) (O)

Elderly housing

—

2,000

1,300

(A) (H) (L) (O)

Low-income elderly housing

—

1,500

1,000

(A) (H) (L) (O)

Minimum site width (ft.)

55

55

65

(B)

Minimum site width (ft.) on corner lots

65

65

70

(B)

Minimum yards:

 

 

 

 

Front (ft.)

15

15

15

(G)

Side (ft.)

5

6/10

6/10

(G) (I) (K) (V)

Corner side (ft.)

10

15

15

(G) (I) (V)

Rear (ft.)

10

10

15

(G) (I) (V)

Courts

 

 

 

(L)

Maximum height (ft.)

35

35

45

(M) (N)

Maximum height (ft.) accessory building

15

15

15

(M) (N)

Maximum coverage

40%

45%

60%

 

Park area

 

 

 

(P)

Open space (sq. ft.)

200

200

200

(P)

Minimum site landscaping (% of site area)

35%

30%

30%

(Q) (R)

Fences and walls

 

 

 

(S)

Off-street parking and loading

 

 

 

(D) (T)

Signs

See Chapter 17.60

Outdoor facilities

(F) See §17.40.290, Outdoor displays and facilities, and Ch. 17.50, Wireless Communications Facilities

Screening of mechanical equipment

See §17.40.240 and Ch. 17.50

Refuse storage areas

See §17.40.250

Underground utilities

See §17.40.300

Performance standards

See Ch. 17.44

Nonconforming uses & structures

See Ch. 17.63

Note: — means not applicable.

 

A.    See Chapter 17.34, Affordable Housing Density Bonus Overlay District.

B.     See Section 17.40.090, Development on substandard lots.

C.     See Section 17.40.230, Development on lots divided by district boundaries.

D.    See Section 17.54.190, Driveways and carports—Design and location in R districts.

E.     See Section 17.40.220, Duplex units on corner lots.

F.     See Section 17.40.130, Swimming pools.

G.    Permitted Projections into Required Yards.

1.     In All Districts. See Section 17.40.100, Building projections into yards and courts.

2.     Accessory Structures. See Sections 17.40.150, Nonresidential accessory structures; 17.40.160, Accessory dwelling units; and 17.54.190, Driveways and carports—Design and location in R districts.

3.     Minimum front yard is fifteen feet; twenty feet from the entrance of a garage or carport. See Section 17.40.100, Front yards in R districts.

H.    See Section 17.40.170, Exterior materials in R districts.

I.      Building Height and Required Yards. The width of a required interior side or rear yard adjoining a building wall exceeding twenty-five feet in height, excluding any portion of a roof, shall be increased five feet over the basic requirement.

 



Building Height and Required Yards

(The diagram is illustrative)

 

J.      The general plan special density bonuses to developments where neo-traditional development policies are applied as set forth in the general plan. Such bonuses allow up to nine units per acre in RS developments.

K.    In the RM and RH districts, the average yard width shall be ten feet, and the minimum width six feet.

L.     Courts Opposite Windows (RM and RH Districts).

1.     Opposite Living Room Windows. The minimum width of a court opposite a living room window shall equal the height of the opposite wall, but shall not be less than twenty feet if there is a required window of a habitable room in the opposite wall.

2.     Opposite Other Habitable Rooms. The minimum width of a court opposite a window of a habitable room other than a living room shall be fourteen feet if there is a required window of a habitable room in the opposite wall.

3.     Dimensions of Courts. Required courts shall extend horizontally twenty feet in both directions from the vertical centerline of a required window, and shall extend upward from the window sill.

 



Courts Opposite Windows

(The diagram is illustrative)

 

M.    See Section 17.40.080, Exceptions to height limits.

N.    The height measurement of the structure shall be the maximum vertical dimension measured from the lowest outside surface ground contact with the structure perimeter to the highest structure point. See Section 17.40.082.

 



Height Measurements

(The diagram is illustrative)

 

O.    In the RS and RM districts up to ten percent additional floor area may be allowed for mixed-use projects with twenty-five percent affordable residential units; see Chapter 17.34.

P.     Open Space.

1.     Basic Requirement. Total open space on a site having three or more dwelling units shall be at least two hundred square feet per dwelling unit.

2.     Private Open Space. Private open space meeting a portion of the requirement shall be on patios or balconies within which a horizontal rectangle has no dimension less than six feet.

3.     Shared Open Space. Shared open space, provided by non-street side yards, patios and terraces, shall be designed so that a horizontal rectangle inscribed within it has no dimension less than ten feet, shall be open to the sky, and shall not include driveways or parking areas, or area required for front or street side yards.

4.     Parkland Dedication. All new single-family and multifamily housing development projects shall be subject to the parkland dedication requirements prescribed by Chapter 16.13 generally because they contribute to increased demand for community and neighborhood parks and recreational facilities. Imposition of said parkland dedication requirements is consistent with and implements the general plan’s land use element insofar as it identifies parkland deficiencies in the city and calls for the creation and prioritization of new parks and park improvements. Said developments shall be subject to said requirements irrespective of whether or not they require tentative or parcel map approval unless such dedication and/or fees were required and paid for a part of a tentative or parcel map approval process in accordance with Chapter 16.13. The applicant for such developments shall dedicate land or pay an appropriate fee or a combination of dedication and fee as provided by Section 16.13.050.

Q.    Planting Areas.

1.     Yards Adjoining Streets. All visible portions of a required yard adjoining a street shall be a landscaped planting area.

2.     Interior Yards. In the RM and RH districts, at least fifty percent of each required interior side yard and rear yard shall be planting areas having a minimum width of five feet adjoining a side or rear property line; provided, that the width of a required planting area may be reduced to two feet in one side or rear yard adjoining a driveway and an accessory structure may occupy a portion of the planting area in a rear yard.

3.     Notwithstanding subsection (Q)(2) of this section, a continuous planting area having a minimum width of five feet shall adjoin an RS district.

R.     See Chapters 17.45, Landscape Standards; 15.46, Water Efficient Landscaping Standards; 12.20, Street Trees; 12.30, Tree and Sidewalk Maintenance; solar access in accordance with Section 17.58.060, Prohibition on casting shadows; and California state law.

S.     Fences and Walls. The maximum heights of a fence or wall shall be six feet except within fifteen feet of the front property line abutting a street, where the maximum height shall be three feet. In addition, all fences and walls shall be subject to the driveway and intersection visibility requirements of Chapter 17.62. For reversed corner lots, a fence placed on the rear and side property lines may be six feet in height; provided that the driveway visibility requirements of Section 17.40.100 are met. Where the difference in elevation between two adjacent lots is more than one foot, the maximum height from the upper property shall not be more than six feet to protect views from the upper lot, unless the planning director approves a higher height. The director’s decision shall be subject to appeal to the planning commission under the provisions of Chapter 17.78.

T.     No portion of a driveway located in a front setback area shall be used for required parking. See Chapter 17.54, Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations.

U.    Flag Lots. A tentative parcel map with four or fewer lots that contains up to two flag lots in the R district may be approved, if the following criteria are met:

1.     Parcel map and flag lot configuration shall require planning commission review and approval;

2.     The original parcel’s shape, location or topography creates areas that could be developed with a residence that would not front on public streets;

3.     The portion of the lot providing the access corridor shall not be counted towards meeting minimum lot size requirements for the flag lot;

4.     Flag lot shall have a minimum street frontage of twenty-five feet;

5.     Driveway accessing flag lot shall be paved with a minimum sixteen-foot width to access one lot;

6.     Up to two lots may be accessed via one access driveway, provided the street frontage is increased to thirty feet and the paved driveway is increased to nineteen feet;

7.     Width of lot shall measure at least fifty-five feet where the access corridor ends;

8.     Side and rear yard setbacks for flag lot and adjoining lots shall be measured from the access corridor;

9.     Front yard setback for flag lots shall be measured from where the access corridor ends;

10.   The planning director shall be satisfied the applicant has not sold or transferred land, or taken any other steps to create the artificial result that the original parcel is shaped irregularly; and

11.   Further subdivision of flag lots shall not be allowed.

The planning commission may attach additional requirements to the parcel map to ensure that the creation of a flag lot is not injurious to property or detrimental to the public welfare. The criteria above shall be incorporated into the findings of approval for any such subdivision.

V.    Where there is a vertical grade separation between lots, building setback, retaining walls, and improvements shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements of Section 17.40.320. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.20.060 Review of plans.
Certain projects shall require architectural design review (see Chapter 17.52). (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

Chapter 17.22 RM MOBILE HOME PARK DISTRICT
17.22.010 Purpose—Establishment.
A.    The purpose of an RM zoning district is:

1.     To provide areas for low-, medium-, and high-density residential living in accordance locations shown on the general plan, which offer a variety of dwelling types;

2.     To preserve the characteristics of a residential zoning district while allowing for manufactured housing where compatible;

3.     To provide designated areas within the city for the establishment and maintenance of mobile home park residential environments.

B.     RM areas may be designated on larger parcels of land with utilities, services and good access to city streets and state highways.

C.     The RM district is not intended to be used for purposes of transient lodging. Use or parking of recreational vehicles, travel trailers, campers and similar types of lodging is not permitted within any RM district. Storage of recreational vehicles, travel trailers, campers and similar types vehicles may be allowed in accordance with an approved permit in accordance with Section 17.22.020 below. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.22.020 Regulations generally.
A.    No building or improvement or portion thereof shall be erected, constructed, converted, altered, or enlarged, nor shall any lot or premises be used in the RM zoning district except for one or more of the purposes listed in this chapter and subject to the terms and conditions of this chapter, or applicable city of Waterford development standards, as well as all other applicable provisions of this title.

B.     Mobile home parks or manufactured home developments shall be built and managed in compliance with Title 25 of California state law. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.22.030 Use regulations.
A.    Schedule 22-1 below prescribes the land use regulations for the RM district. The regulations for the district are established by letter designations as follows:

1.     “P” designates use classifications permitted in the RM district.

2.     “L”   designates use classifications that are permitted, subject to certain limitations.

3.     “T”   designates use classifications that are permitted to be conducted for a limited period of time and that require a temporary use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.74.

4.     “AU” designates a use classification permitted in the district but requiring an administrative use permit as provided in Chapter 17.73 due to the nature of the use or the area within which the use is proposed requiring special review/approval procedures.

5.     “U” designates use classifications that may be permitted upon approval of a conditional use permit, as provided in Chapter 17.75.

6.     “S”   designates use classifications that are subject to special regulations.

7.     Where letters in parentheses are opposite a use classification heading, referenced regulations shall apply to all use classifications under the heading.

8.     Letters in parentheses in the “Supplemental Regulations” column refer to the subsections of Section 17.22.040 following the schedule.

B.     Use classifications are defined in Chapter 17.04. In cases where a proposed use is not included in a use classification, the planning director shall determine whether the proposed use is substantially similar in character to a permitted use classification and in that event shall assign the proposed use to a permitted use classification. Use classifications not listed in Schedule 22-1 below are prohibited. Supplemental use regulations for the RM district are set forth in Section 17.22.040 below.

 

Schedule 22-1 RM District Use Regulations (see Ch. 17.04, Use Classifications)

 

Land Use Regulations

RM

Supplemental Regulations

Manufactured housing

P

 

Mobile homes

P

 

Trailers w/minimum of 800 sq. ft. of livable area

AU

Not used for temporary or transient occupancy

Accessory structures (storage)

P

(D)

Accessory uses

P

(A)

Small household pets

P

 

Parking areas/shelters

P

 

Child care services—6 or fewer

P

 

Residential care services—6 or fewer

P

 

Home occupations

AU

 

Community centers

C

 

Bicycle/pedestrian/equestrian trails, parks

P

 

Religious facilities

C

 

(Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.22.040 Supplemental use regulations.
A.    Temporary sales office and/or construction offices, and neighborhood or block parties, fairs or festivals, pursuant to Chapter 17.74.

B.     Approval of a use permit shall require a finding that (1) the proposed use will have no significant unmitigated environmental impacts; and (2) the building design is compatible with surrounding buildings.

C.     See Chapter 17.53, Home Occupations in R Districts.

D.    See Sections 17.40.150, Nonresidential accessory structures, and 17.40.160, Accessory dwelling units.

E.     See Section 17.54.190, Driveways and carports—Design and location in R districts.

F.     See Section 17.40.130, Swimming pools.

G.    See Section 17.40.120, Mobile homes and travel trailers.

H.    See Section 17.40.300, Animals.

I.      See Chapter 17.63, Nonconforming Uses and Structures.

J.      Planning commission use permit required, except that the planning director may approve use permits for general family day care homes caring for nine to fourteen children, as defined in Chapter 3.4 of the California Health and Safety Code. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.22.050 Property development regulations.
The following schedule prescribes development regulations for the RM district. The first two columns establish basic requirements for permitted and conditional uses; letters in parentheses in the “Additional Regulations” column refer to the subsections of Section 17.22.060 following the schedule.

 

 

 

Development

RM

Additional Regulations

Minimum lot area

2.5 acres

 

Minimum dwelling unit (stand) area

2,400 s.f.

 

Maximum density

14 du/ac

 

Minimum density

6 du/ac

 

Minimum average lot width

100 ft.

(A)

Minimum street frontage

35 ft.

(B)

Maximum height (ft.)

24 feet

20 feet accessory uses

Minimum park yard areas (ft.):

 

 

Front

10

(E)

Side

25

 

Rear

10

 

Maximum lot coverage (%)

60%

(C)

Improved park space

20%

(D)

Site plan review

Yes

Subject to Ch. 17.52

Signs

P

Subject to Ch. 17.60

On-site parking required

Yes

Subject to Ch. 17.54

(Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.22.060 Site development standards.
The following supplemental standards shall be applied to the RM district generally.

A.    Minimum Average Lot Width. One hundred feet for interior lots and/or corner lots.

B.     Minimum Street Frontage. The city planning commission shall be responsible for determining the minimum street frontage based on the buildable area of the lot, access requirements and good design. However, in no case shall the planning commission approve lots having less than thirty-five feet of street frontage.

C.     Maximum Allowable Lot Coverage. Sixty percent by all structures exclusive of parking areas.

D.    Twenty percent to be dedicated, preserved and maintained as useable open space for parks, playgrounds and similar uses.

E.     The following supplemental standards are applied to all RM zoning districts adjacent to any R zone to assure compatibility with surrounding residential uses.

1.     Minimum Front Yard Setback. Twenty-five feet from any R zone property line.

2.     A six-foot-high visual screen, as approved by the planning commission, shall be provided around all sides of a mobile home park which abuts an established residential use or R district. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

Chapter 17.24 C COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
17.24.010 Specific purposes.
A.    In addition to the general purposes listed in Chapter 17.04, the specific purposes of commercial districts are to:

1.     Provide appropriately located areas consistent with the general plan for a full range of office, retail commercial, and service commercial uses needed by residents of, and visitors to, the city and region;

2.     Strengthen the city’s economic base, and provide employment opportunities close to home for residents of the city and surrounding communities;

3.     Create suitable environments for various types of commercial uses, and protect them from the adverse effects of inharmonious uses;

4.     Minimize the impact of commercial development on adjacent residential districts;

5.     Ensure that the appearance and effects of commercial buildings and uses are harmonious with the character of the area in which they are located;

6.     Provide opportunities for residential development on the site of commercial development or on separate sites in certain commercial districts and promote mixed-use development in appropriate areas of the city;

7.     Ensure the provision of adequate off-street parking and loading facilities;

8.     Provide sites for public and semipublic uses needed to complement commercial development or compatible with a commercial environment.

B.     The additional purposes of each C district are as follows:

1.     CC Central Commercial District. To provide “downtown” or “central” commercial and “mixed use” sites for businesses serving the daily needs of nearby residential areas while establishing development standards that prevent significant adverse effects on residential uses adjoining a CC district.

2.     CH Commercial Highway Service District. To provide a “mixed-use” environment along Waterford’s main arterial (Highway 132 or Yosemite Boulevard) that can meet the service/commercial needs of the visiting public and provide a landscaped environment for offices of and for residential development that is designed to be compatible with highway service and commercial traffic in the area.

3.     CG General Commercial District. To provide opportunities for the full range of retail and service businesses deemed suitable for location in Waterford, including businesses not permitted in other commercial districts because they attract heavy vehicular traffic or have certain adverse impacts; and to provide opportunities for certain limited manufacturing uses that have impacts comparable to those of permitted retail and service uses to occupy space not in demand for retailing or services.

4.     CR Regional Commercial District. To provide regional retail and service opportunities for development along the major north-south transportation corridor of the city so as to serve residents of the city of Waterford and residents of the surrounding areas and communities. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.24.020 CC, CH, CG and CR districts—Land use regulations.
A.    Schedule 24-1 below prescribes the land use regulations for commercial districts. The regulations for each district are established by letter designations as follows:

1.     “P” designates use classifications permitted in commercial districts.

2.     “L”   designates use classifications that are permitted, subject to certain limitations.

3.     “T”   designates use classifications that are permitted to be conducted for a limited period of time and that require a temporary use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.74.

4.     “AU” designates a use classification permitted in the district but requiring an administrative use permit as provided in Chapter 17.73 due to the nature of the use or the area within which the use is proposed requiring special review/approval procedures.

5.     “U” designates use classifications that may be permitted upon approval of a conditional use permit, as provided in Chapter 17.75.

6.     Where letters in parentheses are opposite a use classification heading, referenced regulations shall apply to all use classifications under the heading.

7.     Letters in parentheses in the “Additional Regulations” column refer to the subsections in Section 17.24.040 following the schedule.

B.     Use classifications are defined in Chapter 17.04. In cases where a proposed use is not included in a use classification, the planning director shall determine whether the proposed use is substantially similar in character to a permitted use classification and in that event shall assign the proposed use to a permitted use classification. Use classifications not listed in Schedule 24-1 below are prohibited. Supplemental use regulations for commercial districts are set forth in Section 17.24.040 below.

 

17.24.030 CC, CH, CG and CR districts—Use table.
 

Schedule 24-1 CC, CH, CG & CR Districts Use Tables (see Ch. 17.04, Use Classifications)

Note: — means not permitted

 

Use Classifications*

CC (D)

CH (D)

CG

CR

Additional Regulations

Residential Use Classifications (see §17.04.030)

 

 

 

 

(D) (L) (M) (R) (W)

Group residential

–

U

U

–

 

Live/work quarters

P

P

AU

AU

 

Multifamily residential

L1

L1

–

L1

 

Residential care limited

–

–

–

P

 

Single-family residential

L10

L10

L10

L10

 

Public and Semipublic Use Classifications (see §17.04.040)

 

 

 

 

(D) (L) (M) (Q) (V)

Clubs and lodges

AU

AU

P

P

 

Cultural institutions

P

P

P

P

 

Day care (general)

L7

L7

–

L7

 

Government offices

P

P

P

P

 

Hospitals

–

U

U

U

 

Park and recreation facilities

AU

AU

AU

P

(B)

Public safety facilities

AU

AU

AU

AU

 

Religious assembly

AU

L9

U

U

(K)

Schools, public or private

U

AU

–

–

(I)

Waste facility

U

U

U

U

(I)

Utilities (minor)

P

P

P

P

 

Commercial Use Classifications (see §17.04.050)

 

 

 

 

(L) (M) (Q) (V)

Ambulance services

–

L6

P

L6

 

Animal sales and services

L8

L8

L8

L8

 

Animal boarding

–

AU

AU

–

 

Animal grooming

AU

AU

P

AU

 

Animal hospitals

–

P

P

–

 

Animals—Retail sales

L8

L8

L8

L8

 

Artists’ studios

L5

L5

—

L5

 

Banks and savings and loans with drive-up service

AU

AU

L11

AU

 

Building materials and services

–

AU

P

AU

(U)

Cannabis dispensary

U16

U16

U16

U16

 

Cannabis testing laboratory

U16

U16

U16

U16

 

Catering services

P

P

P

P

 

Commercial filming

AU

AU

AU

AU

 

Commercial recreation and entertainment

L9

L9

L9

L9

 

Use Classifications*

CC (D)

CH (D)

CG

CR

Additional Regulations

Game center, billiard parlor

L15

P

—

L15

(B)

Conference and meeting facilities

L13

L14

—

L14

 

Eating and drinking establishments

P

P

P

P

(E)

With wine and beer service

AU

P

P

AU

(E)

With full alcoholic beverage service

U

U

U

U

(I)

With live entertainment

U

U

U

U

(I)

With take-out service

AU

P

P

P

(E) (O)

Drive-up

U

P

P

P

(E) (I)

Truck stop

–

U

–

U

(P)

Food and beverage sales

L2

–

L2

L2

(F)

Funeral and interment services

L4

L3

L4

–

 

Photography studio & photo equipment/supply

P

P

P

P

 

Laboratories

–

P

P

AU

 

Maintenance and repair services

–

L12

L12

–

(U)

Boat sales and services

–

P

P

P

(F) (U)

Nurseries (plant material)

AU

P

P

P

 

Offices, business and professional

P

P

P

P

 

Pawn shops

P

P

P

–

 

Personal improvement services

P

P

P

P

 

Personal services

P

P

P

P

 

Research and development services

AU

AU

P

AU

(R)

Produce markets

AU

P

P

P

(C) (U)

Produce stand

AU

P

P

P

(C) (U)

Retail sales

P

P

P

P

 

Secondhand appliances/clothing

AU

P

P

–

(U)

Vehicle/equipment sales & services

–

AU

AU

AU

(F) (U)

Automobile rentals

AU

P

P

P

(F) (U)

Automobile washing

–

AU

P

AU

 

Service stations

U

AU

U

AU

(F) (I) (P)

Vehicle/equipment repair

–

AU

P

AU

(F) (U)

Vehicle/equipment sales and rentals

–

AU

P

AU

(U)

Visitor accommodations (general)

P

P

–

P

(I) (H)

Bed and breakfast inns

P

P

–

P

(I) (H)

Hotels and motels

P

P

–

P

(I) (H)

Temporary Use Classifications (see §17.04.090)

 

 

 

 

(D) (L) (M) (R)

Animal shows

T

T

T

T

 

Christmas tree sales

T

T

T

T

 

Circuses and carnivals

T

T

T

T

 

Mobile food service

T

T

T

–

(A)

Use Classifications*

CC (D)

CH (D)

CG

CR

Additional Regulations

Swap meets

–

T

T

T

 

Commercial filming (limited)

T

T

T

T

 

Accessory Use Classifications (see §17.04.080)

 

 

 

 

(D) (L) (M) (R)

Wireless communications

P

P

P

P

(S)

Alternative energy

P

P

P

P

(T)

Retail sales, outdoor

AU

AU

AU

AU

 

*       See indicated code section with respect to use classification. Uses indicated are a subset of the uses that may occur in this district. Other uses, which are not listed below, may be approved subject to AU procedures provided that they are similar to the indicated uses with respect to impacts on surrounding uses and the stated purpose and intent of commercial “C” district (Sections 17.20.010 and 17.20.020).

1        Not permitted on ground level.

2        A use permit is required for establishments occupying more than one thousand five hundred square feet and for convenience markets. Except as provided below, convenience markets shall not be located within five hundred feet of a site occupied by a public or private school, park or recreational facilities, and no exterior vending machines shall be permitted. A convenience market may be located within five hundred feet of a site occupied by park or recreational facilities if the proposed convenience market is within five hundred feet of an existing retail food and beverage sales establishment. Convenience markets may be operated only between the hours of six a.m. and ten p.m. Longer hours are permitted only if they would not have an adverse effect on neighborhood uses.

3        Only mortuaries allowed, subject to a use permit.

4        Only mortuaries allowed.

5        Planning director administrative permit required only for dance and music studios. If the following conditions are met, the planning director may waive the use permit requirement and approve the use subject to the following:

a. The proposed use is located in an existing structure which is completely enclosed and soundproofed, or is located at least three hundred feet away from the property line of the nearest residential use;

b. The proposed use will not operate prior to seven a.m. Monday through Saturday, or prior to eight a.m. Sunday, or after ten p.m. any day of the week.

6        No repair services are permitted, and an administrative use permit is required.

7        Planning commission use permit required, except that the planning director may approve use permits for large family day care homes caring for seven to twelve children, as defined in Chapter 3.4 of the California Health and Safety Code.

8        Administrative use permit may be issued if the following conditions are met:

a. The proposed use is located in an existing structure which is entirely enclosed, and no outside facilities are proposed.

b. For animal hospitals, or where boarding or overnight care facilities are proposed, the use is located in a soundproofed and air-conditioned facility.

9        Administrative use permit required for facilities holding outdoor events or activities.

10      RS and RM residential uses established prior to June 1, 2011, are allowed to continue to be used as residential units as provided under Chapter 17.63 (Non-Conforming Uses and Structures). New RS- and RM-type residential units created after that date are not permitted.

11      Only automatic teller machines allowed.

12      Use permit required only for equipment rentals and retail sales.

13      Permitted as a secondary use in a building, occupying no more than two thousand five hundred square feet of the building floor area.

14      Permitted as a secondary use in a building occupying no more than two thousand five hundred square feet of the building area. A use permit is required for secondary uses occupying building areas of two thousand five hundred and one to five thousand square feet, or where the use is the primary use of a building.

15      Only game centers with five or fewer games permitted; also see Section 17.40.260, Game centers.

16      Also see Chapter 8.34, Cannabis Regulations.

 

(Ord. 2019-08 §4; Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.24.040 CC, CH, CG and CR districts—Additional use regulations.
A.    Mobile food service subject to the requirements of Chapter 17.55.

B.     See Section 17.40.260, Game centers.

C.     Produce stands and markets as defined and regulated in Chapter 17.56.

D.    See Chapter 17.42, Mixed Use Compatibility Standards.

E.     See Section 17.40.190, Eating and drinking establishments with take-out service.

F.     See Section 17.40.210, Service stations, vehicle/equipment repair, and automobile washing.

G.    See Section 17.40.150, Nonresidential accessory structures.

H.    See Section 17.40.130, Swimming pools.

I.      See Chapters 17.75, Use Permits and 17.76, Variances.

J.      See Chapter 17.63, Nonconforming Uses and Structures.

K.    See Section 17.40.180, Religious assembly yard requirements.

L.     All uses and activities conducted within C districts shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.44 (Performance Standards) unless specifically exempted or modified by the provisions of the C district.

M.    All development or use activities shall be conducted within C districts in conformance with the regulations set forth in Chapter 17.40 (General Regulations), unless specifically exempted or modified by provisions of the C districts.

N.    Limited to facilities accessory to commercial retail sales and service, and not exceeding twenty-five percent of the floor area occupied by the principal use.

O.    See Section 17.40.190, Eating and drinking establishments with take-out service.

P.     See Section 17.40.210, Service stations, vehicle/equipment repair, and automobile washing.

Q.    See Chapter 17.44, Performance Standards and Section 17.44.050, Hazardous materials.

R.     Evaluate a non-commercial project against the following criteria when considering findings for use permits or variances:

1.     Will the project create substantial conflicts with existing commercial traffic?

2.     Will the project create excessive glare, noise or vibration from adjacent commercial uses? (Refer to general plan for noise criteria, and Chapter 17.44, Performance Standards.)

3.     Will the project generate or use hazardous materials or risks that would create health and safety hazards for persons occupying or visiting existing or proposed commercial uses in the area?

4.     Will the project be located on an arterial street, or located in an area which would create conflicts with commercial traffic in the area?

S.     See Chapter 17.40, Wireless Communications Facilities.

T.     See Chapter 17.58, Alternative Energy Systems.

U.    See Section 17.40.300, Outdoor displays, sales and promotions.

V.    See Sections 17.52.080 and 17.52.090 (Architectural Review). (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.24.050 CC, CH, CG and CR districts—Property development regulations.
The following schedule prescribes development regulations for the CC, CH, CG, and CR districts. The first five columns prescribe basic requirements for permitted and conditional uses in each district. Letters in parentheses in the “Additional Regulations” column refer to the subsections in Section 17.24.050 following the schedule.

 

Schedule 24-2 CC, CH, CG, and CR Districts Property Development Regulations

 

Development

CC

CH

CG

CR

Additional Regulations

Subdivision development

 

 

 

 

(A)

Minimum lot area (sq. ft.)

6,000

6,000

7,500

43,000

(B) (C)

Minimum lot width (ft.)

70

70

60

300

(B) (C)

Minimum yards:

 

 

 

 

(W) (X)

Front (ft. from curb)

5

10

10

10

(D)

Side (ft. from property line)

0

5

5

5

(D) (E) (F)

Corner side rear (ft.)

5

10

10

10

(D) (E) (F)

Maximum height (ft.) of structures

40

30

30

30

(G) (U)

Maximum lot coverage

80%

60%

75%

75%

 

Maximum nonresidential FAR

1.2

0.8

0.8

0.8

 

Maximum FAR

2.0

1.2

1.2

1.2

 

Minimum site landscaping

10%

10%

10%

10%

(H) (I) (J) (N) (R) (S)

Fences and walls

 

 

 

 

(K) (L) (M) (N) (T)

Off-street parking and loading

See Ch. 17.54

 

 

 

Signs

See Ch. 17.60

 

 

 

Outdoor display, sales & promotions

See §17.40.300

 

 

 

Screening of mechanical equipment

See §17.40.240

 

 

 

Refuse storage areas

See §17.40.250

 

 

 

Underground utilities

See §17.40.310

 

 

 

Performance standards

See Ch. 17.44

 

 

 

Public utilities

See §17.40.060

 

 

 

Open space

 

 

 

 

(Q)

Planting area

 

 

 

 

(R)

Nonconforming structures

See Ch. 17.63

 

 

 

 

(Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.24.060 CC, CH, CG and CR districts—Additional development regulations.
A.    All divisions of land on property zoned “C” (commercial) shall conform to the minimum lot area standard of the applicable “C” district; provided, however, that no subdivision shall be approved within a “C” district unless it is part of an approved development plan for the site. Such development plan shall, and related subdivision must be for the purpose of improving the usefulness of the site for commercial type uses. Exemptions to minimum parcel sizes shall apply to parcels created or used for general public purposes, public utility or communication purposes.

B.     See Section 17.40.090, Development on substandard lots.

C.     See Section 17.40.230, Development on lots divided by district boundaries.

D.    See Section 17.40.100, Building projections into yards and courts. Double-frontage lots shall provide front yards on each frontage.

E.     A ten-foot side or rear yard shall adjoin an R district, and structures shall not intercept a 1:1 or forty-five-degree daylight plane inclined inward from a height of twelve feet above existing grade at the R district boundary line.

 



Side or Rear Yards

(The diagram is illustrative)

 

F.     Visible yards not used for parking shall have a three-foot planting strip adjoining an interior property line within fifty feet of a street property line, providing that such a planting strip is not required for a lot with a single-family dwelling.

 



Visible Yards

(The diagram is illustrative)

 

G.    See Section 17.40.080, Exceptions to height limits.

H.    See Chapter 17.45, Landscape Standards.

I.      An average sixty square feet (with a minimum horizontal dimension of six feet) of private open space is required for each dwelling unit where residential uses are allowed in mixed use developments.

J.      Courts shall be required opposite windows in dwelling units. The minimum width shall be twenty feet opposite a living room window and fourteen feet opposite the window of any other habitable room, and the court shall extend horizontally ten feet in both directions from the vertical centerline of the window. Where no interior side yard is required, the width of the court perpendicular to the property line need not exceed ten feet. A required court shall be open to the sky above the sill of a window requiring the court; provided that eaves may project up to two feet from a wall adjoining a court.

Exceptions: Courts are not required for live/work quarters or for residential units in mixed-use projects.

K.    The maximum height of a wall or fence or wall shall be eight feet.

L.     A six-foot solid masonry, wood or concrete wall shall adjoin the property line of the site of a new ground-floor residential use abutting an existing nonresidential use or the property line of a new nonresidential use abutting the site of an existing ground-floor residential use. However, no wall shall be required where the portion of the site within ten feet of the property line is occupied by planting area or by a building having no openings except openings opposite a street property line. A wall within fifteen feet of a street property line shall not exceed three feet in height.

 



Required Walls—Residential Use Abutting Nonresidential Use

(The diagram is illustrative)

 

M.    Wall separating residential and nonresidential development should accommodate some form of pedestrian access that will. In no instance shall a wall exceed five hundred linear feet without a break that permits controlled or non-controlled pedestrian access to a commercial district from an adjacent residential district.

N.    In any C district, a triangular yard adjoining both sides of a driveway crossing a street property line shall have a depth of five feet at the edge of the driveway and a width measured on both sides of the driveway of fifty feet, or the distance to the intercepting property line, whichever is less. At least fifty percent of each yard shall be planting area. Visible yards shall have a three-foot planting strip along interior property lines within fifty feet of a street property line; this strip shall be counted in determining compliance with the fifty percent planting strip requirement.

 



Driveway Visibility

(The diagram is illustrative)

 

O.    Open Space.

1.     Basic Requirement. Total open space on a site shall be at least two hundred square feet per six thousand square feet of enclosed building sales or service area and per dwelling unit where mixed use is permitted.

2.     Shared Open Space. Shared open space, provided by non-street side yards, patios and terraces, shall be designed so that a horizontal rectangle inscribed within it has no dimension less than ten feet, shall be open to the sky, and shall not include driveways or parking areas, or area required for front or street side yards.

P.     Planting Areas.

1.     Yards Adjoining Streets. All visible portions of a required yard adjoining a street shall be a landscape planting area or hardscaped. That includes parking areas, driveways and walks, as well as areas covered by ornamental gravel, crushed rock or similar materials.

2.     Interior Yards. In any C districts, at least fifty percent of each required interior side yard and rear yard shall be planting areas having a minimum width of five feet adjoining a side or rear property line; provided, that the width of a required planting area may be reduced to two feet in one side or rear yard adjoining a driveway and an accessory structure may occupy a portion of the planting area in a rear yard.

3.     Notwithstanding subsection (R)(2) of this section, a continuous planting area having a minimum width of five feet shall adjoin an R district.

Q.    See Chapters 15.46, Water Efficient Landscaping Standards; 17.45, Landscape Standards; 12.20, Street Trees; 12.30, Tree, Sidewalk Maintenance; and solar access in accordance with Section 17.58.060, Prohibition on casting shadows, and California state law.

R.     Fences and Walls. The maximum heights of a fence or wall shall be eight feet except within fifteen feet of the front property line abutting a street, where the maximum height shall be four feet. In addition, all fences and walls shall be subject to the driveway and intersection visibility requirements of Chapter 17.62. All fencing materials shall be subject to the requirements of Section 17.62.090, Prohibited fencing.

S.     See Section 17.40.082, Measurement of height.

T.     See Section 17.40.180, Religious assembly yard requirements.

U.    See Section 17.40.320, Grade separation between lots.

V.    Residential development in a C district shall comply with applicable R development regulations for site area per unit and courts opposite windows. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.24.070 Review of plans.
Certain projects shall require architectural design review (see Chapter 17.52). All projects shall be subject to standards of review (see Chapter 17.72). (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

Chapter 17.26 I INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
17.26.010 Specific purposes.
A.    In addition to the general purposes listed in Chapter 17.04, the specific purposes of industrial district regulations are to:

1.     Provide appropriately located areas consistent with the general plan for a broad range of manufacturing and service commercial uses;

2.     Strengthen the city’s economic base, and provide employment opportunities close to home for residents of the city and surrounding communities;

3.     Provide a suitable environment for various types of industrial uses, and protect them from the adverse impacts of inharmonious uses;

4.     Ensure that the appearance and effects of industrial uses are compatible with the character of the area in which they are located;

5.     Minimize the impact of industrial uses on adjacent residential districts;

6.     Ensure the provision of adequate off-street parking and loading facilities.

B.     The additional purposes of each I district are as follows

1.     IL Limited Industrial District. To protect areas appropriate for business and commercial services and light manufacturing from adverse effects of retail uses or of general industrial uses by preventing conversion of prime sites to general office use.

2.     IG General Industrial District. To provide sites for the full range of manufacturing, industrial processing, general service, and distribution uses deemed suitable for location in Waterford; and to protect Waterford’s general industrial areas, to the extent feasible, from disruption and competition for space from unrelated retail and commercial uses that could more appropriately be located elsewhere in the city. Performance standards will minimize potential environmental impacts.

3.     IP Industrial Park District. To provide sites in landscaped settings for industrial office centers, research and development facilities, limited industrial activities (including production and assembly, but no raw materials processing or bulk handling), and small-scale warehousing distribution. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.26.020 IL, IG and IP districts.
A.    Schedule 26-1 below prescribes the land use regulations for industrial districts. The regulations for each district are established by letter designations as follows:

1.     “P” designates use classifications permitted in industrial districts.

2.     “L”   designates use classifications that are permitted, subject to certain limitations.

3.     “T”   designates use classifications that are permitted to be conducted for a limited period of time and that require a temporary use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.74.

4.     “AU” designates a use classification permitted in the district but requiring an administrative use permit as provided in Chapter 17.73 due to the nature of the use or the area within which the use is proposed requiring special review/approval procedures.

5.     “U” designates use classifications that may be permitted upon approval of a conditional use permit, as provided in Chapter 17.75.

6.     Where letters in parentheses are opposite a use classification heading, referenced regulations shall apply to all use classifications under the heading.

7.     Letters in parentheses in the “Additional Regulations” column refer to the subsections of Section 17.26.040 following the schedule.

B.     Use classifications are defined in Chapter 17.04. In cases where a proposed use is not included in a use classification, the planning director shall determine whether the proposed use is substantially similar in character to a permitted use classification and in that event shall assign the proposed use to a permitted use classification. Use classifications not listed in Schedule 26-1 below, or determined to be substantially similar to the uses listed, are prohibited. Supplemental use regulations for Industrial “I” districts are set forth in Section 17.26.040 below. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.26.030 IL, IG and IP districts—Land use regulations.
 

Schedule 26-1 IL, IG & IP Districts Use Table (see Ch. 17.04, Use Classifications)

Note: — means not permitted

 

 

Use Classifications*

IL

IG

IP

Additional Regulations

Residential Use Classifications
(see §17.04.030)

 

 

 

(H) (K) (B) (L) (Q) (R) (S)

Live/work quarters

U

–

–

(F) (K)

Caretaker or guard quarters

AU

AU

AU

(F) (K)

Public and Semipublic Use Classifications (see §17.04.040)

 

 

 

(K) (P) (L) (Q) (R)

Clubs and lodges

L18

L18

L18

(L)

Cultural institutions

U

U

U

(F) (L)

Day care (general)

U

U

U

(F) (J) (L) (M)

Government offices

AU

AU

AU

(F) (K) (L)

Heliports

L1

L1

L1

 

Maintenance and service facilities

L17, L16

L17, L16

L16

(D)

Use Classifications*

IL

IG

IP

Additional Regulations

Public safety facilities

AU

AU

AU

(F)

Religious assembly

U

U

U

(F) (J) (L)

Utilities (major)

U

U

U

(F)

Waste facility

–

U

–

(F)

Utilities (minor)

P

P

P

(F)

Commercial Use Classifications

(see §17.04.050)

 

 

 

(L) (K) (P) (Q) (R)

Ambulance services

P

P

P

 

Animal sales and services

P

P

AU

(F)

Animal boarding

L20

L20

–

 

Animal hospitals

L20

L20

–

 

Artists’ studios

P

–

U

(F) (L)

Banks and savings and loans

L2

L2

L2

(L)

Building materials and services

L3

L3

-

 

Catering services

P

P

P

 

Cannabis testing laboratory

U22

U22

U22

 

Commercial filming

U

U

U

(F)

Commercial recreation and entertainment

L6

L21

L6

(L)

Game center

L9

L9

L9

(L)

Communication facilities

P

P

P

 

Eating and drinking establishments

L4

L5

L4

(L)

With wine and beer service

L4

L5

L4

(L)

With full alcoholic beverage service

U

U

U

(F) (L)

With take-out service

L4

L5

L4

(L)

Limited

L4

L5

L4

(L)

Food and beverage sales

L7

L7

L8

(L)

Funeral and interment services

L10

–

–

 

Horticulture (limited)

P

P

–

 

Laboratories

P

P

P

(I)

Boat sales and services

–

P

–

 

Maintenance and repair services

P

P

P

(I)

Nurseries

AU

AU

–

(F)

Offices, business and professional

L13

–

L13

 

Personal improvement services

L14

L14

L14

 

Personal services

L11

L11

L11

 

Research and development services

P

P

P

(I)

Automobile washing

–

L15

–

(D)

Service stations

L16

L16

–

(D) (I)

Vehicle/equipment repair

L17

L17

–

(D)

Vehicle/equipment sales and rentals

L12

L12

–

(D)

Vehicle storage

AU

U

–

(F)

Warehousing and storage limited

AU

AU

AU

(F)

Use Classifications*

IL

IG

IP

Additional Regulations

Mobile food service

AU

AU

AU

(A) (F)

Industrial Use Classifications

(see §17.04.060)

 

 

 

(I) (P) (Q) (R)

Cannabis cultivation business

U22

U22

U22

 

Cannabis distribution business

U22

U22

U22

 

Cannabis manufacturing business

U22

U22

U22

 

Industry (custom)

P

P

P

 

Industry (general)

L20

L19

U

(F)

Industry (limited)

P

P

P

 

Small-scale

P

P

P

 

Industry research and development

P

P

P

 

Wholesaling, distribution and storage

P

P

P

 

Warehousing and transportation

P

P

U

(F)

Trucking terminal/freight transfer station

U

U

AU

(F)

Package distribution

P

P

U

(F)

Agricultural Use Classifications

(see §17.04.070)

 

 

 

(K) (L) (P) (Q) (R)

Mining and processing

–

AU

–

(F)

Accessory Use Classifications

(see §17.04.080)

AU

AU

AU

(F) (K) (L) (P) (Q) (R)

Wireless communications

AU

AU

AU

(F) (M)

Alternative energy systems

AU

AU

AU

(F) (N)

Wind energy systems

AU

AU

AU

(F) (O)

Temporary Use Classifications
(see §17.04.090)

 

 

 

(F) (K) (L) (P) (Q) (R)

Animal shows

T

T

–

 

Christmas tree sales

T

T

–

 

Circuses and carnivals

T

T

–

 

Retail sales—Outdoor

T

T

–

 

Swap meets—Nonrecurring

T

T

–

 

Trade fairs

T

T

T

 

*       See indicated code section with respect to use classification. Uses indicated are a subset of the uses that may occur in this district. Other uses, which are not listed below, may be approved subject to AU procedures provided that they are similar to the indicated uses with respect to impacts on surrounding uses and the stated purpose and intent of the industrial “I” districts (Section 17.26.010).

1        Allowed with a use permit and heliport permit from the California Department of Transportation, Division of Aeronautics if located one thousand or more feet from a residential district.

2        Only automatic teller machines allowed.

3        Use permit required only for equipment rentals and retail sales.

4        Permitted as a secondary use in a building, occupying no more than two thousand five hundred square feet of the building floor area.

5        Permitted as a secondary use in a building occupying no more than two thousand five hundred square feet of the building area. A use permit is required for secondary uses occupying building areas of two thousand five hundred and one to five thousand square feet, or where the use is the primary use of a building.

6        Only health fitness clubs and tennis/racquetball clubs are permitted as the principal use in a structure, subject to a use permit. Other activities regulated under this use classification are permitted as a secondary use within a building, occupying no more than one thousand square feet of the building floor area.

7        Use permit required for establishments occupying more than one thousand square feet.

8        Only delicatessens and food stores occupying fewer than one thousand square feet are permitted.

9        Only game centers with five or fewer games permitted; also see Section 17.40.260, Game centers.

10      Only crematories, columbariums, and mausoleums allowed.

11      Only beauty shops and barbershops permitted.

12      New or used automobile, truck or motorcycle retail sales shall be permitted only as an accessory to wholesale operations.

13      Medical/dental offices, insurance brokerage offices, and real estate brokerage offices not permitted.

14      Only business and trade schools permitted.

15      Only truck tractor and trailer washing permitted.

16      Only stations offering controlled services to individual uses within an industrial area are allowed, subject to a use permit.

17      Only truck and equipment repair primarily serving industrial activities are permitted by right; a planning director use permit is required for automobile repair and for repair services that cater to the general public. If the following conditions are met, the planning director may waive the use permit requirement and approve the use upon issuance of a zoning permit:

a. The proposed use is located in an existing structure on a major arterial or on a street which connects to a major arterial, and is readily accessible to residential and commercial areas;

b. No outdoor repair or maintenance activities are proposed in conjunction with the use;

c. No outdoor storage of vehicles or equipment will take place during non-business hours;

d. The applicant can demonstrate that the proposed site will meet zoning ordinance parking requirements.

18      Only trade union halls, including their accompanying business offices, are permitted.

19      General industrial uses are permitted by right.

20      Planning director use permit required. If the following conditions are met, the planning director may waive the conditional use permit requirement and approve the use upon issuance of an administrative use permit:

a. The proposed use is located in an existing structure which is entirely enclosed, and no outside facilities are proposed;

b. For animal hospitals, or where boarding or overnight care facilities are proposed, the use is located in a soundproofed and air-conditioned facility.

21      Health fitness clubs, tennis/racquetball clubs, and recreational facilities such as batting cages, indoor golf driving ranges, and firing and archery ranges are permitted within a structure, subject to a use permit when occupying more than one thousand square feet. All activities regulated under this use classification are permitted when occupying no more than one thousand square feet of the building floor area.

22      Also see Chapter 8.34, Cannabis Regulations.

(Ord. 2019-08 §5; Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.26.040 IL, IG and IP districts—Supplemental land use regulations.
A.    Mobile food service subject to the requirements of Chapter 17.55.

B.     Limited to facilities accessory to manufacturing, wholesaling, or distribution, and not exceeding twenty-five percent of the floor area occupied by the principal use.

C.     See Section 17.40.190, Eating and drinking establishments with take-out service.

D.    See Section 17.40.210, Service stations, vehicle/equipment repair, and automobile washing.

E.     See Section 17.40.150, Nonresidential accessory structures.

F.     See Chapters 17.75, Use Permits and 17.76, Variances.

G.    Maximum: One dwelling unit per site as caretaker’s housing.

H.    See Chapter 17.63, Nonconforming Uses and Structures.

I.      See Chapter 17.44, Performance Standards and Section 17.44.050, Hazardous materials.

J.      No general day care facilities or schools shall be permitted as part of a religious assembly facility.

K.    Evaluate a non-industrial or non-commercial project against the following criteria when considering findings for use permits or variances:

1.     Will the project create substantial conflicts with existing industrial and commercial traffic?

2.     Will the project be subject to excessive glare, noise or vibration from adjacent industrial/commercial uses? (Refer to general plan for noise criteria and Chapter 17.44, Performance Standards.)

3.     Will the project be exposed to hazardous materials or risks that would create health and safety hazards for persons occupying or visiting the project?

4.     Will the project be located on an arterial street, or located in an area which would bring non-industrial traffic onto local streets?

L.     See Chapter 17.42, Mixed Use Compatibility Standards.

M.    See Chapter 17.40, Wireless Communications Facilities.

N.    See Chapter 17.58, Alternative Energy Systems.

O.    See Chapter 17.59, Wind Turbine Energy Systems.

P.     See Section 17.40.300, Outdoor displays, sales and promotions.

Q.    All uses and activities conducted within “I” districts shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.44 (Performance Standards) unless specifically exempted or modified by the provisions of the “I” district specifically.

R.     All development or use activities shall be conducted within “I” districts in conformance with the regulations set forth in Chapter 17.40 (General Regulations) unless specifically exempted or modified by provisions of an “I” district specifically.

S.     RS, RM and RH residential uses established prior to June 1, 2011 are allowed to continue to be used as residential units as provided under Chapter 17.63 (Nonconforming Uses and Structures). New RS, RM and RH type residential units created after that date are not permitted. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.26.050 IL, IG and IP districts—Property development regulations.
The following schedule prescribes development regulations for the IL, IG and IP districts. The first four columns prescribe basic requirements for permitted and conditional uses. Letters in parentheses in the “Additional Regulations” column refer to the subsections of Sections 17.26.060 following the schedule.

 

Schedule 26-2 IL, IG, and IP Districts Property Development Regulations

 

 

Development

IL

IG

IP

Additional Regulations

Subdivision development

 

 

 

(A)

Minimum lot area (sq. ft.)

10,000

20,000

20,000

(B) (C)

Minimum lot width (ft.)

100

100

100

(B) (C)

Minimum yards:

 

 

 

(L) (N) (O)

Front (ft.)

15

15

15

(D)

Side (ft.)

10

10

10

(D) (E)

Corner side (ft.)

10

10

10

(D)

Rear (ft.)

10

10

10

 

Maximum height of structures

50

50

50

(E) (F)

Maximum lot coverage

50%

75%

50%

 

Maximum FAR

0.8

1.0

0.6

 

Minimum site landscaping

10%

10%

10%

(H) (I) (P) (Q)

Fences and walls

 

 

 

(J) (K)

Off-street parking and loading

See Ch. 17.54

 

 

 

Signs

See Chapter 17.60

 

 

Refuse storage areas

See Section 17.40.250

 

 

Underground utilities

See Section 17.40.310

 

(M)

 

(Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.26.060 IL, IG and IP districts—Additional development regulations.
A.    All divisions of land on property zoned I (industrial) shall conform to the minimum lot area standard of the applicable I district; provided, however, that no subdivision shall be approved within an I district unless it is part of an approved development plan for the site. Such development plan shall, and related subdivision must be for the purpose of improving the usefulness of the site for industrial type uses. Exemptions to minimum parcel sizes shall apply to parcels created or used for general public purposes, public utility or communication purposes.

B.     See Section 17.40.090, Development on substandard lots.

C.     See Section 17.40.230, Development on lots divided by district boundaries.

D.    See Section 17.40.100, Building projections into yards and courts. Double-frontage lots shall provide front yards on each frontage.

E.     A ten-foot interior side or rear yard shall adjoin an R district, and structures shall not intercept a forty-five-degree daylight plane inclined inward from a height of twelve feet above existing grade at the R district property line.

F.     See Section 17.40.082, Measurement of height.

G.    One foot of additional height allowed for each additional foot the building is set back from each property line beyond the minimum yard requirement may be allowed, up to a maximum height of seventy-five feet; see also Section 17.40.080, Exceptions to height limits.

H.    Planting areas, see Chapter 17.45.

1.     IL District. Required yards shall be planting areas except for necessary drives and walks.

2.     IG District. Required yards shall be planting areas, except for necessary drives and walks, or may be enclosed by a solid fence or wall at least three feet in height, subject to the discretion of the planning director in accordance with Chapter 17.62.

3.     Exceptions. In calculating the minimum percent of the site area to be landscaped, creeks and adjacent riparian vegetation and slopes to be retained in their natural state shall qualify as planting areas.

I.      See Chapter 17.45, Landscaping Standards.

J.      A six-foot solid masonry or concrete wall shall adjoin the property line of the site of a new nonresidential use abutting the site of an existing residential use. However, no wall shall be required where the portion of the site within ten feet of the property line is occupied by a planting area or by a building having no openings except openings opposite a street property line. A wall within fifteen feet of a street property line shall not exceed three feet in height.

K.    Fences and Walls. The maximum heights of a fence or wall shall be eight feet except within fifteen feet of the front property line abutting a street, where the maximum height shall be four feet. The maximum height of a fence or wall shall be eight feet along side and rear property lines, except adjacent to an R or C district, where it shall be six feet. In addition, all fences and walls shall be subject to the driveway and intersection visibility requirements of Chapter 17.62. With the exception of chain-link or similar fencing, all fencing materials in an I district shall be subject to the requirements of Section 17.62.090, Prohibited fencing.

L.     See Section 17.40.180, Religious assembly yard requirements.

 

M.    See Section 17.40.240, Screening of mechanical equipment.

N.    See Section 17.40.320, Grade separation between lots.

O.    The required minimum front yards in the IL, IG and IP zones shall be as follows:

 

 

Building Height Above Curb

Required Setback

Less than 18 feet

15 feet

18 feet to 24 feet

20 feet

Greater than 24 feet

25 feet

 

P.     Planting Areas.

1.     Yards Adjoining Streets. All visible portions of a required yard adjoining a street shall be a landscape planting area or hardscaped. That includes parking areas, driveways and walks, as well as areas covered by ornamental gravel, crushed rock or similar materials.

2.     Interior Yards. In any “I” district, at least fifty percent of each required interior side yard and rear yard shall be planting areas having a minimum width of five feet adjoining a side or rear property line; provided, that the width of a required planting area may be reduced to two feet in one side or rear yard adjoining a driveway and an accessory structure may occupy a portion of the planting area in a rear yard.

3.     Notwithstanding subsection (P)(2) of this section, a continuous planting area having a minimum width of five feet shall adjoin an “R” district.

Q.    See Chapters 15.46, Water Efficient Landscaping Standards; 17.45, Landscape Standards; 12.20, Street Trees; 12.30, Tree, Sidewalk Maintenance; and solar access in accordance with Section 17.58.060, Prohibition on casting shadows, and California state law. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.26.070 Review of plans.
Projects shall be subject to architectural design review (see Chapter 17.58); all projects shall be subject to the WMC standards of review (see Chapter 17.72). (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

Chapter 17.30 PC PLANNED COMMUNITY DISTRICT
17.30.010 Purpose.
The purpose of the Planned Community zone is to encourage creative and efficient land uses, to encourage mixed or multiple use projects, to permit variations from the density, height and other standards in the various zones and to permit development based on a high standard of performance and design. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.30.020 Procedure.
PC district zoning shall be adopted or changed in the same manner as prescribed by this title concerning zoning district amendments. No PC district shall be adopted unless a development plan and development schedule has been approved for the area. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.30.030 Permitted uses.
All uses, when consistent with the general plan, shall be allowed in PC districts, subject to the approval of the development plan and development schedule by the city council. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.30.040 Uses requiring a use permit.
A use permit shall be required for all uses in a PC district unless there is an approved development plan approved by the city council. Any use permit must be consistent with the general plan. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.30.050 Height and space requirements.
Minimum lot size, yards, parking requirements, maximum height, density, and percentage of coverage shall be established for each PC zone by the development plan approved by the city council. In no instance shall the density of a residential development exceed the density permitted by the general plan designation. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.30.060 Area requirements.
No PC district shall be established for a site with less than one acre, (one or more owners) exclusive of bordering streets or highways. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.30.070 Development plan.
An application for a PC zone shall include and be accompanied by a development plan. The PC zone, when adopted, shall become part of the zoning map of the city as provided for in Chapter 17.06 and the development plan for such PC zone shall be adopted by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

A.    The development plan shall include:

1.     A map showing any street system and lot design proposed within the zone. Any area proposed to be dedicated or reserved for parks, parkways, playground, school sites, public buildings, and other such uses must be shown. Compliance with this requirement shall not be construed to relieve the applicant from compliance with the subdivision regulations or any other applicable regulation of the city of Waterford.

2.     A plot plan for each building site or sites in the proposed PC zone or any portion thereof as required by the planning commission. The plot plan shall show the approximate location of all proposed buildings, indicating distances between buildings and between buildings and property or building site lines.

3.     Elevations of all proposed structures. Such drawings need not be the result of final architectural decisions but need only be in sufficient detail to indicate the height of proposed buildings and general appearance of the proposed structures so that the entire development will have architectural unity, be in harmony with surrounding developments and comply with any design criteria in effect at the time of application.

4.     A parking and circulation plan for all nonresidential developments. This plan shall include off-street parking, truck loading access, proposed circulation patterns of vehicles within the PC zone and to and from adjacent public thoroughfares. Any special engineering features and traffic regulation devices needed to facilitate or insure the safety of the circulation pattern shall be shown.

5.     Any or all of the following plans and diagrams or similar information may be required by the planning commission:

a.     A parking and circulation plan for residential developments;

b.     A landscaping and tree planting plan;

c.     A map showing the existing and proposed topography of the area at one-foot contour intervals and trees and structures on the property;

d.     An economic feasibility report or market analysis;

e.     Noise evaluation of the proposed development;

f.      A traffic analysis of the proposed development.

B.     Any changes proposed in the development plan shall be submitted to the planning director and shall be processed as follows:

1.     Changes in a development plan which do not involve new uses, significant impact on adjacent property or significant site redesign may be approved by the planning director or referred to the planning commission for decision without a public hearing.

2.     Changes in a development plan which involve new uses, revisions with significant impact on adjacent property or significant site redesign shall be considered amendments to the PC zone and processed the same as a zone boundary change. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.30.080 Development schedule.
A.    An application for a PC zoned shall be accompanied by a development schedule indicating the approximate date when construction of the project can be expected to begin, the anticipated rate of development and the completion date.

B.     From time to time the planning commission shall compare the actual development accomplished in the various PC zones with the approved development schedules. If the development schedule has expired, the commission may either recommend that the city council grant an extension to the schedule or shall initiate proceedings to rezone the property to the zone classification which it held immediately prior to being zoned PC.

C.     Upon request by the property owner and for good cause, the planning commission may recommend that the city council extend the time limits of the development schedule provided that any request for an extension be on file in the office of the planning director at least thirty days prior to the expiration of any time limit. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.30.090 Revocation.
If conditions of approval have not been complied with, the planning commission may initiate proceedings to review the PC zone and either modify it or rezone the property to the zoned classification which it held immediately prior to being zoned PC. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.30.100 Designation of PC zoning map.
Each PC zone shall be numbered, the first adopted being shown on the zoning map as PC (1) and each zone subsequently adopted being numbered successively. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

Chapter 17.32 SP SPECIFIC PLAN DISTRICT
17.32.010 Purpose.
The purpose of the SP specific plan district is to provide a vehicle for implementing the city’s general plan on an area-specific basis. A specific plan prepared in accordance with the standards set forth in this chapter is intended to serve as regulatory document, consistent with the general plan. In the event there is an inconsistency or conflict between an adopted specific plan and comparable regulations of this code, the specific plan will prevail. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.32.020 Authority.
Specific plans are authorized by California Government Code Section 65450 et seq., which specifies minimum contents and provides for fees and an additional environmental review procedure (Section 65457). (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.32.030 Applicability.
A specific plan zoning may be considered for areas within the existing city limits or where areas are considered for annexation. The specific plan zoning may be used on any size of land mass but normally will be applicable for sites of fifty acres or larger. To be considered for application of the SP zoning district an area should possess one or more of the following characteristics:

A.    Rapidly and/or newly urbanizing, with significant new demand for public facilities and services:

B.     Possessing unique physical, cultural or locational conditions, in particular, significant natural resources to be preserved or utilized, but including any other unusual conditions which warrant special care in planning;

C.     Proposed for a complex mixture of uses;

D.    Held in multiple ownerships. This characteristic is more significant in combination with others listed;

E.     Physically and/or economically deteriorating or marginal. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.32.040 Delineation of specific plan areas.
It is not necessary for specific plan areas to be delineated on the general plan land use map. On the zoning map a specific plan district will be delineated in a manner similar to that of any other zoning district except that each SP zoned area shall also bear a number which distinguishes it from other specific plan areas. In most cases an adopted specific plan will create zoning categories unique to that plan; those zoning categories will be described within the plan itself rather than on the zoning map or in this code. The zoning categories created by the specific plan will be placed on the zoning map as information to the general public. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.32.050 Procedure.
A.    A specific plan shall be adopted by ordinance or resolution, following public hearings before the planning commission and city council. For subject areas which are expected to benefit by updating (signage, for example), supplementary documents such as design standard may also be adopted by ordinance or resolution. Application for other entitlements may be made simultaneously with the specific plan application. In some circumstances simultaneous applications may in fact be necessary.

B.     Prior to or concurrent to adoption of a specific plan, the plan area must be zoned SP and assigned a number as required in Chapter 17.04. The zoning and specific plan applications may be processed simultaneously. In some areas it may be necessary or appropriate to link adoption of the specific plan with adoption of other entitlements or programs such as subdivision or parcel maps, area facilities plans, design guidelines, monitoring programs, permits, financing mechanisms, etc. The specific plan adoption resolution shall define the relationship of the plan to other approvals, whether separately or simultaneously requested. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.32.060 Application.
The application for a specific plan shall be in accordance with public hearing processes prescribed in Government Code Section 65453 and shall include text and diagram(s) as required by the planning commission to properly evaluate the ability of the proposed specific plan to carry out the city’s general plan, application preparers shall seek guidance for the planning department and, if necessary, the planning commission, prior to submitting an application for a specific plan. Such guidance regarding relevant general plan goals, policies, land use and implementation programs shall be provided through pre-application conferences, written material, study sessions or other appropriate means. Application and implementation fees for specific plans shall be as set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.32.070 Specific plan contents.
A.    State Requirements.

1.     A specific plan shall include a text and diagram(s) detailing the following:

a.     The distribution, location and extent of the uses of land, including open space, with the area covered by the plan;

b.     The proposed distribution, location and extent and intensity of major components of public and private transportation, sewage, water, drainage, solid waste disposal, energy and other essential facilities proposed to be located within the area covered by the plan and needed to support the land uses described in the plan;

c.     Standard and criteria by which development will proceed, and standards for the conservation, development and utilization of natural resources, where applicable;

d.     A program of implementation measures including regulations, programs, public works projects and financing measures necessary to carry out paragraphs (1)(a), (b) and (c) of this subsection.

2.     The specific plan shall include a statement of the relationship of the specific plan to the general plan.

B.     City Requirements.

1.     The city’s requirements include the state requirements listed above, but in sufficient depth, scope and detail to provide not only policies for the development of the areas but also specific standards for regulating that development. A specific plan must include the following:

a.     The proposed land uses for all areas covered by the plan;

b.     The types and configurations of building to be included in all developments within the plan area;

c.     The location of and types of streets;

d.     Public facilities and infrastructure required to serve developments within the specific plan area;

e.     A parking and circulation plan for off-off-street parking areas showing the location of parking lots, the approximate number of spaces, and the approximate location of entrances and exits;

f.      Proposed conservation, open space and/or recreation areas, if any;

g.     Any other programs, guidelines or standards that are appropriate for the area covered by the plan.

2.     To meet the goal of tailoring general plan implementation to a specific area, the planning department has prepared a format to follow the text and diagrams prepared must be organized in a manner that clearly states the goals of the specific plan and clearly sets forth regulations in a format readily usable by both professionals and lay persons who may have a role in implementing the specific plan. The planning department shall provide a checklist for examples of specific plan contents to assist applicants. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.32.080 Environmental review.
It is anticipated, under the California Environmental Quality Act and state and local guidelines, that most specific plan will require preparation of an environmental impact report. Once certified, the EIR for a specific plan may be relied upon for further entitlements sought subsequent to adoption of the specific plan. An initial study shall be prepared for all subsequent application to determine whether a supplement or an addendum to the EIR must be prepared or if the project is exempt from further environmental review. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.32.090 Expiration and extension.
Since specific plan applications are flexible, expiration will be determined on a case-by-case basis. Like other city regulations, most specific plan approvals will not expire unless replaced by a subsequently adopted specific plan or rendered obsolete by adoption of a conflicting general plan amendments and conflicting goals and policies of the general plan. In some cases, however, limiting the duration of an approval may be appropriate; i.e., when the specific plan is linked to another entitlement which expires, such as tentative subdivision map. The ordinance or resolution adopting a specific plan shall specify the duration of the specific plan and any means of extension, which may include an evaluation of an applicant’s due diligence in satisfying specific plan provisions. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

Chapter 17.34 DBO DENSITY BONUS OVERLAY DISTRICT
17.34.010 Purpose.
The purpose of the affordable housing density bonus overlay district is to expand housing opportunities for very low-, low- and moderate-income persons throughout the city in accordance with requirements of California Government Code Sections 65915 through 65918. Additional purposes are as follows:

A.    To provide increased residential densities to developers who guarantee that a portion of their housing development will be affordable by households of very low, low or moderate income;

B.     To provide increased residential densities to developers who donate land to develop units for very

low-, low- or moderate-income households;

C.     To ensure affordable units are constructed and located to appear similar to market-rate units;

D.    To provide concessions when needed to offset the costs of developing affordable housing for very

low-, low- and moderate-income households. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.34.020 Definitions.
The following definitions have unique applicability to provisions contained within this chapter and may not apply to other chapters unless specifically referenced.

A.    “Density bonus” means an additional number of units to be made available to qualified housing projects, in the manner provided by this chapter, equal to twenty-five percent over the maximum density allowed on the site proposed to be developed, according to the land use elements of the general plan.

B.     “Destination” means any parcel or site upon which the opportunity for density bonus is realized, and for which an agreement with the city has been executed in accordance with requirement of this chapter.

C.     “Financially equivalent incentive” means an incentive, in addition to the bonus allowed, based on land per unit.

D.    “Incentive” means an incentive granted, in addition to the density bonus, as necessary to establish the economic feasibility of the development of low- and very low-income and senior housing.

E.     “Income limits” means income distribution for low- and very low-income published by the Department of Housing and Community Development in the California Code of Regulations (Title 25, Section 6932).

F.     “Origination parcel” means any parcel or site from which the opportunity for density bonus is derived.

G.    “Qualified housing” means residential projects containing units set aside for residents that have been qualified by income and age according to the standards set forth herein, and where the total monthly payments, including rents (not including personal services such as meals, etc.) and mortgage payments (principal, interest, taxes, insurance, assessment district fees, and homeowner association fees) at any time during the life of the lease, rental agreement or loan, will not exceed the amounts for each type of housing and income level as follows:

1.     BMR (Below Market Rate) Units. Units provided at prices and rents below the market for such units, according to the number of persons per family established by HUD, consistent with the following categories:

a.     Low-Income Housing. Housing within projects of five or more units, wherein twenty percent of the units are affordable to persons earning not more than sixty percent of the Stanislaus County median income, as defined in Section 50079.5 of the Health and Safety Code; with rents or monthly payments of not more than thirty percent of sixty percent of the Stanislaus County median income;

b.     Very Low-Income Housing. Housing within projects of five or more units, wherein ten percent of the units are affordable to persons earning not more than fifty percent of the Stanislaus County median income, as defined in Section 50105 of the Health and Safety Code; with rents not more than thirty percent of fifty percent of the Stanislaus County median income.

2.     Senior Housing. Housing within projects of five or more units, wherein at least fifty percent of the units are occupied by at least one person fifty-five years of age or older. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.34.030 Applicability.
A.    A density bonus and an additional incentive, or financially equivalent incentive, shall be granted to any development that includes at least:

1.     Twenty percent of the units for lower income households; or

2.     Ten percent of the units for very low-income households; or

3.     Fifty percent of the units for senior citizens.

B.     The provisions of this chapter shall apply only to “qualified housing projects” as defined herein and located within the density bonus overlay district. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.34.040 General procedures.
A.    Application Requirements. Applications for density bonus shall be submitted to the planning director on the required form, together with the information required thereon. At least the following additional information shall be required:

1.     Project feasibility analysis containing the following information:

a.     An analysis of that portion of the project which is made feasible with the twenty-five percent density bonus and that portion of the project made feasible through the availability of any specified additional incentive.

b.     A list of alternatives ranked according to effectiveness in enhancing the feasibility of the project. The rationale for ranking alternatives shall be indicated in the study.

c.     The study shall reference data sufficient to allow evaluation required herein, to the satisfaction of the planning director, including, but not limited to, the cost of land, construction, site development, financing, anticipated sale price or rent for the project or units, and an analysis of prices and rents for comparable projects.

d.     Written verification of the conclusions and recommendations of the study shall be obtained by the planning director at the expense of the applicant.

e.     Proposals involving modification of zoning or development standards, e.g., open space, minimum lot size, setbacks, parking standards or direct financial assistance, shall be subject to independent verification of the relative value of such incentives in rendering the project feasible. Such verification shall be obtained by the planning department at the expense of the applicant.

2.     Complete preliminary plans for development of the site including site plan, floor plan, landscape plan and elevations.

3.     A narrative explaining the purpose of the application, development standards utilized to prepare plans and any request for modification of the requirements of the chapter made necessary by the proposal.

4.     A proposed agreement, as specified herein.

5.     Other information deemed necessary by the planning director.

B.     Review Period. Within ninety days of submittal of any request for preliminary review or application for any qualified project, the planning director shall complete review and forward a report to the planning commission for review regarding the procedures and standards for review of the request relative to these requirements.

C.     Development Agreements. Any project for which a density bonus has been approved shall enter into an agreement with the city. The agreement shall be referenced on the deed of any property destination or origination property during the term established herein, and shall include the following information:

1.     The location (address, lot and block number, and assessor parcel number) of BMR units and the location of density bonus units.

2.     The number of BMR units by bedroom and targeted income group.

3.     Eligibility for residence, according to maximum income and age, as appropriate and a process for certifying occupancy according to these standards.

4.     Standards for rents and sales prices for BMR units, as follows:

a.     Table 34-1 shall be used in setting maximum rents and sale price by household size.

b.     Total move-in costs for affordable units shall be limited to one month’s rent, plus a cleaning deposit not to exceed one month’s rent.

Table 34-1

 

Unit Size (Bedrooms)

Maximum Household Size

Studio

1

1

2

2

3

3

4

4

6

c.     Services provided occupants of senior housing such as referenced in Section 17.34.050(A) shall not be included in calculating maximum rents.

d.     Total monthly payments used to categorize for-sale BMR units shall include principal, interest, taxes, insurance, assessment district fees, homeowner association fees, if applicable.

e.     Down payment for for-sale units shall not exceed ten percent of the purchase price.

5.     The minimum term for BMR units shall not be less than thirty years commencing on the day of title transfer for for-sale units and upon occupancy for rental units. The minimum term for projects granted no additional incentive shall be ten years.

6.     The density bonus given and the nature of any additional incentive granted the developer of the project.

7.     Reference to an executed separate agreement with the Stanislaus County housing authority for monitoring occupancy of qualified rental and for-sale housing units.

8.     Provisions requiring the review of the sale and resale of property subject to the terms required herein for all designated low- and very low-income units. Such provisions for transfer of designated low- and very low-income units or of density bonus units shall include, at a minimum:

a.     Notice to the city of pending sale and disclosure of income eligibility of the proposed purchaser(s);

b.     If the purchaser is other than an eligible household, offer the city first right of refusal for purchase at the lesser of offered sales price or the property’s fair market value;

c.     If the city does not purchase the property, and the sale is to other than an eligible household, reimburse the city from the proceeds of sale, in an amount equal to the difference in appraised value and the anticipated sale price to an eligible purchaser.

9.     Other provisions deemed necessary by the city.

D.    Commission and Council Action—Findings Required. The planning commission shall approve a density bonus and recommend that the city council approve a density bonus and recommend that the city council approves a development agreement and rezoning to the density bonus overlay district based on adoption of the following findings:

1.     Substantial evidence in the record indicates that the project conforms to the general plan and other applicable policies, standards and regulations of the city.

2.     Any modification of the standards referenced in this chapter will be necessary to ensure the feasibility of the proposal; therefore, the project will maintain, protect and enhance the public health, safety or general welfare consistent with the purpose set forth herein in accordance with Government Code Section 65915.

3.     The planning commission shall find, based on substantial evidence in the record, that any specific additional incentive is necessary in order to ensure project feasibility.

4.     Other required findings pursuant to this title. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.34.050 Determination of bonus.
Applicants who request a density bonus and agree to construct a residential project of five or more units shall be granted a density bonus, as specified by this subsection. All density bonuses referred to in this section are a specified percentage over the maximum density permitted in the base district.

A.    A density bonus of twenty percent shall be granted to projects in which the following is included:

1.     Development is provided to very-low-income households. An additional 2.5 percent density bonus shall be granted for each additional increase of one percent very-low-income units above five percent, to a maximum density bonus of thirty-five percent, as illustrated in Table 34-2, Application of Density Bonus for Very-Low, Low- and Moderate-Income Units; or

2.     At least ten percent of the total dwelling units of a housing development provided to low-income households. An additional 1.5 percent density bonus shall be granted for each additional increase of 1.5 percent low-income units above ten percent, to a maximum density bonus of thirty-five percent, as illustrated in Table 34-2, Application of Density Bonus for Very-Low, Low- and Moderate-Income Units; or

3.     Fifty percent of the total dwelling units of a housing development are provided to qualifying residents, defined by Section 51.3 of the Civil Code, as a person sixty-two years of age or older, or fifty-five years of age or older in a senior citizen housing development.

B.     A density bonus of five percent shall be granted to a condominium project or a planned unit development that provides at least ten percent of the total number of units to households of moderate income. An additional one percent density bonus shall be granted for every one percent of moderate-income units above ten percent, up to a maximum of thirty-five percent, as illustrated in Table 34-2, Application of Density Bonus for Very-Low-, Low- and Moderate-Income Units.

C.     A density bonus of fifteen percent shall be granted to applicants that donate sufficient land to provide at least ten percent of the units for very-low-income occupants, subject to the requirements of this subsection. Density bonus shall increase by one percent for every additional one percent of very-low-income units above ten percent, up to a maximum of thirty-five percent. All of the following conditions shall apply:

1.     Donations shall be made to the city of Waterford or a developer previously identified and approved by the city.

2.     Land must measure a minimum of one acre in size or be able to accommodate forty units per acre.

3.     Transferred land shall be within the boundary of the proposed development.

4.     Transferred land shall be appropriately designated by the general plan for high-density residential development prior to final project approval.

5.     Transferred land shall be zoned for high-density residential use prior to final project approval.

6.     Transferred land shall be adequately served by infrastructure prior to final project approval.

 

Table 34-2 Application of Density Bonus for Very Low-, Low- and Moderate-Income Units

 

Very-Low-Income Units

Low-Income Units

Moderate-Income Units

% Very-Low-Income Units

Permitted % Density Bonus

% Low-Income Units

Permitted % Density Bonus

% Moderate-Income Condo/PUD Units

Permitted % Density Bonus

5

20

10

20

10

5

6

22.5

11

21.5

11

6

7

25

12

23

12

7

8

27.5

13

24.5

13

8

9

30

14

26

14

9

10

32.5

15

27.5

15

10

11

35

16

29

16

11

35% Maximum Density Bonus

17

30.5

17

12

 

 

18

32

18

13

 

 

19

33.5

19

14

 

 

20

35

20

15

 

 

35% Maximum Density Bonus

21

16

 

 

 

 

22

17

 

 

 

 

23

18

 

 

 

 

24

19

 

 

 

 

25

20

 

 

 

 

26

21

 

 

 

 

27

22

 

 

 

 

28

23

 

 

 

 

29

24

 

 

 

 

30

25

 

 

 

 

31

26

 

 

 

 

32

27

 

 

 

 

33

28

 

 

 

 

34

29

 

 

 

 

35

30

 

 

 

 

36

31

 

 

 

 

37

32

 

 

 

 

38

33

 

 

 

 

39

34

 

 

 

 

40

35

 

 

 

 

35% Maximum Density Bonus

 

D.    Construction and Location of Affordable Units. All units that are constructed for very-low-, low- or moderate-income households shall meet the following minimum standards:

1.     Distribution. Affordable dwelling units shall be reasonably interspersed among market-rate units within the same development.

2.     Comparable Units. Affordable dwelling units must be generally comparable to market-rate units, including total square footage, bedroom size, closet space, amenities, and number of bathrooms, except in quality of interior “finish” materials (for example, floor and wall coverings). Affordable dwelling units shall measure no less than ninety percent of the average square footage of market-rate units with the same number of bedrooms.

3.     Comparable Design. Affordable units shall be designed to reasonably reflect the exterior design of market-rate units in the same development.

4.     Comparable Amenities. Residents of affordable units may not be charged for amenities not charged to other residents, including, but not limited to, access to recreational facilities, parking, cable TV, and interior amenities like dishwashers and microwave ovens. Optional services for all residents must be the same. Tenants of affordable units cannot be required to purchase additional services.

E.     Affordability. Units constructed for targeted income households shall be made affordable as specified by this section, and as required by subsection I of this section, Affordable Housing Density Bonus Agreement.

1.     Limits on Housing Costs. Units constructed for targeted-income households shall be made affordable and meet the housing cost limits, as follows:

a.     Rents for units targeted for very-low-income households shall not exceed thirty percent of fifty percent of the area median income.

b.     Rents for units targeted for low-income households shall not exceed thirty percent of sixty percent of the area median income.

c.     The purchase price for units targeted for moderate-income households shall be limited so that monthly housing costs do not exceed thirty percent of one hundred twenty percent of the area median income. A ten percent down payment on the purchase price may be required.

2.     Continued Affordability. Units constructed for targeted-income households shall be occupied by very-low-, low-, or moderate-income households, consistent with the density bonus approved for the project. In addition, such units shall remain available and affordable, as follows:

a.     Very Low- and Low-Income Units. Units constructed for very-low-income and low-income households shall remain available and affordable to very-low- and low-income households for at least thirty years or the life of the structure, whichever is greater.

b.     Moderate-Income Units. Units constructed for moderate-income households shall be owned and occupied by, and affordable to, moderate-income households for ten years or the life of the structure, whichever is greater. Subsequent sale of moderate-income units shall comply with subsection (I)(7) of this section.

F.     Development Concessions. An applicant may request, and the city shall allow, development concessions for a project that meets the criteria for a density bonus, as described in subsection B of this section (Determination of Bonus) and provided by this section. The following requirements shall apply:

1.     The city shall approve one or more concessions or incentives for a proposed project if the applicant has provided documented evidence that the waiver or modification is necessary to make the housing units economically feasible, as required by subsections (F)(3) and (F)(4) of this section. The city may deny one or more requested concessions or incentives if, based on substantial evidence, the city makes either of the following findings:

a.     The concession or incentive is not necessary to ensure affordable housing costs, as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 50052.5, or to ensure rents in the targeted units are set as specified in subsection (E)(1) of this section.

b.     The concession or incentive would have a specific adverse impact, as defined in Government Code Section 65589.5(d)(2), upon the public health and safety, or physical environment, or any real property that is listed in the California Register of Historical Resources, and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact without rendering the development unaffordable to low- and moderate-income households.

2.     The number of city zoning or development standards that shall be waived or modified shall be consistent with the following Table 34-3, Affordable Housing Development Concessions:

 

Table 34-3 Affordable Housing Development Concessions*

 

 

Percentage Affordable Housing

Number of Concessions

Very Low

Low

Moderate Condos and/or PUDs

1

5%

10%

10%

2

10%

20%

20%

3

15%

30%

30%

*       Per SB 435, income categories cannot be combined to achieve a greater number of concessions than that identified in this table.

 

3.     The applicant shall provide documented evidence that any such concession is needed to sufficiently reduce the cost of the housing development, while passing on said reduction to future tenants and homeowners. Development concessions cannot be used to increase profit to a housing developer.

4.     The planning commission shall approve proposed development concessions consistent with this subsection if all of the following findings can be made:

a.     The applicant has submitted documented financial evidence that shows a waiver or modification of development standards is needed to make the housing units economically feasible;

b.     A waiver or reduction in development standards will not result in a specific, adverse impact upon the health, safety or physical environment for which there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact;

c.     A waiver or reduction in development standards will not result in an adverse impact on any real property that is listed in the California Register of Historical Resources; and

d.     The planning commission has considered the specific site for which a waiver or modification of development standards is requested and has determined the specified concession is required to allow for the use of a density bonus.

G.    Parking Standards. If a project qualifies for a density bonus, an applicant may request reduced parking standards for the entire project site. Reduced parking standards may be requested and shall be approved even if a density bonus is not being requested. Reduced parking requirements shall include guest and handicapped parking, may be provided as tandem spaces, and may be uncovered, provided the spaces are located on-site. Reduced parking standards shall be as follows:

1.     One on-site parking space per unit for units with one bedroom or less.

2.     One and one-half on-site parking spaces per unit for units with two bedrooms.

3.     Two on-site parking spaces per unit for units with three or more bedrooms.

H.    Other Development Standards. The applicant may request waiver of any additional development standards if the applicant provides documented evidence that such waivers are necessary to make the project economically feasible.

I.      Affordable Housing Density Bonus Agreement. All applicants for projects that receive an affordable housing density bonus, development concession and/or reduction in parking standards, including a project consisting of contiguous properties, shall enter into an affordable housing density bonus agreement with the city of Waterford. All such agreements, prior to execution, are subject to approval by the city attorney. The affordable housing density bonus agreement shall be consistent with all other provisions of this section. Agreements shall also include the following provisions:

1.     The total number of units that will be constructed and the number of units that will be made affordable to very-low-, low- or moderate-income households shall be clearly stated;

2.     The affordable units shall remain available to, and occupied and affordable by, very-low- and low-income households for at least thirty years and for moderate-income households at least ten years or the life of the structure, whichever is greater, consistent with subsection E of this section, Affordability;

3.     The units affordable by very-low-, low- or moderate-income households shall be reasonably interspersed throughout the development and shall be identified on building plans submitted to the community development department and described in the application for a density bonus;

4.     Resale controls shall be included as a deed restriction consistent with subsection (I)(7) of this section;

5.     If reduced parking standards have been applied to the project, the number of bedrooms of each unit shall be identified;

6.     The city or designee shall consider the assets and income of prospective households, pursuant to the state’s Housing and Community Development (HCD) standards set forth in the definition of “income eligibility”;

7.     The applicant shall provide documented evidence to the city of Waterford community development department that initial occupants of all very-low- and low-income rental units meet the necessary income qualifications. The property owner shall provide an annual report to the Waterford housing authority certifying tenants of qualifying rental units meet the income and rent limit requirements;

8.     Every purchaser of moderate-income owner-occupied units shall certify the unit will be the purchaser’s primary place of residence, and every renter of low- or very-low-income units shall certify the unit will be occupied by the household renting the unit;

9.     Initial sales price and fair market value of units at time of initial sale shall be stipulated for all units constructed for moderate-income owner occupants; and

10.   The applicant shall provide documented evidence to the city planning department that initial owner occupants of moderate-income units meet the necessary income qualifications. Subsequent sale of moderate-income units shall be limited to moderate-income households, as approved by the city planning department. In addition, sale proceeds of moderate-income units sold after the first ten years of occupancy by moderate-income household(s) shall be distributed as follows:

a.     The initial owner is entitled to receive the value of the down payment, documented improvements to the property and a proportional share of the unit’s appreciation, in accordance with the formula in Government Code Section 65915.

b.     The city shall receive its proportional share of appreciation of the unit in addition to the amount of the original subsidy. The city shall use the proceeds within three years to promote affordable, owner-occupied housing. Use of said proceeds may be accomplished in cooperation with the Stanislaus County Housing Authority and/or other similar organizations dedicated to the provision of affordable housing in Waterford.

J.      Projects Divided by District Boundaries. If the project involves land divided by district boundaries, including noncontiguous properties, the number of dwelling units permitted in the development shall be the sum of the dwelling units permitted in each of the districts. Within the project, the permitted number of dwelling units may be distributed without regard to the underlying density regulations.

K.    Transfer of Density Permit Requirements. A noticed public hearing shall be required for any proposal to transfer density rights between contiguous or noncontiguous properties if the resulting density exceeds one hundred twenty-five percent of the number of units normally permitted by the base district. The planning commission may recommend, and the city council may approve, such a transfer of density if the following findings can be made:

1.     That the project as proposed will materially assist in accomplishing the goal of providing affordable housing opportunities in the city;

2.     That the project would not lead to over-concentration of persons and families of moderate, low, or very low income; and

3.     That granting the increased density will not adversely affect the general plan, cause significant adverse effects on the environment, adversely affect solar access to the neighboring property, or violate relevant regulations of this code. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.34.060 Incentives.
A.    Types of Incentives. Incentives granted in addition to the density bonus may include any one or a combination of additional density beyond the minimum required bonus, reductions in zoning ordinance requirements or financial assistance.

1.     Bonus Incentive Criteria. In addition to the standard twenty-five percent bonus, an additional percentage of the maximum number units otherwise permitted under the applicable zoning district regulations and land use elements of the general plan, according to type of qualified housing, as follows:

a.     An additional bonus of up to fifteen percent for on-site project amenities may be allowed. The planning commission may assign five percentage points to each amenity, not to exceed a total of fifteen percentage points. Typical amenities include, but are not limited to, combined and centralized indoor and outdoor recreation areas, library, dining facilities, laundry services, pools, van/carpool services, libraries and passive and active recreation facilities, medical clinic facilities, etc.

b.     An additional density bonus of up to fifteen percent for proximity to public services may be allowed. The planning commission may assign three percentage points to each public service located within six hundred feet of the project site. Typical services include, but are not limited to, shopping, public transit, medical facilities, emergency facilities and parks and recreational facilities, which in the opinion of the planning commission are appropriate for use by future residents of the project. Projects with continuously maintained daily transportation and that are within one thousand two hundred feet of services shall qualify for the additional incentive.

c.     An additional bonus of up to ten percent for development standards which exceed, by ten percent or more, the standards of the district within which the project is located. The planning commission may assign a bonus of five percentage points of each development standard limited to lower building coverage or wider yards resulting in recreation opportunity and visual enhancement of the project.

d.     An additional density bonus of up to fifteen percent for meritorious design of landscaping and other amenities and areas, that encourage the use and visual enjoyment of common and private open space areas on the project site, may be allowed. The planning commission may determine the amount of bonus by assigning any combination of percentage points for features which reflect the intent of this criterion. Such features may include, but are not limited to, gazebos, water fountains, barbecue and picnic areas, exercise courses and landscaped walkways, interior and open courtyards.

e.     An additional bonus of one unit for substantial renovation, to current standards of the Uniform Building Code, of any one residential unit identified as substandard by the chief building official pursuant to an official survey of the city. A bonus shall not be awarded for the replacement or rehabilitation of low- and very low-income housing units on-site.

2.     Modification of Development Standards Criteria. The city may grant, as additional incentive, adjustments in only the following zoning code requirements:

a.     A reduction in setbacks;

b.     A reduction in the minimum parking spaces or adjustment to dimensions thereof;

c.     An increase in the height limit of buildings;

d.     A reduction in the minimum lot size required.

3.     Financial Incentive Criteria. The city may grant additional incentives, including, but not limited to:

a.     Waiver of application fees;

b.     Waiver of municipal facility and capital improvement fees;

c.     Direct subsidy via city-authorized programs.

B.     Limitations on Incentives.

1.     Limitations for Bonus Incentives.

a.     Mixed senior, low- and very low-income units in accordance with the percentage requirements for low- and very low-income housing and senior occupancy, not more than sixty percent bonus incentive, at least thirty percent of which must be obtained via amenities contained in subsections (A)(1)(a) and (A)(1)(b) of this section, and the maximum density shall be no greater than fifty dwelling units per acre.

b.     Senior units, not more than fifty percent bonus incentive, provided that the maximum density shall be no greater than forty dwelling units per net acre.

c.     Low- and very low-income units, not more than thirty percent bonus incentive. At least ten percent of the incentive bonus must be obtained via amenities listed in subsection (A)(1)(d) of this section, and a maximum density shall be no greater than thirty dwelling units per net acre.

2.     Limitations on Zoning Incentive.

a.     Not more than two land use regulations may be modified; in such cases, one of the regulations must be for parking.

b.     Regulations may be relaxed to the extent approved by the city council. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.34.070 General limitations.
A.    Incentives and Density Bonus Units.

1.     More Than One Incentive. More than one category of incentive may be utilized, subject to limitations, as prescribed.

2.     Density Bonus Transfer. The density bonus granted herein may be transferred to other projects and areas of the city possessing the same or higher density than of the site upon which the low- and very low-income units are located. Agreements required herein shall refer to such units and sites.

B.     BMR Housing.

1.     Unit Size. Except senior housing projects, a majority of BMR units within any project shall contain three or more bedrooms. Remaining units shall be one- and two-bedroom units, and the majority of these shall be two-bedroom units. All BMR units shall be at least eight hundred square feet in area. All BMR units which contain two or more bedroom units shall be at least one thousand square feet in gross floor area. These provisions do not apply to senior housing.

2.     Timing of Development. Development of qualified housing on destination parcels shall occur at the same relative rate as other units on the originating parcel.

3.     Existing Low- and Very Low-Income Units. Qualified housing units may be located either on or off the site of originating development, and may consist of relocated units and rehabilitated units documented by the city as substandard.

a.     Report Required. Applications for development which involve the demolition of any residential building shall be submitted with a report prepared in accordance with the WMC.

b.     Preservation Required. Units proposed to be demolished which are deemed acceptable for human habitation by the chief building official, or require repairs equaling less than fifty percent of the replacement value of the structure and have provided housing opportunity for persons of low- and very low-income as determined by the planning director, shall either be preserved on subject site, related to another site within the community or replaced with comparable BMR units on a one-for-one basis.

c.     BMR Replacement. The BMR unit may be replaced on- or off-site and shall not be included in the calculation of allowable density bonus. Rents and prices (low- or very low-income units) for replacement units shall be consistent with the average rents charged during the year preceding project submittal, and shall be independently verified by the planning director.

4.     Location of Units. BMR units, except as otherwise provided herein, shall be located on the site proposed to be developed and shall be dispersed equally throughout the project according to the manner in which the project has been designed. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

Chapter 17.36 MOBILE LIVING UNITS
17.36.010 Definitions.
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall be construed as hereafter set out, unless it shall be apparent from the context that they have a different meaning.

A.    “Mobile living unit” means a commercial coach, mobile home, recreational vehicle or travel trailer as each of these terms is defined in Chapter 1 (Sections 18000 through 18014), Part 2 (Mobile Homes) and in Chapter 1 (Sections 18200 through 18220), Part 2.1 (Mobile Home Parks Act), Division 13 of the Health and Safety Code of the state, and a camp trailer, house car, trailer coach or motor vehicle, as each of these terms is defined in Division 1 (Sections 100 through 680) of the Vehicle Code of the state, or any other vehicle or structure originally designed or permanently altered in such a manner as will permit occupancy or use thereof for living or sleeping purposes, and so designed or equipped with wheels, or capable of being mounted on wheels and used as a conveyance on public streets or highways, propelled or drawn by its own or other motive power, excepting a vehicle or device used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.

B.     “Person” means and includes any natural person, partnership, firm, company, corporation, trust or unincorporated association. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.36.020 Use or occupancy of mobile living units for sleeping purposes prohibited—Exceptions.
It is unlawful for any person to occupy or use any mobile living unit for living or sleeping purposes upon any street, alley, lane, highway, municipal off-street parking lot or other public place or upon any lot, piece, parcel or tract of land within the city except as provided below:

A.    Within a lawfully established and licensed mobile home park where RV and travel trailers are specifically permitted; recreational (RV) trailer park; travel trailer park; labor camp subject to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 17000), Part 1, Division 13 of the Health and Safety Code of the state of California; or other like facility which is designed and equipped to operate for the purpose of providing temporary or permanent accommodations for such mobile living units.

B.     A mobile living unit may be occupied or used for sleeping purposes only by friends, relatives or visitors on land that is paved, zoned residential, and entirely owned by or leased to the host person for a period not to exceed two weeks in any one calendar year; provided, that said mobile living unit shall not be connected to any utility, other than temporary electric hookups; and provided further, that the host person shall receive no compensation for such occupancy or use. No such mobile living units shall discharge any litter, sewage, effluent or other matter except into sanitary facilities designed to dispose of such material.

C.     Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any occupancy of a mobile living unit or mobile home which is permitted pursuant to the zoning ordinance of the city, or pursuant to permits granted thereunder, shall be permitted. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.36.030 Permitting property to be occupied or used for such purposes prohibited.
Subject to the exceptions set forth in this title, it is unlawful for any owner, lessee, or occupant of any lot, piece, parcel, or tract of land within the city, whether for gain, hire, reward, gratuity or otherwise, to permit the same to be occupied or used by any mobile living unit for living or sleeping purposes; provided, however, that the prohibition contained in this section shall not apply to any use of land permitted by the zoning ordinance or any permit granted thereunder. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.36.040 Overnight parking exception.
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the temporary occupancy, for sleeping purposes, of a mobile living unit or any other motor vehicle within the city limits for a single period of not more than twenty-four hours in any one calendar year from the evening of one day to the morning of the next day, if lawfully parked on a public street or in a public parking facility, when the following conditions are met:

A.    Said vehicle must conform to all applicable sections of the Vehicle Code of the state of California.

B.     Said vehicle must have completely self-contained utilities meeting all applicable codes and laws of the state of California governing such mobile living units, as defined in this title, or meeting such requirements in the jurisdiction of registration, if the vehicle is registered outside the state of California; this subsection is not applicable to motor vehicles.

C.     The self-contained utilities described in subsection B of this section must include toilet facilities; this subsection is not applicable to motor vehicles.

D.    Said vehicle, or the occupants thereof, may not discharge or discard any litter, effluent, sewage or other matter into any public street or way or upon any private property while parked as provided in this section.

E.     Said vehicle is not parked in a parking space in a manner that it creates a visible obstruction to traffic or creates a hazard to movement of traffic or pedestrians.

F.     Said vehicle is not parked in any “R” or residential district within the city.

G.    Said vehicle is not over eight feet in width or twelve feet in height. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.36.050 Exemption for parking or storage on owned or leased premises.
Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the owner or operator of any mobile living unit from parking or storing his or her mobile living unit upon premises owned, leased or otherwise lawfully occupied or used by him or her, so long as such mobile living unit is not occupied or used for living or sleeping purposes in violation of the provisions of this chapter, and as long as such mobile living unit is not in violation of zoning or any other applicable ordinance or regulation of the city. This chapter does not apply to temporary mobile offices. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.36.060 Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of any police officer, the building official, the health officer and any other employee of the city designated by the city manager, in writing filed with the city clerk, to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The building official, community code enforcement officer or any regularly appointed employee of the city so designated by the city manager is empowered to make arrests and issue citations pursuant to Sections 836.5 and 853.6 of the Penal Code of the state for violations of this chapter. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

Chapter 17.40 GENERAL REGULATIONS
17.40.010 Applicability.
The regulations specified in this title shall be subject to the general provisions and exceptions set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.40.015 Interpretation of regulations.
A.    All regulations in this title pertaining to the districts established in Chapter 17.06 are subject to the general provisions, conditions and exceptions in this chapter.

B.     If any ambiguity arises concerning the appropriate classification of a particular use within the meaning and intent of this title, or with respect to matters of height, area requirements or zone boundaries as set forth herein, the planning commission shall ascertain all pertinent facts and, by resolution, set forth its findings and interpretations and thereafter such interpretation shall govern, except if the city council directs the planning commission to adopt a different interpretation. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.40.020 Use restrictions—Generally.
Unless a use is listed or similar to a listed use, in a specific zoning district description, the use is to be considered prohibited in that district. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.40.030 Use restrictions—Temporary structures.
One temporary structure for use as a contractor’s office and a materials storage yard for on-site construction only are permitted on the same property with respect to which the construction project building permit is issued. Such uses shall be subject to all yard and off-street parking requirements and shall be removed at the end of construction. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.40.040 Use restrictions—Accessory uses.
Accessory uses and buildings appurtenant to a permitted use shall be allowed only when constructed concurrent with or subsequent to the main building. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.40.050 Use restrictions—Wrecking yards and secondhand dealers/stores.
A.    Wrecking yards, junkyards, auto dismantling yards, and secondhand stores, where merchandise is displayed or stored outside an enclosed building, shall be enclosed within a solid fence of uniform texture of not less than six feet in height. Not more than six re-buildable automobiles identified as offered for sale as used automobiles, may be displayed outside the fenced area or building at any one time.

B.     If any vehicle is so displayed for a period of ninety days and it has not been sold during that time, it shall not be considered to be a re-buildable automobile and it must thereafter be stored within the fence enclosure.

C.     No material shall be stored or piled so as to extend higher than fence height at any point nearer than six feet from the fence. Beginning at a line parallel to the fence and six feet within it, material may be piled an additional one foot in height for each additional two feet in distance from the fence.

D.    Where vehicles not suitable for resale are stored or held for wrecking or dismantling, one may be stacked or piled on top of another at the fence, to a two-car maximum limit, even though the top of the second vehicle may extend higher than six feet; provided, that vehicles so stacked at the fence cannot be other than passenger vehicles. The term passenger vehicle shall not include trucks, buses, pickups, vans, carryalls, or any other vehicle the primary intended use of which was for other than the transportation of persons.

E.     Secondhand dealers, as provided for in Chapter 5.40, shall not display any merchandise outside an enclosed area or building at any time. In no event should such secondhand materials be located on a public right-of-way or sidewalk. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.40.060 Use restrictions—Facilities for public utilities.
For purposes of this chapter, facilities for public utilities include, but are not limited to, electrical substation, communication equipment buildings, service yards, gas regulator stations, meter lots and water wells; and such uses are permitted in all R districts, subject to securing a use permit in each case. Public utility transmission and distribution lines, both overhead and underground, are permitted in all districts without limitation as to height, but metal transmission towers are subject to all yard requirements as other structures. However, routes of proposed electrical transmission lines, including height and placement of towers, shall be submitted to the planning commission for review and recommendation prior to the acquisition of rights-of-way therefore, when such lines are not within a public street or highway. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.40.070 Cluster mailboxes.
For all uses, property owner or authorized representative shall confer with local U.S. Postal Service authorities to determine locations, if necessary, for cluster mailboxes. If clustered mailboxes or locations are specified by U.S. Postal Service authorities, easements or other mapped provisions shall be included in the development plans. If clustering or special locations for mailboxes are not required, provide written evidence from the U.S. Postal Service authorities stating the exemption. Specific locations for cluster mailboxes shall be to the satisfaction of the U.S. Postal Service and the city public works director. Upon a determination by the planning commission and/or city council that the specific use would not warrant the provision of cluster mailboxes, this restriction may be waived. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.40.080 Exceptions to height limits.
A.    Chimneys, elevators, communication towers, mechanical appurtenances, monuments, spires, campaniles, public buildings may be permitted in excess of height limits for the various districts provided a use permit shall first be obtained in each case. Flag poles are permitted without height limitations and conventional television antennas, not over forty feet in height, are permitted in all districts except as provided in subsection B below.

B.     Towers, spires, cupolas, chimneys, elevator penthouses, water tanks, flagpoles, monuments, theater scenery lofts, radio and television antennas, transmission towers, fire towers, and similar structures and necessary mechanical appurtenances, covering not more than ten percent of the ground area covered by the structure to which they are accessory, may exceed the maximum permitted height in a district in which the site is located if the site is located one thousand feet from the flood level of the Tuolumne River:

1.     In an RS district, a chimney may exceed the permitted height by two feet, but a use permit shall be required for any other structure exceeding the permitted height in the district and shall not be issued for height in excess of twenty feet above the district height limit.

2.     In an RM or RH district, a structure may exceed the district height limit by not more than eight feet if no portion intercepts an inclined daylight plane sloping inward from the nearest lot line at a forty-five-degree angle from the height of the highest building wall permitted adjoining a required yard; provided, that a chimney may intercept the daylight plane. A use permit shall be required for any structure exceeding the height limit by more than eight feet and shall not be issued for height in excess of twenty feet above the district height limit.

3.     In an AG, C, I, PS, or OS district, a structure may exceed the district height limit by ten feet, and a use permit may be approved for features extending more than ten feet above the district height limit.

4.     For projects to be acted on by the planning commission, requests for approval of height use permits shall be acted on by the planning commission. For projects which require action by the architectural design review committee only, requests for approval of height use permits shall be acted on by the design review commission. For projects to be acted on by the planning director only, the architectural design review committee shall act on the height use permit application. Applications for higher light poles in the I districts shall be acted on by the planning director. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.40.082 Measurement of height.
Height shall be measured from finished grade at all points on the site to a warped plane an equal height above all points on the site. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.40.090 Development on substandard lots.
A.    A legally created lot having a width or area less than required for the district in which it is located may be occupied by a permitted or conditional use if it has a width of twenty-five feet or more and an area of two thousand five hundred square feet or more; provided, that on the effective date of regulations that made it substandard it was in single ownership separate from any abutting lot. No substandard lot shall be further reduced in area or width.

B.     Except as provided below, a substandard lot shall be subject to the same yard and density requirements as a standard lot; provided that in an R district one dwelling unit may be located on a substandard lot that meets the requirements of this section. In an R district, the required interior side yard for a single-family residence, on a building site which is substandard in width, may be reduced to as much as ten percent of the lot width, and a street side yard may be reduced to as much as twenty percent of the lot width, except that no site may have a yard width of less than three feet.

C.     Notwithstanding the minimum building site area for the various districts, as provided by this title, a minimum area for one single-family dwelling which is not connected to a sanitary sewer, but served by a public water supply, shall be twenty thousand square feet. Where there is no connection to either a sanitary sewer or public water, the minimum building site for a single-family dwelling shall not be less than one acre. For other uses without sanitary sewers and/or public water, the minimum building site shall be that established by the city council or planning commission as a condition to any use permit required. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.40.100 Yards.
A.    Building projections into yards and courts, unless otherwise required by applicable zoning district regulations, shall be permitted as follows:

1.     Fireplaces or chimneys: eighteen inches.

2.     Uncovered porches, terraces, platforms, decks, subterranean garages, and patios not more than thirty inches in height: four feet in a corner side yard and six feet in a front yard. There is no minimum setback requirement for these structures in the rear or interior side yards.

3.     Cornices, eaves, and ornamental features: two feet.

4.     Stairs, canopies, awnings, sunrooms, and covered porches: six feet into a front or rear yard, three feet into a corner side yard, and two feet into an interior side yard.

5.     Balconies and bay windows: two and one-half feet into a front or rear yard, two feet into a corner side yard, and eighteen inches into an interior side yard.

6.     In the RS district, where the rear property line of a site adjoins an area of permanent open space, the following projections will be permitted:

a.     Attached decks above the first floor level: six feet into a rear yard.

b.     Detached decks more than thirty inches and not more than forty-eight inches in height: twelve feet into a rear yard, except that such a deck shall maintain a minimum side yard setback of five feet.

B.     Whenever an official plan line has been established for any street, required yards shall be measured from such line, and in no case shall the provisions of this chapter be construed as permitting any encroachment upon any official plan lines.

C.     Uncovered porches and paved terraces may extend not exceeding three feet into any required side yard and not exceeding six feet into any required front yard.

D.    In case an accessory building is attached to the main building, it shall be made structurally a part of, and have a common wall with, the main building and shall comply in all respects with the requirements of this title applicable to the main building. Unless so attached, an accessory building in all R districts shall be located on the rear one-half of the lot at least ten feet from any dwelling building existing or under construction on the same lot or any adjacent lot. Such accessory building shall not be located within five feet of any alley or within five feet of the side line of the front one-half of any adjacent lot or in the case of a corner lot to project beyond the front yard required or existing on the adjacent lot.

1.     On side yards of corner lots, the main building may be located five feet closer to the street line than at the front yard;

2.     Truck loading docks shall be so located that all vehicles entering or leaving the premises to load or unload may be driven in a forward direction without the necessity of such vehicle entering or leaving said premises in reverse gear, and so that no portion of any such vehicle will stand or protrude on or into the public right-of-way while loading or unloading;

3.     Where lots abut streets at the front and rear, and vehicle access to the street in the rear is restricted solid fences or screen planting, not exceeding six feet in height, may be located on the rear property line. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.40.110 Keeping of animals.
Except within the AG district, the following applies to all zones within the city.

A.    On parcels which are one acre or larger in size, there may be maintained a maximum of four horses or four llamas or four head of cattle. For larger parcels, additional animals may be maintained in the same proportion (six animals on one and one-half acres, eight animals on two acres, etc.). Additional newborn animals may be maintained until they reach the age of six months.

B.     On parcels which are one-half acre or larger in size, there may be maintained two sheep or two goats or two miniature horses. In addition, there may be maintained two pigs or two calves when the animals are being raised as part of a 4H or FFA project and are registered with the city. For larger parcels, additional animals may be maintained in the same proportion. Additional newborn animals may be maintained until they reach the age of six months.

C.     On parcels which are ten thousand square feet or larger in size, there may be maintained four rabbits, or six racing homer pigeons. Additional newborn animals or birds may be maintained until they reach the age of six months.

D.    The following animals are not allowed in any area of the city: stallions, bulls, turkeys, guinea fowl, pea fowl, geese or ostriches.

E.     All parcels on which animals are kept under the provisions of this section shall be maintained in a clean and nuisance free condition. All animals shall be maintained with secure fencing to prevent the animals from leaving the property. If complaints are received about noise, dust, odors, flies or other conditions detrimental to the health and safety of persons or property in the vicinity, the animals may be ordered to be removed by the city council.

F.     Keeping of Exotic Animals. The keeping of exotic animals, as defined by this Code and State Fish and Game Code, are subject to the following requirements.

1.     Such animals, except cats, shall not be permitted to run at large, but shall be, at all times, confined within a suitable enclosure or otherwise be under the control of the owner of the property; and

2.     Any enclosure shall be located in an interior side or rear yard and set back at least five feet from the property line; and

3.     The number of allowed animals, as defined by this title, may not exceed the limits set forth in Title 6 unless the property owner has obtained an animal keepers permit and a conditional use permit in accordance with Chapter 17.75.

G.    Domestic fowl may be maintained within the city subject to the following:

1.     No more than six domestic hens.

2.     There shall be a minimum of twenty feet between the window or door of any building used for human habitation and pens, coops, cages or similar housing where fowl are kept.

3.     There shall be a minimum separation equal to the required side yard between any property line and any pens, coops, cages or similar housings for fowl.

4.     All fowl shall be kept in conformance with all other laws, ordinances and regulations governing them, including licensing regulations.

5.     All parcels on which animals are kept under the provisions of this section shall be maintained in a clean and nuisance free condition. All animals shall be maintained with secure fencing to prevent the animals from leaving the property. If complaints are received about noise, dust, odors, flies or other conditions detrimental to the health and safety of persons or property in the vicinity, the animals may be ordered to be removed by the city of Waterford appeals and hearing board. (Ord. 2015-07 §1; Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.40.120 Mobile homes and travel trailers.
Mobile homes, trailer coaches or camp cars shall be used for human habitation or occupied for living or sleeping quarters only when installed within a licensed trailer court, trailer park or mobile home park. Mobile homes, trailer coaches or camp cars sited, situated and/or maintained upon any lot, piece or parcel of land, other than a trailer court, trailer park or mobile home park shall comply with the following conditions:

A.    Such vehicle shall not be maintained in any required front yard.

B.     Such vehicle shall be situated not closer than five feet to any main building or any property line.

C.     Such vehicle shall not be used for sleeping quarters nor shall any sanitary or cooking facilities contained therein be used. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.40.130 Swimming pools.
A.    Swimming pools in R districts shall be constructed on the rear one-half of the lot or fifty feet from the front property line, whichever is the less; such pools shall not be located closer than five feet to any rear lot line or side line. On the street side of any corner lot, where the rear lot line abuts a side lot line, no pool shall be located closer than ten feet to such side lot line.

B.     Filter and heating system for such pools shall not be located closer than twenty feet to any dwelling other than the owner’s.

C.     No pool shall occupy more than seventy percent of the required rear yard. Coverage by a temporary swimming pool shall not be considered in measuring maximum lot coverage. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.40.140 Accessory buildings generally.
A.    An accessory building may be erected as an integral part of a principal building, connected by a breezeway or similar structure, or detached from the principal building. Where an accessory building is attached to the main building, it shall be made structurally part of and have a common roof with the main building, and shall comply with all respects with the requirements of this title applicable to the main building.

B.     An accessory building must be constructed subsequent to, or concurrently with, the construction of the principal building on the site.

C.     No accessory building shall be permitted to be erected within the required front yard or exceed the lot coverage standards of the zoning district within which it is proposed to be located.

D.    A detached accessory building shall be located on the rear one-half of the lot and at least six feet from any dwelling/building existing or under construction on the same lot or any adjacent lot.

E.     In the case of a corner lot abutting upon two streets, no accessory building shall be erected or altered so as to project beyond the front yard required on any adjacent lot, nor shall it be located closer to either street line than is permitted for the main building on the lot.

F.     Accessory buildings exceeding one hundred square feet shall require approval of the building official prior to their placement or construction on a lot. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.40.150 Nonresidential accessory structures.
A.    In R Districts.

1.     Timing. Nonresidential accessory structures shall not be established or constructed prior to the start of construction of a principal structure on a site, except that construction trailers may be placed on a site at the time site clearance and grading begins. Construction trailers shall be removed within thirty days following the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the structure.

2.     Location. Except as provided in this subsection, nonresidential accessory structures shall not occupy a required yard or court, or project beyond the front building line of the principal structure on a site. In the RS zone, a detached garage may protrude past the front building line of the principal structure, but may not be located within a required front yard; provided, that the design of the detached garage is compatible with the existing residence in terms of architectural design, materials, colors, and exterior finishes. No accessory uses may be permitted off-site.

3.     Maximum Height. The maximum height of a nonresidential accessory structure shall be twelve feet, subject to the provisions of this subsection; provided, that pitched roofs shall not exceed a height of fifteen feet. For any RS lot containing a single-family residence, a pitched roof may extend to twenty feet in height to match the roof pitch of the existing or proposed residence on the site. The maximum height of any wall shall not exceed twelve feet at the eaves. No second story, other than an unfinished storage area, may be developed for any accessory building.

4.     Relation to Property Lines. A nonresidential accessory structure in a required rear yard shall be located on a property line or shall be not less than three feet from a property line. A structure on a property line shall not exceed six feet in height at the property line and shall not intercept an inclined daylight plane sloping inward from a point six feet above the property line and rising 1.0 feet for each foot of distance from the property line. A four-foot setback from an alley shall be provided for a garage door. A minimum three-foot distance shall be maintained between an accessory building and the principal structure on the site. An accessory building shall either directly abut another accessory building or a fence; provided, that the height requirements of this subsection are met, or shall maintain at least a three-foot setback from any fence or other accessory building on the site.

5.     In an RS district, the total gross floor area of accessory structures more than four feet in height shall be counted in computing lot coverage, and shall meet, and not exceed, the lot coverage requirements of the RS district except that the total area of any one accessory building shall not exceed the total area of the primary residential structure on the same site.

6.     Patio Covers. A patio cover open on at least two sides and complying with all other provisions of this subsection may be attached to a principal structure and shall not be subject to requirements for courts opposite required windows.

7.     Swimming Pools. An unenclosed swimming pool and related equipment may occupy a required rear yard or side yard but shall not be within five feet of a property line.

8.     Decks. No deck that is thirty inches or more in height shall be located in a required yard.

9.     Decorative Archways. A decorative archway may occupy a required front yard, provided it meets the driveway visibility requirements of Title 12. No more than one archway per frontage may be constructed. Any decorative archway shall have a maximum height of eight feet, a maximum width of eight feet, and a maximum depth of four feet.

B.     In C, I, OS and PS Districts. Accessory structures shall comply with all regulations applicable to the principal structure on a site. Off-site accessory uses shall be allowed only with a use permit issued by the planning director.

C.     In PC or SP District. The location of accessory structures shall comply with the adopted PC or SP district requirements. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.40.160 Accessory dwelling units.
An accessory dwelling unit (ADU) may be constructed on the same lot as an existing or proposed single-family residential, mixed use or multifamily residential zoning district that allow residential uses, subject to applicable building code requirements and standards that are intended to preserve the existing residential neighborhood character while protecting the public health and safety environment of the city of Waterford. A junior accessory dwelling unit (JADU) may be constructed on a residential lot zoned for single-family residences with a single-family residence built, or proposed to be built, on the lot.

A.    Purpose. This section is intended to implement the requirements of the city of Waterford Housing Element in accordance with Government Code Sections 65852.2 and 65852.22 by permitting the creation of accessory dwelling units and junior accessory dwelling units through a ministerial administrative process, thereby increasing housing opportunities for the community through use of existing housing resources and infrastructure.

B.     Where Permitted.

1.     ADUs are permitted in all zone districts allowing single-family or multifamily use on lots developed with existing or proposed dwellings.

2.     An ADU may be established in the following methods:

a.     Attached to, or located within, an existing or proposed primary dwelling.

b.     A new detached structure, or located within or attached to an accessory structure, including detached garages or similar structures.

c.     Conversion of existing attached or detached accessory structures, including garages, storage areas, or similar structures.

d.     Reconstruction of an existing structure or living area that is proposed to be converted to an ADU, or a portion thereof, in the same location and to the same dimensions and setbacks as the existing structure.

3.     A JADU may be established within the space of the primary dwelling, including an attached garage or accessory structure.

4.     A JADU may be established within the space of the primary dwelling in combination with the construction of one detached, new construction ADU not exceeding eight hundred square feet and height of sixteen feet with four-foot side and rear setbacks. The detached, new construction ADU may exceed eight hundred square feet but shall be limited to one thousand two hundred square feet when constructed on a property that is equal to or greater than 0.50 acres in size.

5.     The existing unit may be considered the ADU, and a new primary dwelling unit built, if all applicable zoning requirements are met.

6.     ADUs shall be permitted on lots developed with existing multifamily dwellings subject to the following provisions:

a.     A minimum of one ADU may be constructed, or up to twenty-five percent of the existing unit count, within nonlivable space, including, but not limited to, storage rooms, passageways, attics, basements, or closets.

b.     The construction of two detached ADUs, subject to a maximum height of sixteen feet, and four-foot side and rear setbacks. In this case, only two detached ADUs are permitted on the lots developed with existing multifamily dwellings.

C.     Development Standards.

1.     ADU Type, Location and Size.

a.     Attached Unit. An ADU attached to an existing primary dwelling shall not exceed fifty percent of the total existing or proposed living area of the primary dwelling.

b.     Detached Unit. An ADU structurally independent and detached from the existing primary dwelling shall not exceed one thousand two hundred square feet.

c.     ADUs shall have independent exterior access from the primary dwelling. No passageway to the primary dwelling shall be required.

d.     ADUs shall not be required to provide fire sprinklers if they are not required for the primary residence.

2.     JADU Location and Size.

a.     A JADU shall be constructed entirely within an existing or proposed primary dwelling and shall not exceed five hundred square feet.

b.     JADUs shall have an independent exterior entrance from the primary dwelling but may also include shared access between two units.

3.     Required Setbacks.

a.     An attached or detached ADU shall provide a setback of no more than four feet from the side and rear property lines.

b.     Cornices and eaves may project into the required yard by no more than one foot.

c.     All ADUs shall meet the front yard setback.

d.     When an ADU is created within an existing structure, the side and rear setbacks must be sufficient for fire safety as determined by the fire department.

e.     No setback shall be required for an existing garage or accessory structure converted, or portion thereof, to an ADU and no setback shall be required for a new structure constructed in the same location and same dimensions as an existing structure.

f.      An ADU constructed above an existing garage or dwelling unit, exceeding sixteen feet in height, shall meet the side and rear setbacks of the underlying zoning district.

g.     Staircases serving an ADU shall provide a setback of no less than four feet from the side and rear property lines subject to approval by the fire department.

4.     Parking.

a.     The parking requirements for an accessory dwelling unit shall be one parking space per unit. The parking space may be provided as tandem parking or in setback areas.

b.     An accessory dwelling unit shall be exempt from the parking requirement listed above given that the accessory dwelling unit is in any of the following instances:

i.      The ADU is located within one-half of a mile walking distance of public transit.

ii.     The ADU is located within an architecturally and historically significant historic district.

iii.    The ADU is part of the proposed or existing primary residence or an accessory structure.

iv.    When on-street parking permits are required but not offered to the occupant of the ADU.

v.     When there is a car share vehicle located within one block of the ADU.

5.     Architecture. The accessory unit improvement plans shall be architecturally compatible with the primary dwelling in terms of design, building and roofing materials, colors, and exterior finishes. The ADU may have a flat or pitched roof.

6.     Impact Fees and Utilities.

a.     ADUs and JADUs shall comply with water and sewer requirements as determined by the public works department. ADUs shall not be considered a new residential use for the purposes of calculating utility connection fees or capacity charges for water and sewer service.

b.     The city shall not require a new or separate utility connection or impose a related connection fee or capacity charge for ADUs or JADUs that are contained within an existing residence or accessory structure.

c.     Fees charged for the construction of ADUs shall be consistent with Government Code Section 65852.2(f).

D.    Conditions.

1.     An ADU/JADU shall not be sold or otherwise conveyed separate from the primary residence.

2.     Neither the ADU/JADU nor the primary dwelling unit shall be rented for a term of less than thirty-one days. ADUs on multifamily properties shall be subject to this provision, except the restriction shall not apply to existing multifamily units.

3.     Owner-occupancy shall be required for a property developed with a JADU. The owner may reside in either the primary dwelling or the JADU.

4.     The property owner shall record a covenant, approved as to form by the city attorney, declaring compliance with each and every condition referenced in this section.

E.     Accessory residential units constructed without city approval, prior to adoption of these provisions, may be made legal through the building permit process set forth for new accessory dwelling units. Applications shall be evaluated for compliance with the adopted standards in this section. (Ord. 2020-05 §4;  Ord. 2017-09 §1).

 

17.40.170 Exterior materials in R districts.
In all R districts, the exterior walls of all structures, other than accessory structures, shall have a nonmetallic finish or be finished in such a manner as to resemble natural wood finish. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.40.180 Religious assembly yard requirements.
Yards, height and bulk, and buffering requirements for religious assemblies shall be as specified by a use permit; provided that the minimum interior side yard shall be fifteen feet and the minimum rear yard shall be twenty-five feet. Yards adjoining street property lines shall not be less than required for a permitted use. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.40.190 Eating and drinking establishments with take-out service.
The following supplementary development regulations shall apply to eating and drinking establishments with take-out service:

A.    Minimum Separation. Establishments shall not be closer than five hundred feet to a public or private school, park, or playground in an R, OS, or PS district.

B.     Litter Control. Identifiable containers and napkins shall be used for all carry-out food, and all litter resulting, including litter on adjacent property and public rights-of-way, shall be promptly removed. A use permit may require the operator to retain a contract litter cleanup service if the planning director determines that a litter problem exists. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.40.200 Live entertainment.
The following regulations shall apply to any use offering scheduled live entertainment as defined, except within an OS or PS district and approved by the Waterford city council, shall be conducted in accordance with the following:

A.    Exits not limited to emergency use only shall be located in accordance with the planning director so as to not unnecessarily impact any residential district after 10:00 p.m.

B.     An administrative use permit, in accordance with Chapter 17.73, shall establish conditions ensuring that no litter problem will exist.

C.     An administrative use permit, in accordance with Chapter 17.73, for live entertainment shall apply only to the type of entertainment approved, and a different type of entertainment shall require approval of a new use permit. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.40.210 Service stations, vehicle/equipment repair, and automobile washing.
The following supplementary development regulations shall apply to the service station, vehicle/equipment repair, and automobile washing use classifications.

A.    Minimum Separation. Minimum separation between site boundaries shall be five hundred feet, except that one such use may be located at each corner of a street intersection.

B.     Site Layout. Conditions of approval of a zoning or use permit may require buffering, screening, planting areas, or hours of operation necessary to avoid adverse impacts on properties in the surrounding area.

 

C.     Planting Areas. Perimeter planting areas shall be as required for parking lots by Chapter 17.46, except where a building adjoins an interior property line. Required interior planting areas may adjoin perimeter planting areas.

D.    Storage of Materials and Equipment. The provisions of Section 17.40.042(I), Outdoor facilities, shall apply, except that a display rack for automobile products no more than four feet wide may be maintained on each pump island of a service station. If display racks are not located on pump islands, they shall be placed within three feet of the principal building, and shall be limited to one per street frontage. Storage of inoperative vehicles on the site is prohibited. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.40.220 Duplex units on corner lots within the RS district.
Duplex residential units may be developed on corner lots in RS districts subject to approval of a conditional use permit by the planning commission in accordance with Chapter 17.75 subject to the following:

A.    The minimum building site shall be consistent with lot sizes allowed in the respective RS district but not less than eight thousand square feet.

B.     Minimum average lot width shall be the same as provided in the RS district.

C.     Minimum Street Frontage. The planning commission shall be responsible for determining the minimum street frontage based on the buildable area of the lot, access requirements and good design. However, in no case shall the planning commission approve lots having less than thirty-five feet of street frontage.

D.    Minimum allowable density for duplex units on corner lots is four thousand square feet of lot per dwelling unit.

E.     Setbacks shall be the same as provided in the RS district.

F.     All site development standards within the RS district shall apply as applicable.

G.    Maximum lot coverage shall be forty-five percent of the total lot area. Lot coverage shall specifically include all buildings and structures.

H.    Maximum building height shall be thirty-five feet. The planning commission may approve building heights over thirty-five feet by means of a conditional use permit where it can be demonstrated that the additional building height is necessary in order to achieve some purpose which is in keeping with the architectural character neighborhood and where such additional building height is not likely to be detrimental to the overall residential quality of the neighborhood.

I.      Off-Street Parking. Minimum required off-street parking is as follows:

1.     There shall be not less than one garage, ten feet by twenty feet, for each dwelling unit in any duplex, plus one covered or uncovered space for each dwelling unit.

2.     The driveway serving the off-street parking for one dwelling unit shall have access to one street and the driveway serving the off-street parking for the other dwelling unit shall access to another street. If the lot has access to an alley, one or both driveways may access the alley.

J.      Minimum Floor Area Requirements.

1.     One-bedroom units shall have a minimum of six hundred fifty square feet in gross floor area.

2.     Two-bedroom units shall have a minimum of eight hundred square feet in gross floor area.

3.     Three-bedroom units shall have a minimum of nine hundred square feet in gross floor area.

4.     Four-bedroom units shall have a minimum of one thousand square feet in gross floor area.

K.    Useable Open Space Requirement. A minimum of three hundred square feet of useable open space shall be provided for each dwelling unit.

L.     Architectural and site plan review shall be required as follows:

1.     Architectural and site plan review shall be required for those projects which could result in the development of new single-family and/or duplex residences (including in-fill projects) in accordance with Chapter 17.52.

2.     Architectural and site plan review shall be required by the architectural review committee prior to issuance of a permit based on the finding that a proposed residence is out of character with the existing neighborhood or if the design and/or materials of a proposed residential addition are inconsistent with the existing residence.

3.     Maintaining the single-family dwelling appearance shall be given special consideration through the use permit process which includes plot plan review. The following shall be considered:

a.     Entrance to each unit shall front on different street frontages. Putting the second unit entrance to the side or rear of the building so it is not readily visible from the same street as the first unit’s entrance.

b.     Locating each unit’s parking spaces so that they are not readily visible from the same street. Alley access for both units is acceptable.

c.     Employing construction materials and architectural styles which blend with the adjacent units so they appear as a single residence if attached or a single residence and accessory building if detached.

M.    Other provisions of this title as applicable in the RS district such as signs, landscaping and screening, fences, swimming pools, etc. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.40.230 Development on lots divided by district boundaries.
The regulations applicable to each district shall be applied to the area within that district, and no use other than parking serving a principal use on the site shall be located in a district in which it is not a permitted or conditional use. Pedestrian or vehicular access from a street to a use shall not traverse a portion of the site in a district in which the use is not a permitted or conditional use. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.40.240 Screening of mechanical equipment.
A.    General Requirement. Except as provided in subsection B of this section, all exterior mechanical equipment, except solar collectors, and operating mechanical equipment in I districts located more than fifty feet from an R, C, PS, PD or OS district boundary, shall be screened from view on all sides. Equipment to be screened includes, but is not limited to, heating, air conditioning, refrigeration equipment, plumbing lines, ductwork, and transformers. Satellite receiving antennas shall be screened as prescribed by Chapter 17.50 (Wireless Communications Facilities). Screening of the top of equipment may be required by the planning director, if necessary to protect a significant view.

B.     Utility Meters. Utility meters shall be screened from view from public rights-of-way, but need not be screened on top or when located on the interior side of a single-family dwelling. Meters in a required front yard or in a side yard adjoining a street shall be enclosed in subsurface vaults.

C.     Screening Specifications. Screening materials may have evenly distributed openings or perforations not exceeding fifty percent of the surface area and shall effectively screen mechanical equipment so that it is not visible from a street or adjoining lot. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.40.250 Refuse storage areas.
A refuse storage area screened on all sides by a six-foot solid masonry wall, or located within a building, shall be provided prior to occupancy for all uses other than one-family or two-family dwellings. Locations and horizontal dimensions of refuse storage areas shall be as prescribed by the planning director. The planning director may waive this screening requirement in I districts for refuse collection and storage equipment, including dumpsters and waste containers that are not visible from public streets. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.40.260 Game centers.
Administrative use permit required in accordance with Chapter 17.73. An administrative use permit shall include the following performance standards that apply to the operation of game centers, including mechanical or electronic games, or any other similar machine or device.

A.    Purpose. The intent of these performance standards, in particular the use permit requirement, is to provide a procedure to control the location and operation of game centers, to require adequate adult supervision, and to govern hours of operations so as not to allow school children to patronize game centers during school hours.

B.     Use Permit Required. An administrative use permit, approved by the planning director, is required to install, operate or maintain three or more mechanical or electronic games. The administrative use permit is valid only for the number of games specified; the installation or use of additional games requires a new or amended administrative use permit. The planning director may impose reasonable restrictions on the physical design, location and operation of a game center in order to minimize the effects of noise, congregation, parking and other nuisance factors that may be detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare of the surrounding community.

C.     Adult Manager. At least one adult manager, of at least nineteen years of age, shall be on the premises during the time a game center is open to the public.

D.    Hours of Operation for Minors Between Six and Eighteen Years of Age. No game center owner, manager or employee shall allow a minor between six and eighteen years of age to play a mechanical or electronic game machine during the hours the Waterford public schools are in session, or nine p.m. on nights preceding school days, or ten p.m. on any night. It is the responsibility of the owner or manager of the game center to obtain a current schedule of school days and hours. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.40.270 Electric transmission line easements.
All residential uses, schools, and public buildings shall be set back at least one hundred fifty feet from the edge of two hundred thirty kilovolt electric transmission line easements. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.40.280 Stream setbacks.
All development shall be set back a minimum of twenty-five feet from the top of the bank of streams (both seasonal and perennial) and ravines. The minimum setback from the Tuolumne River shall be fifty feet from the flood plane boundary as defined by the appropriate flood panel map for the river. No permanent development, except temporary trails, chairs, or benches, shall be permitted within these setback areas. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.40.290 Outdoor displays, sales and promotions.
A.    Guidelines for Outdoor Displays, Sales, and Promotions. The display or sale of goods, merchandise or services which customarily occur indoors, shall be allowed to occur outdoors, subject to the following conditions:

1.     Outdoor displays, sales or promotions may occur up to six times during any calendar year, with a maximum of seven consecutive days for each business/promotion.

2.     Outdoor displays, sales or promotions held more than six times a year and/or longer than seven consecutive days will require planning commission approval of a conditional use permit.

3.     Outdoor displays, sales or promotions of new merchandise, furniture tools or equipment sold within the business building are permitted in any district where commercial or “C” uses are permitted provided that such outdoor displays are not located on a public right-of-way or sidewalk unless the event has an approved encroachment permit from the Waterford city public works department.

4.     Outdoor displays, sales or promotions must be by a licensed city of Waterford business, city of Waterford merchant association, public school, charitable or not-for-profit organization.

5.     When applicable, all merchandise or services sold or displayed outdoors shall be of the same type(s) new merchandise ordinarily sold indoors at the business conducting the sale.

6.     Prior to any outdoor sale, displays or promotion, an annual application permit for outdoor displays, sales and promotions must be obtained from the planning department and renewed annually.

7.     Outdoor displays or sale of goods or services by itinerant vendors as defined by this code, are prohibited.

B.     Examples of Outdoor Displays, Sales and Promotions. The following are examples of outdoor displays, sales and promotions:

1.     Tables of merchandise, clothing on rolling or stationary racks, picnic tables (outside eating area), large individual items such as lawn mowers, garden tractors, etc. which encroach on the public right-of-way.

2.     Outdoor art and craft shows, and exhibits.

3.     Sidewalk sales, or certified farmers market.

4.     Religious, patriotic, historic, or similar displays, or exhibits.

C.     An application for an outdoor display, sale or promotion must be approved by the planning department prior to the event. The application shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following information:

1.     An approved encroachment permit signed by the Waterford city public works director where the proposed outdoor display, sale or promotion is proposed on a city sidewalk, right-of-way or on public property;

2.     The identification of the person and/or business conducting the display, sale or promotion;

3.     A description of the event, the days and hours of operation and its location;

4.     The property owner’s authorization, if applicable; and

5.     A site plan (drawing) illustrating the location and/or placement of the displays.

D.    Performance Standards. Outdoor displays, sales or promotions, are subject to the following general performance standards:

1.     The display of merchandise must be arranged or situated so that it does not create a hazard to pedestrians or encroach on a required building exit, driveway, parking space, landscaped area or setback area.

2.     A minimum four-foot passage shall be maintained between and/or around any tree, newsstand, bike rack, planter, trash receptacle, etc.

3.     Sidewalks may not be restricted in such a manner as to prohibit safe and convenient movement of pedestrian traffic.

4.     The display area must be maintained so that it is not unsightly and does not create a condition that is detrimental to the appearance or the premises or surrounding property.

5.     The display area, when utilizing a public right-of-way, must not create a hazardous condition for pedestrians or the public or otherwise create a public liability for the city of Waterford.

E.     Guidelines for Accessory Outdoor Eating Areas. Outdoor eating areas are considered accessory if they are operated in conjunction with a take-out food establishment. These guidelines are intended for outdoor eating areas which may encroach on the public right-of-way.

1.     The total number of seats may not exceed twelve on public rights-of-way.

2.     Prior to the placement of any outdoor furniture, an outdoor display, sales, and promotion permit shall be obtained from the planning department.

F.     Outdoor Eating Area Performance Standards.

1.     Accessory eating areas are subject to the general design standards applicable to the building or district within which the activity is conducted, and must include an approved encroachment permit signed by the public works director where the eating area is proposed on a city sidewalk, right-of-way or on public property. These outdoor dining regulations are intended to ensure public safety and welfare, protect public property, and promote the attractive use of public right-of-way, by regulating the location, height, design and use of outdoor dining barriers and fixtures.

2.     The outdoor eating area, including furniture, must be arranged or situated so that is does not create a hazard to pedestrians or encroach on a required building exit, vehicle travel lane, driveway, or any public street that is not formally closed by city authority.

3.     The outdoor eating area shall provide a minimum of four feet of pedestrian clearance when located on any sidewalk or other public right-of-way, and set back a minimum of six feet from any crosswalk or ramp. A minimum of four feet of clearance must be provided around any tree, newsstand, bike rack, bench, planter, trash receptacle, etc.

4.     The outdoor eating area must be maintained in a manner such that it does not create an unsightly appearance, including how the furniture is organized and secured when the business establishment is closed. The outdoor dining area must remain clear of litter, unattended food scraps, soiled utensils and dishes at all times. The permit holder shall maintain the tables and chairs in the permitted outdoor dining area in a clean condition at all times. No debris shall be swept, washed or blown into the sidewalk, gutter or street. Adequate lighting may be required of the operator to ensure safety of customers and pedestrians, and must be maintained in good working order.

5.     Alcoholic beverages are not allowed to be served or consumed within any outdoor eating area, unless the following regulations are met:

a.     State Licensure. The outdoor dining area operation must be duly licensed by the State Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control, and the city of Waterford requirements and restrictions for the service of alcoholic beverages in outdoor dining areas shall not be less than those required by the State Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control.

b.     Indemnification. The permit holder shall indemnify, defend and hold harmless the city, its officials, officers, agents and employees from any and all claims, causes of action, losses, injuries or damages arising directly or indirectly from the negligent acts, errors or omissions of the permit holder, its officers, agents, employees or anyone rendering services on its behalf. This indemnity shall include all reasonable costs and attorney’s fees incurred in defending any action covered by this section.

c.     Barriers. The outdoor dining area must be clearly and physically separated from pedestrian traffic, and exits shall be designated in the encroachment permit, and clearly marked at the exit locations.

i.      Barrier Requirements. Barriers shall maintain a minimum height of forty-two inches and a maximum height of forty-eight inches. Sectional fencing must be constructed of decorative metal (aluminum, steel or iron) and must be of a dark color (either painted or stained) to compliment downtown furnishings. Rope or chain barriers are permitted with a minimum diameter of one inch. Vertical support posts must be constructed of wood or metal. The spacing, if any, between barriers, railings, or fences, must prevent pedestrian traffic through them.

ii.     Barrier Removal Deposit. A removal deposit shall be submitted at the time of encroachment permit approval where a fixed barrier is proposed and be subject to the determination of the public works director. A removal deposit is not required for portable barriers. If, at the time of cessation of outdoor dining use and/or revocation of the encroachment permit, the barrier is removed by the business owner or other responsible party, any removal deposit will be refunded.

iii.    Removal of Barriers and Fixtures. Permit holders shall have thirty days from the date of business closure to remove all barriers and other outdoor dining fixtures. Permit holders shall notify the city for final inspection once all barriers and fixtures are removed. Failure to remove barriers within the thirty-day period may result in the city taking action to remove the barriers and fixtures. Expenses incurred shall be billable to the permit holder and/or deducted from the deposit.

d.     Written Notice. The service of alcoholic beverages shall be restricted solely to on-premises consumption by customers within the outdoor dining area. The business operator shall post a written notice to customers that drinking or carrying an open container of alcohol is prohibited outside the outdoor dining area.

e.     Outdoor dining areas shall not be used primarily for alcoholic beverage consumption, and the opportunity to order food from the dining establishment’s menu shall be made available at all times when alcohol is served.

f.      Police department approval is required for alcohol sales after midnight in outdoor dining areas.

6.     Denial of Encroachment. Upon denial of an encroachment permit by the public works director, an applicant may, within fifteen calendar days following notification of such denial, file a notice of appeal to the city council, who shall then hear all appeals concerning the application for encroachment, and which decision regarding the appeal shall be final.

7.     Suspension/Revocation. An outdoor dining encroachment permit shall be subject to suspension or revocation by the public works director. A permit may be suspended or revoked if any of the permit requirements or terms and conditions contained in this chapter are violated. A permit may be suspended or revoked if necessary to preserve and protect the health and welfare of the public. The public works director, or designated representative, will serve the permit holder with a written notice stating the proposed grounds for the suspension or revocation and the effective date. The notice shall provide the permit holder with information on the appeal process.

8.     A written notice requesting an appeal shall be filed with the city clerk not later than fifteen calendar days after receipt of the notice of proposed suspension or revocation. Failure to file a notice of appeal within the fifteen-day period waives the permit holder’s right to appeal and the public works director’s proposal will become final. If a timely notice of appeal is filed, the city council will consider the appeal at the next available meeting.

G.    Garage or Yard Sales. Garage or yard sales are permitted in any R district subject to Chapter 5.28 and the following:

1.     The garage or yard sale does not occur more than one time in any three month period or four times during a calendar year by an individual or on an individual lot or home or run for a period longer than two consecutive days.

2.     Garage or yard sale goods and wares are displayed entirely off a public right-of-way.

3.     The garage or yard sale activities are conducted in accordance with all applicable provisions of this code. (Ord. 2014-10 §1; Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.40.300 Underground utilities.
All electrical, telephone, CATV, and similar distribution lines providing direct service to a development site shall be installed underground within the site. Off-site utilities along a project frontage for all new commercial, multifamily, or industrial development shall be undergrounded, unless a deferral is granted by the planning commission, for those projects over which it has approval authority, or by the design review committee in accordance with Chapter 17.52 for those projects over which it has approval authority, or by the planning director for those projects over which the director has approval authority, in accordance with the deferral requirements set forth in Title 16, Subdivisions. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.40.310 Grade separation between lots.
A.    In all residential districts, there shall be no more than twelve inches vertical grade separation between lots unless the lots are improved with a masonry retaining wall.

1.     All fences shall be constructed on top of any masonry wall and fence height shall be measured from the top of the grade.

2.     All grades of less than twelve inches in vertical separation shall be sloped on a 1:1 grade and all fences erected top of the slope and building and structure setback lines shall be measured from the top slope regardless of the property line.

B.     In all commercial and industrial districts, there shall be no more than a twenty-four-inch vertical grade separation between lots unless the lot is improved with a masonry retaining wall.

1.     All fences shall be constructed on top of any masonry wall and fence height shall be measured from the top of the grade.

2.     All grades of less than twenty-four inches in vertical separation shall be sloped on a 1:1 grade and all fences shall be constructed upon the top of the sloped area and building and structure setback lines shall be measured from the top slope. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

Chapter 17.42 GENERAL MIXED USE COMPATIBILITY STANDARDS
17.42.010 Purpose.
A.    A mixed-use development is encouraged within some zoning districts within the city of Waterford as a means of reducing traffic and congestion and to promote over all community well being and economic vitality. These standards are intended to accommodate and foster pedestrian usage by combining commercial/retail uses and residential uses in the same buildings or in close vicinity of each other. The interaction of these different uses during day and evening hours provides a dynamic that can not usually be created with typical single use zones. This concept harkens back to a village where people lived and worked in close proximity. This concept also tries to reduce dependency upon the automobile, makes pedestrians a focal point, and encourages human interaction, smaller scale buildings, and a vibrant sidewalk environment.

B.     For projects in those zoning districts where mixed-use developments are allowed, the following design review standards shall apply.

C.     These standards shall be applied to both new development proposed on vacant land and the retrofitting of existing improvements and building to mixed uses. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.42.020 Types of mixed use development.
Mixed use developments may be proposed in two ways:

A.    Establishment of a new permitted or conditionally permitted use within a zoning district where mixed use development is allowed.

B.     Establishment of a mixed-use development that proposes a new development or complex that will accommodate mixed uses. Typically these would be proposed in any commercial or industrial zone and be approved as planned community (PC) in accordance with Chapter 17.30 or a specific plan district (SP) in accordance with Chapter 17.32. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.42.030 Mixed use land use standards.
A.    Schedule 42-1 below prescribes the land use regulations for districts within which mixed uses are allowed unless otherwise not allowed in the specific zoning district within which the mixed use development or use is proposed. The regulations for each use are established by letter designations as follows:

“P” designates use classifications permitted in residential districts.

“L” designates use classifications that are permitted, subject to certain limitations.

“T” designates use classifications that are permitted to be conducted for a limited period of time and that require a temporary use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.74.

“AU” designates a use classification permitted in the district but requiring an administrative use permit as provided in Chapter 17.73 due to the nature of the use or the area within which the use is proposed requiring special review/approval procedures.

“U” designates use classifications that may be permitted upon approval of a conditional use permit, as provided in Chapter 17.75.

“S”   designates a use classification that is subject special regulations.

B.     Use classifications are defined in Chapter 17.04. In cases where a proposed use is not included in a use classification, the planning director shall determine whether the proposed use is substantially similar in character to a permitted use classification and in that event shall assign the proposed use to a permitted use classification. Use classifications not listed in Schedule 42-1 below are prohibited.

 

Schedule 42-1 Mixed Use Compatibility Table (see Ch. 17.04, Use Classifications)

 

Mixed Use Classifications

Regulation

Single-family residential unit and one accessory residential unit

P

Multifamily apartments residential

AU

Day care

AU

Private garage

P

Garage, patio or yard sales

T

The keeping of domestic animals and pets

P

Home occupations

P

Day care

P

Public and Semipublic Use Classifications

 

Clubs and lodges

AU

Cultural institutions

P

Government offices

P

Public safety facilities

AU

Religious assembly

P

Mixed Use Classifications

Regulation

Residential care (general)

AU

Schools, public and private

AU

Utilities (minor)

P

Commercial Use Classifications

 

Live/work quarters

AU

Animal grooming

AU

Animals—Retail sales and pet stores

U

Artists’ studios

P

Banks and savings and loans

P

Catering services

AU

Commercial recreation and entertainment

AU

Game center, billiard parlor

AU

Indoor movie theaters and performing arts theaters (limited)

P

Communications facilities

P

Eating and drinking establishments

P

With wine and beer service

AU

With full alcoholic beverage service

U

With live entertainment

U

With take-out service

P

Food and beverage sales

AU

Offices, business and professional

P

Personal improvement services

P

Personal services

P

Research and development services

U

Retail sales

P

Visitor accommodations

AU

Bed and breakfast inns

P

Hotels and motels

AU

Boarding or rooming house

AU

Agricultural Use Classifications

 

Tasting room and fruit stand

AU

Horticulture (limited)

AU

Accessory Use Classifications

 

Accessory uses and structures

AU

Nonresidential accessory structures

AU

Accessory dwelling unit

AU

Temporary Use Classifications

 

Animal shows

T

Seasonal sales

T

Circuses and carnivals

AU

Personal property, yard, garage or patio sales

T

Religious assembly

AU

Mixed Use Classifications

Regulation

Retail sales, special outdoor

AU

Street fairs, and farmers, markets

T

Trade fairs

T

Other similar compatible uses

AU

(Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.42.040 Design review.
A.    Site plan design review will be used by the city to approve development (site plans and architectural designs) in mixed-use proposals. The architectural site plan review committee will make urban design decisions based on the following guidelines to promote visual quality in these areas of the city.

B.     Site plan review will examine the location, intensity and type of uses proposed within a mixed use proposal and address the relationship of proposed uses to surrounding uses in the neighborhood and immediately adjacent to the project site or building. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.42.050 Overall proposal design.
A.    Mixed-use proposal should create a new diverse and pedestrian-friendly neighborhood environment, with a mix of housing, shopping, workplace and entertainment uses and nodes for transportation access, all within a short walk of each other. A range of types, sizes, amenities, and uses will enhance a series of inviting functional public spaces, including shopping streets and pedestrian friendly streetscapes, open spaces, courtyards, trails, residential, office, and retail in mixed-use buildings. The design principles for buildings and streets are taken from traditional small towns that provided a close-in community life.

B.     To foster pedestrian usage in the mixed-use proposal, the construction of new sidewalks must be a minimum of ten feet in width, whenever feasible.

C.     Properties or development projects abutting major streets in the district should have zero to ten-foot setbacks from the right-of-way, pedestrian-friendly store fronts with display windows along fifty percent of their facade and the facades should not be plain or sterile but incorporate architectural features such as windows, entrances, variations in setback, so that no wall plane is wider or longer than two and one-half times the height of the wall plane.

D.    Street frontage should accommodate and foster pedestrian usage. Properties or development projects abutting a frontage street shall:

E.     Off-street parking in commercial areas should either be behind or to the side of development.

1.     A minimum of curb cuts should be allowed along streets for parking access.

2.     Vehicular access to parking lots and garages should only be permitted along frontage streets when there is no other side street or alley access. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.42.060 Pedestrian supportive design.
Mixed use developments are encouraged in the city of Waterford, within specific zoning districts, for the express purpose of encouraging pedestrian and non-vehicular travel between home, the workplace and shopping/services. For this reason, plans for reuse of existing development for mix-use purposes or development of new mixed-use developments shall adhere to the following principals:

A.    Separation of potentially incompatible uses should be accomplished through walls and screening as shown in Figures 42-1 and 42-2.

 

Figure 42-1



 

Figure 42-2



 

B.     Pedestrian access ways shall be part of any wall or hedge separating residential, commercial and employment centers to encourage pedestrian access.

C.     Under no circumstances shall walls or security fencing result in the need for a resident of a mixed-use development to travel, by motor vehicle, to a service or work within the mixed-use development. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.42.070 Transit supportive design.
Where a mixed use proposal includes street improvements, designs should accommodate bus stops and similar amenities as approved by the city engineer and local transit system operator. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.42.080 Overall architectural design.
Where new construction is proposed, the following design standards are encouraged. Where existing development is to be used for mixed-use concepts, redevelopment should examine opportunities to conform to these standards:

A.    Building design concepts should respond to the site plan by forming street edges and by encouraging active, safe street life offering a variety of activities. Buildings should recognize site patterns and help define entries to interior courtyards, building entrances, and public spaces to encourage family and community activities.

B.     Use architectural styles that are associated with traditional neighborhood design and newer multifamily designs that delineate separation of the units. Commercial architectural styles should mimic the old Main Street concept.

C.     The architectural designs should utilize a variety of roof forms to create diverse elevations. Residential units, office and commercial/retail spaces should overlook the streets and courtyards as part of a unified and defined sense of space.

D.    Parapets, cornices, shed roofs, dormers and other secondary roof forms create variety in the units and break up the massing of the overall buildings. Varied roof heights and roof elements also serve to reinforce the diverse experience of the streetscape. Vertical elements such as bays and decks which sometimes carry to the ground and to upper levels help to create variation in the facade that modulate the building facade.

E.     The materials used in design of the buildings should also reinforce the diverse experience of the elevations. Roof colors should be coordinated to complement the color schemes.

F.     Plaza or courtyard materials can be used to create a community space, through the use of color and scoring as patterns in the hardscape. Landscape creates diversity, provides color and softens the building and hardscape environment, while benches or seating areas, play areas and public art help residents and visitors enjoy the space and environment, making it a place where people want to visit, shop, live and recreate. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.42.090 Residential dwelling units.
Mixed-use residential dwelling units are allowed as follows. Multifamily residences in the mixed-use development proposals should follow the density standards of this title in a manner that is consistent with the following:

A.    Residential units in mixed-use buildings along the street frontage are allowed at a rate of one and one-half units per one thousand gross square feet of commercial/retail space and shall be located above, behind, or below (where terrain permits) the commercial space. The top floor of the building must be designed for residential units.

B.     Residential units detached from the mixed-use building(s) may be located behind the commercial space at a density of nine units per acre.

C.     Units behind the commercial development may be designed as any of the following or combination thereof: townhouses, cottages, or attached or detached single-family residential units in a manner consistent with the city’s residential development and site standards for R-2 and R-3 residential zones.

D.    Corner lots may have residential units abutting on the secondary street.

E.     Either residential or commercial space, or any combination thereof, may be located behind the mixed-use building(s) facing the street.

F.     At least twenty percent of the gross land area with the project limits shall be set aside as open space and recreation. Ten percent of the required open space and recreation area must include an active recreational element such as play structures, ball courts (basketball, tennis, etc.), gazebos, or plazas with gathering areas and barbecue facilities.

G.    Live-work type units are encouraged within mixed-use type developments. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.42.100 Overall building form.
Buildings should provide and enhance the pedestrian scale and orientation of the district. The following concepts help to achieve that goal:

A.    Buildings should be built to the property line or right-of-way easement to enclose a pedestrian-oriented landscape. Pedestrian-oriented amenities are important. When development accommodates specific pedestrian activities, the setback may vary up to twenty feet with city approval, if the space is planned for outdoor dining associated with an eating establishment, recessed plaza or specific district design standards or landscape needs. The setback can not be used for parking.

B.     Buildings should utilize elements such as massing, materials, windows, canopies and articulated roof forms to create a visually distinct “base” as well as a “cap.”

C.     Within larger projects, variations in facades, floor levels, architectural features and exterior finishes are encouraged to create this appearance of several smaller buildings. Upper stories should be articulated with features such as bays and balconies.

D.    Special attention should be given to designing a primary building entrance, one that is clearly visible from the street and incorporates changes in mass, surface, or finish to give emphasis.

E.     Corner and public buildings because of location, purpose or size should be given special attention in the form of building features, such as towers, cupolas, and pediments.

F.     The development of ground level view points and corridors as well as public balconies, and roof spaces which take advantage of solar access and views are encouraged.

G.    Minor pedestrian passages shall be provided between buildings where access is needed to allow pedestrians to move through the district to another area. Under no circumstances shall building mass exceed three hundred feet without some form of “through” pedestrian access. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.42.110 Waterford downtown, mixed-use, and transportation related building and structure design.
Development in the downtown area, as defined by the land use element of the Waterford general plan shall be designed in the following context:

A.    Building design should reflect historic downtown materials and building designs which were of a smaller scale, two-story designs with cornice lines or similar to downtown commercial uses. Corporate, private development and agency architecture will need to accommodate these historic values and assist in maintaining a small community feeling of the early 1900s.

B.     Sites or buildings abutting the new Waterford City Hall building and Government Center near Highway 132 should maintain a continuity in design elements of the building complex such as roof lines and materials, and connect existing or proposed pedestrian spaces and amenities and landscape treatments.

C.     Building facades along the “downtown” portions of “E” Bentley Streets should be pedestrian-oriented with the majority of the street wall being made up of windows and other interesting design features and businesses that are interactive retail should be promoted (i.e., artist studio and gallery, hands-on displays or merchandise, etc.).

D.    Public transportation and related facility designs should be compatible with local plans and regulations, and must be approved by the city. Bus stop design should address all transportation modes (bus, bicycle and vehicles), transfer needs and pedestrians. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.42.120 Building design.
A.    Architectural Details. The following architectural elements are required to provide visual interest and create a sense of human scale:

1.     Awnings, Sunshades and Canopies. Weather protection is encouraged for pedestrian street frontages with ground floor commercial. The minimum width of such elements shall be four feet. Minimum height is eight feet, maximum height is twelve feet. Awnings with painted signs are permitted, however, must be externally lit. Internally illuminated awnings are not permitted.

2.     Front Porches. Front porches, stoops, bay window and dormers are encouraged on buildings which contain residential dwellings.

3.     Trees, Plants and Flowers. The use of potted plants and flowers as well as street trees are encouraged, but should not impede pedestrian traffic.

4.     Street Furniture. Public seating, trash receptacles and informational directional kiosks should be of uniform design and be provided throughout district where needed. Sidewalk widths, street trees, landscaping, weather protection, public art, street furniture and other amenities for pedestrians in public rights-of-way and public plazas are required abutted by private development must provide an additional three feet to six feet for a total sidewalk width of no less than eight feet.

5.     Exterior Lighting. Pedestrian areas need to be well marked and well-lit. Exterior lighting should be an integral part of the architecture and landscape design. Street lighting should relate in scale to the pedestrian character of the area. Pedestrian lighting should be provided at a pedestrian scale of three to twelve feet, with the source light being shielded to reduce glare, thereby encouraging safe access to these areas twenty-four hours per day. Overall, lighting and pedestrian zone lighting is needed but should not create glare or light spillage off-site or beyond parking lots and streets.

B.     Building Fenestration.

1.     Façades. Any façade visible from a public right-of-way, pedestrian corridor or public open space should incorporate fenestration. Fenestration patterns for street level uses should have generous amounts of clear glass and be designed to incorporate displays. Glass curtain walls, reflective glass, and painted or dark tinted glass are not permitted.

2.     Blank Walls. Where windowless walls are necessitated by the uses housed within the building, they should have an interesting exterior treatment such as artwork, decorative tile, or masonry, or trellises with plant material. Blank walls visible from a public way, larger than ten feet in any dimension, which exceed two hundred square feet, must be screened by one of the above methods.

3.     Street Visibility. Upper and lower story windows are encouraged to overlook streets and open spaces, thereby helping to provide “community eyes” to make these spaces more comfortable and safe.

C.     Proportions. The scale of all structures in relationship to other structures and spaces is important. Buildings and the spaces between should relate easily and openly to the external public areas. To balance horizontal features on longer façades, vertical building elements, such as building entries should be emphasized.

D.    Modulation. Building façades visible from public rights-of-way, pedestrian corridors or public open space, except for ground floor commercial, shall be modulated approximately every forty feet. The modulation shall have a minimum depth of four feet.

E.     Articulation. Façades should be varied and articulated to provide visual interest to pedestrians. The roof line of buildings should be modulated and should include interesting architectural features, such as decorative eave, trim, or cornice. Window articulation through use of a decorative trim, such as window hoods and the use of smaller regularly spaced windows in upper stories with smaller divided lights. Store front designs and materials should be allowed to be unique while maintaining the character of the building façade of which they are a part. The base of buildings should be articulated through use of plinths, pilasters or other elements.

F.     Materials and Colors. Exterior building materials and finishes should convey an impression of permanence and durability. Materials such as masonry, stone, stucco, wood, terra cotta, and tile are encouraged. Where masonry is used for exterior finish, decorative patterns should be considered. These patterns could include a change in color or material. Exterior colors should be given careful consideration in the context of the surrounding buildings and environment.

G.    Screening.

1.     All wall-mounted mechanical, electrical, communication, and service equipment, including satellite dishes and vent pipes should be screened from public view by parapets, walls, fences, landscaping or other approved means.

2.     All rooftop and sidewall mechanical equipment and other extensions allowed above the building height shall be concealed by or integrated within the roof form or screened from view. The following appurtenances or necessary extensions above the roofline that require screening include: stair wells, elevator shafts, air conditioning units, large vents, heat pumps and mechanical equipment.

3.     Service and loading areas must be screened from street and pedestrian ways.

4.     Under no circumstances shall screening create an obstruction to pedestrian traffic flow in and around sidewalks, store and shop entrances or the entrance to residential clusters.

H.    Parks and Open Space. Mixed-use developments will provide twenty percent in parks and open space. Plazas, play areas, landscape buffers and open spaces (sensitive areas) can be included. Ten percent of the area will be in useable parks, plazas and play areas. Pedestrian and bicycle paths and connections are required within the development and shall be provided to the closest activity areas (i.e., schools, business area, park, major arterial, etc.). (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.42.130 Signage.
Signage in the mixed-use developments should be done to clearly relay information and should be appropriate scale to the buildings and should focus on the close-in nature of the slow vehicle and pedestrian traffic. Signage shall be consistent throughout mixed use planned area.

A.    Signage throughout the waterfront area should be consistent, while public transportation should have its own charter but which is complementary to signage for private development, other public transportation or facility design and to building character.

B.     Windows along a frontage street can have painted or etched lettering above seven feet as signage for the business.

C.     Where possible, signs should be an integral part of the building rather than an afterthought. Wall-mounted signs shall not project more than six inches from the building.

D.    Sign creativity is encouraged. Signs may be fabricated of mixed media, including metal reverse-illuminated letters, suspended neon letters, illuminated individual letters, signs etched or cutout of solid material such as wood or brass and illuminated from behind.

E.     Building mounted or wall signs for retail shops and commercial area will be located in the storefront area above the door height and below canopy (typically eight feet above floor).

F.     Signs shall be centered between architectural elements and between columns to allow building architecture to be expressed. Signs shall not necessarily be centered on lease premises.

G.    Signs shall be compatible in scale and proportion with building design and other signs.

H.    Signage shall be placed facing primary pedestrian streets.

I.      Overhanging, building mounted or blade signs which hang from the canopy, arcade or building front may be utilized to increase visibility. Overhanging signs shall not have an area of more than three square feet or exceed two inches in thickness. Overhanging signs area is not included in signage area allowed under the sign code. The bottom of the sign should not be lower than eight feet aboveground.

J.      Letter height shall not exceed eighteen inches. Larger first letters up to twenty-four inches will be permitted.

K.    Length of the signs shall not be more than two-thirds of the overall “leased” façade area or less than three feet from demising wall of lease premises. Each sign is calculated separately and shall conform to all applicable maximum area limitations. Calculated maximum areas are not transferable to other façades. Each tenant is allowed to place signage on no more than two façades.

L.     Awnings with signs painted on them are allowed, but the awnings can not be internally illuminated.

M.    Monument signs and wall signs can not be internally illuminated. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.42.140 Off-street parking, parking facilities, lots and structures.
Parking shall conform with the provisions of Chapter 17.54 unless otherwise prescribed below:

A.    Off-street parking in commercial areas shall either be behind or to the side of development with ground-floor retail along the street frontage. As an alternative, off-street parking may be allowed in front of the building where the development incorporates a mini-street design that includes angled parking, street trees, pedestrian sidewalks with connecting walkways to the public street, and decorative lighting. (See Figure 42-3)

Figure 42-3



Example of a Mixed-Use Development Incorporating a Mini-Street Design

 

B.     Shared or joint parking is encouraged so that parking needs generated by development can be accommodated efficiently.

C.     A minimum of curb cuts should be allowed along frontage streets for parking access in accordance with the requirements of the city engineer.

D.    Adjacent street frontage to a mixed use project can be counted on a one to one basis towards the parking requirement on streets that are improved and have designated parking.

E.     Residential units in the downtown business and mixed-use developments shall provide one parking space per unit. All other mixed-use developments shall provide one and one-half parking spaces per unit and one guest space per every four units. Parking for the commercial/retail/office space shall be determined using the parking standards of the city. Shared parking proposals are encouraged.

F.     Employee parking shall be provided on-site, or as part of a shared parking agreement.

G.    Joint or shared access, and off-street parking, internal circulation or parking is encouraged with adjacent uses and developments.

H.    A development can reduce the required off-street parking spaces up to fifty percent when it can be demonstrated, in a parking-traffic study, prepared by a traffic engineer, that use of public transit or demand management programs, special characteristics or customer, client, employee or resident population will reduce expected vehicle use and parking space demand for their development, as compared to standard Institute of Transportation Engineers vehicle trip generation rates and city parking requirements.

I.      Parking lots shall have internal landscaping as well as be screened from streets and pedestrian ways.

J.      Parking garages shall be screened to improve the pedestrian environment in mixed-use zones.

K.    Parking Facilities—Lots—Structures.

1.     Provide close-in (near bus stops) preferential parking for carpools and vanpools.

2.     Joint and shared parking are encouraged among retail, office, entertainment, housing, and parking uses.

3.     Bike racks and weatherproof lockers for bicycles should be provided near bus stop locations where practical.

4.     Well defined pedestrian walkways should be provided in parking lots from parking to building, or bus stop facilities. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.42.150 Landscape design.
Development in a mixed-use district should have extensive landscaping of large parking areas, along streetscapes and for pedestrian-oriented open spaces which can be seen from the street and pedestrian-oriented areas. Landscaping can also help to define areas and separate areas thereby bringing a human scale to these intense uses.

A.    Due to extreme summer heat, landscaping and shade of parking and community or public areas should be heavily landscaped with trees that will provide summer shade and cooling. Parking areas should have one tree per every four parking stalls or trees between every two to four ferry loading lanes.

B.     Parking areas must be screened from all pedestrian-oriented areas through the use of trees, scrubs, walls and/or trellis structures with plants.

C.     Parking lots should provide landscaping next to buildings and along walkways. Parking lots should provide enough trees so that fifty percent of the lot is shaded within a five-year period and landscape beds have a ninety percent ground coverage in five years.

D.    Arbors or trellises supporting living landscape materials should be considered for ornamentation on exterior walls. Any such feature should cover an area of at least one hundred square feet and include sufficient plantings to achieve at least thirty percent coverage by plant materials within three years.

E.     Where pedestrian activity is encouraged onto the site, the screening doesn’t have to be site obscuring.

F.     Utilities are required to be underground and aboveground equipment should be located away from major pedestrian streets and corners. Equipment boxes and vaults must be placed in back of the sidewalk and where landscaping can minimize or screen their impact. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.42.160 Pedestrian walkways.
A.    Where practical and the project is located in close proximity to the Tuolumne River Parkway or any of the city’s strip parks located on old canal alignments, interior mixed use walkways shall make a direct connection in accordance with city standards.

B.     Sidewalks along frontage streets should be a minimum of ten feet. Interior sidewalks in the mixed use development area should be no less than five feet. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

Chapter 17.44 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
17.44.010 Purpose.
The purpose of these performance standards is to ensure compatibility between land uses by setting limits, whether generic or quantitative, for dust, heat, electrical disturbances, fumes, vapors, odor, noise, lighting and so forth. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.44.020 Evidence of compliance.
The planning director shall require such evidence of ability to comply with performance standards as he or she deems necessary prior to issuance of a zoning permit. Where periodic testing is required, such test data shall be gathered by the owner of the subject property or holder of applicable permit and provided to the city as required at the sole cost and expense of the owner of the subject property or holder of applicable permit. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.44.030 Dust.
No urban land use shall create dust, dirt or mud, which leaves the boundaries of the project site. Implementation of the following measures shall help to reduce generation of dust, dirt or mud:

A.    Schedule all grading activities to ensure that repeated grading will not be necessary.

1.     If a construction site has been disturbed (cleared, graded or excavated) and is to remain inactive for a period of three or more months, it shall be seeded with an annual grass and watered until growth is evident. If after disturbing, the site is inactive for three or more months during the dry period (June to October), as an alternative to seeding, a soil binding dust palliative, such as Hemicellulose extract (wood molasses) solution, may be applied.

2.     If seeded, grass shall be mowed (not disked under) to a maximum height of four inches for fire control. Grasses do not need to be maintained in a green/growing condition. Mowing should occur before the grass dries out to avoid fires that may result from blades striking rocks.

B.     During clearing, grading, earth moving and other site preparation activities and all construction:

1.     Exposed earth surfaces shall be watered as needed, whenever needed, in order to prevent dust from leaving the project site on that phase of the project presently under development.

2.     Mud and dirt carried from the development onto adjacent roadways shall be cleaned up daily.

3.     Litter and debris shall be cleaned up daily to prevent it from leaving the project site and littering adjacent properties. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.44.040 Air contaminants.
All uses shall comply with rules, regulations, and standards of the San Joaquin Valley Unified Air Pollution Control District (SJVUAPCD). An applicant for a zoning permit or a use, activity, or process requiring SJVUAPCD approval of a permit to construct shall file a copy of the SJVUAPCD permit with the planning director. Any use, activity or process that requires SJVUAPCD approval of a permit to operate shall file a copy of such permit with the planning director within thirty days of its approval. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.44.050 Hazardous materials.
A.    Purpose. The following supplemental regulations are intended to ensure that the use, handling, storage and transport of hazardous substances comply with all applicable requirements of the California Health and Safety Code and that the city is notified of emergency response plans, unauthorized releases of hazardous substances, and any substantial changes in facilities or operations that could affect the public health, safety or welfare. It is not the intent of these regulations to impose additional restrictions on the management of hazardous wastes, which would be contrary to state law, but only to require reporting of information to the city that must be provided to other public agencies.

B.     Definitions. For purposes of this section, “hazardous substances” shall include all substances on the comprehensive master list of hazardous substances compiled and maintained by the California Department of Health Services pursuant to Section 25282 of the California Health and Safety Code.

C.     Permit Required. A use permit, in accordance with Chapter 17.75, shall be required for any new commercial, industrial, or institutional use, accessory use, or major addition or alteration to an existing use that involves the manufacture, storage, handling, transport, or processing of hazardous substances in sufficient quantities that would require permits as hazardous chemicals under the Uniform Fire Code adopted by the city, with the following exceptions:

1.     Underground storage of bulk flammable and combustible liquids is permitted, subject to the provisions of subsection E of this section; and

2.     Hazardous substances in container sizes of ten gallons or less stored or maintained for the purposes of retail or wholesale sales are exempt from these regulations. The planning director or the planning commission may request information on the procedures to be used to process, transport, and store hazardous substances in a safe manner prior to approval of a use permit.

D.    Hazardous Materials Release Response Plans. All businesses located in the city and required by Chapter 6.95 of the California Health and Safety Code to prepare hazardous materials release response plans shall submit copies of all such plans, including any corrected plans or revised plans, to the fire department at the same time these plans are submitted to the public agency administering these provisions of the California Health and Safety Code. These submittal requirements shall be a condition of approval of a zoning permit, issued in accordance with the provisions of this title, for (1) new development where space may be occupied by such a business, and (2) any alteration or addition to an existing building or structure occupied by a business subject to these provisions of the California Health and Safety Code.

E.     Underground Storage Tanks. Underground storage of hazardous substances shall comply with all applicable requirements of Chapter 6.7 of the California Health and Safety Code and Section 79.1113(a) of the Uniform Fire Code. Any business located in the city that uses underground storage tanks shall:

1.     Notify the city police department and fire department of any unauthorized release of hazardous substances immediately after the release has been detected. Such notification shall include the steps being taken to control the release; and

2.     Notify the fire chief of any proposed abandoning, closing or ceasing operation of an underground storage tank and the actions to be taken to dispose of any hazardous substances.

3.     These notification requirements shall be a condition of approval of a zoning permit for (a) new development that involves installation of underground tanks, and (b) any alteration or addition to an existing building or structure on a site where underground storage tanks exist.

F.     Aboveground Storage Tanks. Aboveground storage tanks for any flammable liquid shall be allowed only at refinery or bulk storage plant locations with the approval of the fire marshal. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.44.060 Combustibles and explosives.
The use, handling, storage, and transportation of combustibles and explosives shall comply with the provisions of the applicable fire codes. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.44.070 Radioactive materials.
The use, handling, storage, and transportation of radioactive materials shall comply with the provisions of the California Radiation Control Regulations (California Administrative Code, Title 17) and applicable Waterford public safety and fire prevention codes. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.44.080 Lighting.
Exterior lighting shall be designed and maintained in a manner so that glare and reflections are contained within the boundaries of the parcel, and shall be hooded and directed downward and away from adjoining properties and public rights-of-way. The use of blinking, flashing or unusually high intensity or bright lights shall not be allowed. All lighting fixtures shall be appropriate to the use they are serving, in scale, intensity and height. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.44.090 Glare.
A.    From Glass. Mirrored or highly reflective glass shall not cover more than twenty percent of a building surface visible from a street unless an applicant submits surface information demonstrating to the satisfaction of the planning director that use of such glass would not significantly increase glare visible from adjacent streets and property or pose a hazard for moving vehicles.

B.     From Outdoor Lighting. Parking lot lighting shall comply with Chapter 17.54. Site lighting shall be designed and installed to confine direct light rays to the site. Minimum illumination at ground level shall be 0.5 foot-candles, and shall not exceed 0.5 foot-candles in an R district. Security lighting in any district may be indirect or diffused, or shall be shielded or directed away from adjoining properties and public rights-of-way. Lighting for outdoor court or field games within three hundred feet of an R district shall require approval of a use permit. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.44.100 Noise.
Noise generated by mechanical equipment, buzzers, bells, loud speakers or other noise generating devices shall comply with the noise standards below at any boundary line of the parcel, except fire protection devices, burglar alarms and church bells shall conform to the standards contained within Chapter 8.22. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.44.110 Odor.
No use shall emit any offensive odor off site based on typical human reaction except normal odor associated with certain uses that are allowed in agricultural areas such as animal confinement facilities. The Stanislaus County Environmental Health Division shall be responsible for determining whether or not the off-site odor is offensive or causes a nuisance. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.44.120 Vibration.
No use shall create any disturbing ground vibration, based on typical human reaction beyond the boundaries of the site. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.44.130 Water pollution.
No person or use shall discharge liquids of any kind into a public or private sewage system, watercourse, body of water, or the ground, except in compliance with applicable regulations of the California Regional Water Quality Control Board (California Administrative Code, Title 23, Chapter 3 and California Water Code, Division 7). (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.44.140 Heat and humidity.
Uses, activities, and processes shall not produce any unreasonable, disturbing, or unnecessary emissions of heat or humidity, at the property line of the site on which they are situated, that cause material distress, discomfort, or injury to the average person. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.44.150 Electromagnetic interference.
Uses, activities and processes shall not cause electromagnetic interference with normal radio or television reception in R districts or mixed use district where “R” uses are permitted, or with the function of other electronic equipment beyond the property line of the site on which they are situated. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.44.160 Public safety.
Implement “Crime Prevention through Environmental Design” (CEPTED) principal in project design.

A.    Purpose. CEPTED design principals recognize that the physical environment can be manipulated to produce behavioral effects that will reduce the fear and incidence of crime while improving quality of life. Secondly, CEPTED principals provide a conceptual framework, derived from this insight, which serves to develop and ensure a better designed property. It is through the development of this design that crime and loss is kept to a minimum. That is because CPTED believes that crime and loss are byproducts of human functions that are not working properly.

B.     Strategy. There are three overlapping CPTED design strategies:

1.     “Natural surveillance” is a design strategy that is directed at keeping intruders under observation.

2.     “Natural access control” is a design strategy that is directed at decreasing crime opportunity. The primary thrust of an access control strategy is to deny access to a crime target and to create a perception of risk in offenders.

3.     “Territorial reinforcement” is an “umbrella” design strategy that realizes that physical design can create or extend a sphere of influence so that users of a property develop a sense of proprietorship over it. Territorial strategies will often embody natural surveillance and natural access control strategies.

C.     Implementation. CEPTED principals shall be implemented in the city of Waterford through the application of CEPTED design principles during the project architectural-design review process, as set forth in Chapter 17.52 and the implementation of the Waterford general plan policies and standards. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

Chapter 17.45 LANDSCAPING STANDARDS
17.45.010 Purpose and intent.
Landscaping and landscape plans are required for development proposed within the city of Waterford for the purpose of enhancing the visual environment of the city but also for the purpose of moderating the physical environment by creating non-reflective surfaces and providing shading of public areas and buildings and thereby enhancing the “livability” of the city. Landscaping also provides erosion control on sloped areas and provides dust control. A managed landscape area also limits the potential fire and creates buffers between use areas. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.45.020 Applicability.
A.    Whenever landscaping or a landscape plan is required by this code or a condition of any action authorized by this code, the following standards of planting and irrigation system design and landscape and irrigation specifications shall apply.

B.     Additional requirements of the WMC relating to landscaping requirements are set forth in:

1.     Section 17.42.140, Landscaping mixed use compatibility standards;

2.     Section 17.54.180, Landscaping in parking areas, and others.

C.     Landscape planning areas shall include all setback, yard and open areas that are not “hardscaped” or managed in a manner so as to prevent erosion, dust and creation of fire hazards in and around buildings on all development plans. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.45.030 Definitions.
A.    “Landscape area” shall mean the total area of the site not covered by buildings, parking lots, driveways, or streets, and shall include patios, plazas, sidewalks, hard-courts, swimming pools, spas, and parkway areas.

B.     “Turf” shall mean a single-bladed grass or sod.

C.     “Arable condition” shall mean returning the soil to an easily crumbled or loosely compacted condition down to minimum depth per planting material requirement, whereby the root structure of newly planted water conserving plant will be allowed to spread unimpeded. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.45.040 Landscape plan.
A.    Plan Preparation. It is required that a licensed landscape architect, landscape contractor, architect, engineer, certified designer, or other landscaper be employed in preparing the landscape and irrigation plans in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 15.46. In addition to plants, the use of structural elements like pools, fountains, raised planters, benches, and sun-shades are encouraged in the landscape plan.

B.     Plant Materials. The selection of plant materials should include both evergreen and deciduous trees, shrubs, and attractive erosion-preventing groundcover. It is required that at least ninety percent of the plants selected for use in non-turf areas be well-suited to the climate of the region and require minimal water once established in the landscape. Up to ten percent of the plants may be of a non-drought tolerant variety as long as they are grouped together and can be irrigated separately. Attention shall be given to appearance, height, spread, growth rate, moisture requirements, potential root damage, disease and pest susceptibility, climatic adaptability, soil type, slope, function, and degree of maintenance required.

C.     Plant Coverage. Plants shall be so spaced and sized that, when mature, they will fill the planter area. Although a reasonable number of growing seasons will be allowed for full plant coverage to develop, interim ground cover shall be provided during this period. Interim cover of surfacing materials shall consist of wool mulch or chips, or any other approved material. Mulches must be a minimum of three inches thick when used as an interim measure.

D.    Plant Maintenance. Underground automated irrigation systems shall be provided to assure efficient water use with a minimum of labor and water waste. Irrigation controllers must have multiple cycle capabilities. Plant material must be maintained in a healthy condition. Unhealthy plants shall be replaced. Planters shall be kept free of all weeds, debris, and trash.

E.     Planter Construction. All planter areas should have a permanent border to prevent cars and pedestrians from damaging plant materials. All planters constructed adjacent to buildings or structures shall be so designed to avoid irrigation water intrusion into or on that adjacent building structure. The minimum width of a planter bed shall be forty inches measured from the inside of curbing or acceptable permanent border.

F.     Compacted Soils. Prior to the planting of any materials the compacted soils within the planting area shall be returned to a friable condition. Friable condition shall mean returning the soil to an easily crumbled or loosely compacted condition down to a minimum depth per planting material requirements, whereby the root structure or newly planted material will be allowed to spread unimpeded. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.45.050 Standards of landscape design/implementation.
A.    Landscaping and open spaces shall be designed as an integral part of the overall site plan design. Landscaping and open spaces shall enhance the building design, enhance public views and spaces, provide buffers and transitions, provide for a balance of solar uses, and provide screening.

B.     Landscape design shall accent the overall design theme through the use of structures such as arbors and trellises which are appropriate to the particular architectural style of adjacent structures.

C.     Landscape areas shall utilize xeriscaping concepts which: minimize the amount of turf area, uses plant material that has a low water demand and uses a segmented irrigation system calibrated to the specific water demands of various turf, plant and tree groups as prescribed in Chapter 15.46.

D.    The following are common planting design concepts that shall be used whenever possible:

1.     Specimen trees used in informal grouping and rows at major focal points;

2.     Informal massing of colorful plantings;

3.     Landscaping shall be in scale with adjacent structures and be of appropriate size at maturity to accomplish its intended purpose;

4.     Trees shall be located throughout a parking lot and not simply at the ends of parking aisles;

5.     Tree, located within parking lot shall be deciduous and of a type and nature so as to provide fifty percent parking lot shading within ten years of planting;

6.     At maturity, trees should provide a shade canopy for all parking areas;

7.     Landscaping shall be protected from vehicular and pedestrian encroachment by raised planting surfaces, depressed walks, or the use of curbs;

8.     The use of vines and climbing plants on buildings, trellises, and perimeter garden walls is strongly encouraged;

9.     Plants in boxed, clay or wood containers shall be used for enhancement of sidewalk shops, plazas, and courtyards.

E.     Landscaping around the entire base of structures is recommended to soften the edge between the parking lot and the structure. This should be accented at entrances to provide focus.

F.     Berms, plantings, and low walls to screen parking areas from view of public rights-of-way while allowing filtered views of larger buildings beyond.

G.    Landscaping for commercial uses shall define entrances to buildings and parking lots, define the edges of various land uses, provide transition between neighboring properties (buffering), and provide screening for loading and equipment areas.

H.    Planting areas between walls and streets shall be landscaped with a hierarchy of plants in natural formations and groupings. Solid walls over three feet high shall receive vines when adjacent to public streets.

I.      All required building setbacks shall be incorporated into the landscape design, unless such areas are utilized in driveways and the like. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.45.060 Planting plan specifications.
A.    Three copies of the planting plan shall be submitted for a review and approval by the director of planning in accordance with the standards of landscape design set forth in this chapter.

B.     One copy of all building elevations and site grading plans or one copy of all building plans shall be submitted together with the landscape plan. The building elevation and site grading plans shall be in sufficient detail to permit determination of the location, width, and height of all doors and windows and roof overhangs on all proposed buildings within or adjacent to proposed landscape areas.

C.     The landscape plans shall be legible and drawn to a scale no smaller than one inch equals twenty feet. Maximum sheet size on all drawings shall be twenty-four inches by thirty-six inches (D size).

D.    The landscape plans shall indicate property lines, important dimension lines, setback lines, walls and fences, driveways, adjacent streets, outline of all structures and adjacent land uses.

E.     The landscape plans shall indicate planting details pre-emergent soil treatment rates and materials, and soil preparation. The result of soil tests for horticultural suitability, if any, shall be submitted with the landscape plan. Soils shall be prepared and/or amended as appropriate. At a minimum the acid/alkaline levels (pH) need to be indicated. A minimum of three inches of mulch shall be added in non-turf areas to the soil surface after planting. Plant types that are intolerant of mulch shall be excluded from this requirement. Sheet plastic and other nonporous material shall not be placed under mulch.

F.     The use of turf as a plant material will not be permitted in narrow planter areas (less than ten feet in width), in traffic median strips, parking strips, between curbs and sidewalks, on slopes that are in excess of three to one, or in non-activity areas. On slopes exceeding fifteen percent, a level buffer zone of eighteen inches is required between beamed turf areas and hardscape (i.e. streets, walkways, etc.).

G.    The landscape plans shall include a plant list giving the common and botanical names of plants to be used. This plant list shall be arranged in legend form with a key number assigned to each plant. On the plan, each plant shall be identified by a key number or other reference. The size of the plant, its spacing and the quantity to be used shall follow in the legend, as the following example illustrates.

 

 

No.

Botanical Name

Common Name

Size

Space

Quantity

1.

Campanula isophylla

Italian bellflower

Flat

6″

6

2.

Eucalyptus polyanthemos

Silver dollar gum

5 gallons

20′

10

3.

Pinus mugo mughus

Mugho pine

1 gallon

10′

14

4.

Ajuga reptans

Carpet bugle

Flat

6″

5

 

(Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.45.070 Irrigation plan specifications.
Three copies of the irrigation plans and related water conservation documentation as required in Chapter 15.46 shall be submitted for review and approval by the director of planning. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.45.080 Inspection.
Upon installation of landscaping and irrigation systems, the installer must contact the planning department and request an inspection. The planting and irrigation installation must conform to the approved plans before a certificate of occupancy will be issued by the chief building official. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.45.090 Maintenance.
Whenever landscaping or planting and irrigation system is required by the code, or as a condition of an action authorized by this code, the planting and irrigation system shall be maintained in accordance with the approved planting and irrigation plan. Maintenance includes removal of weeds, litter, or other debris and replacement of dead plant materials. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.45.100 Fees.
A landscaping and irrigation plan review fee shall be paid to the planning department. The amount of the fee will be set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.45.110 Model homes.
To promote landscape water conservation through education, all single-family residential developments with two or more model homes to be constructed by a developer, shall provide for landscaping of at least fifty percent of the models consistent with the requirements of this chapter.

A.    Signs. Each development with “water saving” model homes may provide information to potential buyers regarding the water saving design by means of a front yard sign up to four square feet in area. The sign should indicate that the model features a water saving planting and irrigation design and may list the designer and supplier of the plants.

B.     If the optional sign is not used or it does not provide details on the design, an interior display including a drawing, or combination of drawings, shall be displayed inside each “water saving” model which provides a schematic of the landscape. These drawings shall include a key identifying the common name of the plants used in the “water saving” model yards. A brochure with the same information may be distributed with the sales information to potential buyers to satisfy this requirement. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

Chapter 17.50 WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
17.50.010 Purpose.
This section is intended to establish development standards, in accordance with federal law and state rules and regulations, for antenna and wireless communication transmission (hereinafter called “wireless communication facilities”) that:

A.    Minimize the potential health, public safety and aesthetic impacts of such facilities on the community;

B.     Regulate the placement and design of wireless communication facilities so as to preserve the unique visual character of the community;

C.     Encourage the location of wireless communication facilities in industrial and commercial districts and generally discourage the location of such facilities in residential districts;

D.    Provide for the managed development of wireless communication facilities in a manner that reasonably accommodates the needs of citizens and wireless communication service providers;

E.     Locate such wireless communication facilities where they are least visible from public rights-of-way in the vicinity, while not burdening adjacent property owners with adverse visual impacts; and

F.     Protect landmark structures, historically significant structures, architecturally significant structures, landmark vistas or scenery, and view corridors from visually obtrusive wireless communication antennas and associated equipment. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.50.020 Exemptions.
Each exempt facility shall fully comply with other applicable requirements of the municipal code to the extent not specifically exempted in this subsection, including but not limited to adopted building, electrical, plumbing, mechanical, and fire codes. The following wireless communication facilities are exempt from the standards of this section, except as noted in subsection B of this section:

A.    Direct broadcast satellite antennas and multipoint distribution services antennas measuring one meter or less in diameter (or diagonal measurement); and

B.     Television broadcast system antennas designed to receive only television broadcast signals;

C.     Satellite earth station antennas designed to receive and/or transmit radio frequency signals directly to and/or from a satellite measuring two meters or less in diameter (or diagonal measurement);

D.    Amateur Radio Antennas. Antennas and antenna structures constructed by or for FCC-licensed amateur radio operators that comply with the following provisions:

1.     The antenna structure, when fully extended, measures thirty-five feet or less in height, and measures twenty-four inches or less in diameter or width,

2.     The antenna boom measures twenty feet or less in length and is three inches or less in diameter,

3.     No antenna element exceeds thirty-two feet in length or two inches in diameter or width, with the exception of mid-element tuning devices which shall not exceed six inches in diameter or width, and

4.     The turning radius of any antenna does not exceed twenty-six feet;

E.     Public communication facilities, including personal wireless services, used and maintained by the city, or any fire district, school district, hospital, ambulance service, governmental agency, or similar public or semipublic use;

F.     Private, noncommercial wireless communications facilities or systems contained entirely on-site for the purpose of serving the premises upon which the facility is located and having no potential visual, noise, thermal or radio frequency interference impacts to surrounding properties or the community;

G.    Replacement of duly permitted facilities or equipment of a minor nature that does not increase the number or height of antennas or significantly expand the size or capacity of the equipment cabinet or ancillary related equipment;

H.    Any facility specifically exempted from city regulation by the rules and regulations of the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) or the provisions of a permit issued by the California Public Utilities Commission. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.50.030 Criteria for exempt facilities.
The following location and design standards shall apply to all wireless communication facilities that are exempt per Section 17.50.020:

A.    An antenna may be installed on a lot in any zoning district.

B.     No facility shall be located in a front or street-side yard.

C.     No wireless communication facility may be located within ten feet of interior side and rear property lines; except if the antenna does not exceed six feet in height.

D.    No antenna may exceed fifteen feet, as measured from ground level immediately under the antenna to the highest point of the antenna or any appurtenance attached to it; however, the planning director may approve mounting an antenna on the rear half of a roof if no other feasible location exists, and all other applicable criteria of Section 17.50.030 are met. The justification for rooftop mounting shall be submitted with an application for a zoning permit. If the antenna is located on property owned by the city of Waterford, and used primarily for emergency services communications, the height of the antenna may be permitted up to one hundred sixty feet.

E.     The structural base of an antenna, including all bracing and appurtenances, but excluding the dish itself, shall be screened from public rights-of-way and adjoining properties by walls, fences, buildings, landscape, or combinations thereof not less than four feet high, so that the base and support structure are not visible from beyond the boundaries of the site at a height of six feet or below.

F.     All wires and/or cables necessary for operation of an antenna or reception of a signal shall be placed underground, except for wires or cables attached flush with the surface of a building or the structure of the antenna.

G.    Highly reflective surfaces shall not be permitted. All satellite dish antennas that are not screened shall be painted with as unobtrusive a color as possible.

H.    No more than one antenna shall be permitted per parcel unless approved by the planning director.

I.      No signage of any kind shall be posted or displayed on a wireless communication facility. (Ord. 2016-06 §1; Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.50.040 Permit required.
A use permit, in accordance with Chapter 17.75 shall be required for the installation of all wireless communication facilities in all districts. In addition, a design review permit shall be required per Chapter 17.52. Wireless communication facilities in planned community (PC) or specific plan (SP) zoning districts with residential uses shall be subject to the provisions of Section 17.50.080. All use permit applications shall include:

A.    A written definition of the area of service desired for coverage or capacity.

B.     Documentation showing that the proposed facility would provide the needed coverage or capacity.

C.     A map showing all technically feasible alternative sites from which the desired coverage could also be provided, along with an analysis of the feasibility of those alternative sites that compares visual impact with that of the proposed project. At a minimum, this analysis shall identify the location of all existing monopoles within a quarter mile of the proposed site, provide an explanation of why co-location has not been proposed at each of these sites, and assess the potential for building-mounted alternatives.

D.    Photo simulations of the proposed project.

E.     Written documentation demonstrating that emissions from the proposed wireless communications facility are within the limits set by the FCC.

F.     Design that proposes the smallest and least visible antennas possible that will reasonably accommodate the operator’s objectives. The applicant shall disclose which antennas and support structures were evaluated and the process used to select the antenna and support structure. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.50.050 Location criteria.
The following criteria shall apply to the siting and development of all new wireless communication facilities in order to mitigate any potential health, safety, urban design, neighborhood character or public access impacts:

A.    Antennas attached to a roof shall maintain a 1:1 ratio for equipment setback (for example, a ten-foot-high antenna requires a ten-foot setback from façade) unless an alternative placement would reduce visual impact; be treated or screened to match mechanical equipment, stairs, elevator towers, or other background features and be camouflaged so that the antennas are not visible from a public right-of-way; and not be mounted in direct line with significant view corridors.

B.     Facilities located within any “C” or “R” district shall not exceed a height of twelve feet above the maximum allowed height limit for the main building in the zoning district in which the facility is located.

C.     Facilities shall not reduce existing parking on the site below the zoning district parking requirement.

D.    When a monopole is adjacent to a residential use it must be set back from the nearest residential lot line a distance at least equal to its total height. In addition, it shall not exceed 1.5 feet in diameter at its base nor one foot at its top and the antennas shall not extend more than three feet from the center of the pole.

E.     Co-location shall occur whenever reasonably feasible and aesthetically desirable. In order to facilitate future collocation of antennas for other service providers, the conditions of approval shall prohibit the applicant from entering into an exclusive lease for the use of the site. Co-location shall be discouraged when it will increase visual impacts. Service providers are encouraged to co-locate with other facilities such as water tanks, light standards and other utility structures where the collocation is found to minimize the overall visual impact. Co-location of an antenna on a nonconforming structure shall not be considered to be an expansion of the nonconforming structure.

F.     Any service provider facilities that are developed on vacant sites shall be temporary. When such sites are developed, these facilities shall be removed. Such facilities may be replaced with building-mounted antennas or other types of appropriate facilities, subject to review and approval by the city in accordance with this section.

G.    Site location and development shall preserve the preexisting character of the surrounding buildings and land uses, the neighborhood and the zoning district as much as possible. Existing on-site vegetation shall be preserved or improved, and disturbance of the existing topography shall be minimized.

H.    In determining whether to grant or deny approval for a wireless communications facility, the planning commission may require more stringent standards than the development standards of this chapter. The planning commission may attach such conditions as it considers necessary to ensure visual and land use compatibility with the surroundings so as to avoid adverse effects on the health, safety, and welfare of the community’s residents, to protect existing vegetation, and to minimize the proliferation of such facilities. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.50.060 Design review standards.
All wireless communication facilities, including but not limited to, equipment, antennas, poles, dishes, cabinets, structures, towers or other appurtenances shall employ a design that minimizes the visual impact by making use of the following or similar techniques:

A.    The proposed facility shall be sited to be screened by existing development, topography or vegetation in such a way as to have the least visual impact possible taking into consideration all technically feasible alternatives.

B.     The materials, textures and colors of new or remodeled structures shall be visually compatible with the predominant materials. Facilities shall have a non-reflective finish and shall be painted and/or textured to match the exterior of the building or background.

C.     Mounting of facilities on the peaks of roofs or hilltops shall be avoided to the greatest extent possible and all other related equipment shall be screened or hidden from view. Additional new vegetation and its proper irrigation or other screening may be required as a condition of approval.

 

D.    Antennas mounted on architecturally significant structures or significant details of a building should be covered by appropriate casing manufactured to match existing architectural features found on a building. Where feasible, antennas shall be placed directly above, below or incorporated into vertical design elements.

E.     Equipment shelters or cabinets shall be placed underground to the greatest extent possible or screened from public view by using landscaping or materials and colors consistent with surrounding backdrop.

 

F.     All wireless communication facilities and associated equipment must be regularly maintained.

G.    Any exterior lighting shall be manually operated and used only during night maintenance or emergencies. The lighting shall be constructed, located, and oriented so that only the intended area is illuminated and off-site glare is eliminated.

H.    All towers and antenna support structures shall be constructed in accordance with engineered plans and specification as required and approved by the city engineer. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.50.070 Required findings.
To approve a use permit for a wireless communication facility, the planning commission must find that:

A.    The proposed location of the project and the conditions under which it would be operated and maintained will not be detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare of persons residing or working in the neighborhood or the general public, and will not be materially injurious to properties or improvements in the vicinity.

B.     Development of the proposed facility as conditioned will not significantly affect any designated visual resources, environmentally sensitive resources, community character resources; or, that there are no other environmentally equivalent and/or superior and technically feasible alternatives to the proposed wireless communications facility as conditioned (including alternative locations and/or designs) with less visual and/or other resource impacts, and that the proposed facility has been modified by conditions and/or project design to adequately minimize and mitigate its visual and other resource impacts.

C.     The proposed facility is in compliance with all FCC regulations.

D.    The proposed location and design of the project and the conditions under which it would be operated or maintained will be consistent with all elements of the Waterford general plan, other pertinent city ordinances and with any specific plan or overlay district that has been adopted for the area.

E.     The proposed project will complement and harmonize with the existing and proposed land uses in the vicinity and will be visually compatible with the physical design aspects including scale, height, materials, colors, and texture. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.50.080 Additional findings for wireless communication facilities in R districts.
Wireless communication facilities are allowed in R districts only if the planning commission finds, in addition to all items in subsection F of this section, that:

A.    In acknowledgement that an environmental determination has not been made regarding placement of a commercial facility in a residential zoning district, it has been disclosed in a required California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) evaluation for the project that environmental impacts associated with the facility were determined to be less than significant.

B.     The proposed antenna is located on a parcel with a nonresidential use.

C.     The proposed antenna is located either:

1.     More than thirty-five feet away from the nearest residential use; or at least one foot away from the nearest residential property line for every foot of monopole height, whichever is greater; or

2.     More than twenty feet away from the nearest residential property line if the proposed antenna is mounted on an existing utility structure within a utility corridor. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

Chapter 17.52 ARCHITECTURAL AND DESIGN REVIEW PROCEDURES
17.52.010 Intent.
It is the intent of this chapter to provide a method for reviewing architectural and site plan review applications as required in this title. This review requirement allows special appraisal of a project to determine if the uses have the potential to adversely affect other land uses, public safety transportation or facilities in the vicinity. The review of the application may result in conditions of approval necessary to eliminate or reduce to an acceptable level any potential adverse effects of a use. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.52.020 Applicability.
The regulations in this section shall apply in all zoning districts wherein architectural and site plan review is specified and shall be subject to the provisions of this title. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.52.030 Design review committee.
A design review committee, consisting of the planning director, public works director, a representative of the building department, police department and city manager, is created to carry out the duties hereinafter specified. All offices may choose to send a designee in their absence. The design review committee shall also serve as the environmental review committee to perform the required environmental impact assessment under the applicable provisions of city policy and the California Environmental Quality Act of 1970. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.52.040 Review authority—Powers and duties.
All architectural and site plan review applications shall be submitted in the format required by the planning department. The planning department shall, upon receipt of a complete application, consult the design review committee to complete the following tasks:

A.    The required environmental impact assessment under the applicable provisions of city policy as adopted by resolution pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act, as amended.

B.     To review the architectural and site plan for conformity with this title and the adopted design review standards. The design review committee may grant variations from the design standards whenever it is determined that the design standards impose a physical hardship which cannot be reasonably met. However, said variations shall not abridge any minimum standard or regulation imposed by the chapter. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.52.050 Application.
The applicant shall submit the following information to the planning department. Specific information may be omitted and added at the discretion of the planning department.

A.    Application form as required by the planning department.

B.     A fee as determined and set by resolution of the city council of the city of Waterford, amended from time to time.

C.     Location map indicating the subject parcel(s) and adjacent streets. This should include a reproduced county assessor’s parcel map showing project parcel and a three-hundred-foot boundary drawn from the perimeter of the project. The location map must show land uses within one hundred fifty feet of the project site boundaries.

D.    Written statement describing the project in detail and the reasons for the project, including the city’s potential benefits and costs.

E.     Site photographs clearly showing the view of, and from, the project.

F.     8.5 x 11-inch black and white reduction of each plan to be submitted.

G.    Site plan to include the following information:

1.     Name, address of recorded owner and name/firm preparing map, assessor’s parcel number, parcel dimensions and area in acres or square footage.

2.     Legal Boundaries, Rights-of-Way, Trails, Paths, Utility Poles and the Like. Show location and size of all public and private utilities.

3.     Topography. Show faults, flood zones and other areas susceptible to natural hazards, along with site slope.

4.     Grading. Preliminary grading plans clearly showing existing and proposed contours indicate building pad and finished elevations and retaining walls.

5.     Streets and Lots. Proposed street layout and lot design, off-street parking and loading areas.

6.     Public Areas. Schools, trails, parks, etc.

7.     Land Use. Show proposed land uses, including their general location and height of existing structure and trees within fifty feet of the property lines.

8.     Buildings. Include building outside dimensions, height, location and use. Delineate each residential unit or commercial shop and indicate unit type and size. Show trash enclosures, storage building and the like. Indicate setbacks and distance between buildings.

9.     Features. Building appurtenances and features, including balconies, decks, stairs and roof lines shown.

10.   Phasing. Show potential phasing limits of project. A statement should be submitted that provides the manner and phasing of the installation and maintenance of parking, lighting, landscaping, private grounds, streets, utilities and open space.

11.   Coverage. Tabulate the building, landscaping, open space and paving coverage.

H.    Landscaping Plan. A preliminary landscaping plan shall be submitted showing major landscape structures such as fences, walls, walks, pools, land trellises with dimensions, paving material designations and proposed planting plan. Approval of a preliminary landscaping plan will be subject to submittal of a final landscaping and automatic irrigation plan to be checked for conformance proper to issuance of a building permit.

I.      Building Elevations. Show all elevations with materials, colors and dimensions specified. A materials list and color palette board shall accompany the application. Show all lights and features such as storage spaces, mailboxes, air conditioning units, transformers and utility meters.

J.      Floor Plans. Show all exterior doors and windows, stairways, mechanical rooms and shared hallways.

K.    Signs. Submit the following information:

1.     Site plan showing the fully dimensioned location of all freestanding and wall signs. Include the length of all building frontage(s) onto public right-of-way.

2.     Fully dimensioned elevations showing sizes and locations of existing and proposed wall signs.

3.     Detailed drawings of all proposed signs indicating the type of lettering, color scheme, cabinet colors and material specifications.

4.     Inventory of all signs showing the sign type, description, size, height above finished grade and area of each sign in square feet.

L.     Cross-sections shall be submitted through the major axis of the project extending to the curb line on street sides and ten feet onto adjacent properties. Provide typical building sections showing wall, eave and façade. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.52.060 Application evaluation and findings.
The design review committee shall evaluate the architectural and site plan review application to establish whether or not the following findings, and such other findings that may be specified by state law, can be determined, based on the evidence and testimony presented, that:

A.    The proposed use is consistent with the general plan, is consistent with the intent and goals of the Waterford design guidelines and any applicable specific plans adopted by the city.

B.     The design or improvements of the proposed use is consistent with the general plan, is consistent with the intent and goals of the Waterford design guidelines and any applicable specific plans adopted by the city.

C.     The site is physically suitable for the type, density and intensity of the proposed use.

D.    The design or improvements of the proposed use are not likely to cause substantial environmental damage or substantially and unavoidably injure fish or wildlife or their habitat.

E.     The design of the proposed use is not likely to cause public health problems. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.52.070 Design review committee action.
The design review committee shall recommend approval or conditional approval of an architectural and site plan review application to the planning commission. In recommending conditional approval of an application, the committee may recommend requirements and conditions with respect to location and design as determined to be necessary to obtain conformity with this chapter and the adopted design standards. Upon design review committee recommendation for denial, the planning commission shall review the site plan and said recommendation for denial at its next regularly scheduled meeting. (Ord. 2016-05 §1; Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.52.080 Design review along Highway 132 (Yosemite Boulevard) and “F” Street (Oakdale-Waterford Highway).
It is the city of Waterford’s intent to preserve and enhance the key travel corridors through the city. In the achievement of this purpose, development along the Highway 132 (Yosemite Boulevard) and “F” Street (Oakdale-Waterford Highway) corridors through the city shall be subject to specific standards of review as follows:

A.    The Highway 132 (Yosemite Boulevard) and “F” Street (Oakdale-Waterford Highway) corridors, within the city of Waterford shall be designated as special design review (SDR) areas and subject to special standards of architectural and site plan review.

B.     Within an SDR, the storage of vehicles shall only be permitted behind screened outdoor storage areas or within structures outside of the view corridors of vehicles traveling along these roadways.

C.     There shall be no outdoor storage or display of used equipment, secondhand goods, boats, watercraft, junk or other used materials except new equipment or goods sold within a retail business unless stored within a structure or an enclosed area outside of the view corridors of vehicles traveling along these roadways.

D.    Uses such as automotive, boat/watercraft, motorcycle or other equipment repair shops are not permitted to locate, develop or maintain their business in such a manner as to distract from the visual or aesthetic quality of the neighborhood within which it is located.

E.     Contractor’s yards, equipment rental, storage facilities and similar businesses located within an SDR shall be planned and designed in such a manner that all storage and equipment parking is located outside the view corridor of the SDR area of concern. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.52.090 Design review along the Tuolumne River corridor.
A.    It is the city of Waterford’s intent to preserve and enhance the view corridor along the Tuolumne River as it passes through the city of Waterford through the application of specific standards of review as follows:

1.     The Tuolumne River corridor, within the city of Waterford shall be designated as special design review (SDR) area and subject to special standards of architectural and site plan review.

2.     Within an SDR, the storage of vehicles shall only be permitted behind screened outdoor storage areas or within structures outside of the view the river corridor of vehicles traveling along the river and the adjoining River Parkway.

3.     There shall be no outdoor storage or display of used equipment, secondhand goods, boats, watercraft, junk or other used materials unless stored within a structure or an enclosed area outside of the view the river corridor of vehicles traveling along the river and the adjoining River Parkway.

4.     Parking areas, roadways and buildings proposed to be located within, or adjacent to, the Tuolumne River corridor shall be landscaped in such a fashion as to complement the natural setting along this important resource area.

5.     In the review of all site plans the architectural review committee shall consider the impact of the proposal on the view corridor along the Tuolumne River.

B.     The architectural design review committee shall not approve any site plan that proposes development that is not consistent with the intent and purpose of this chapter.

C.     Within the SDR outside building materials shall be limited to wood, stucco, stone, or similar materials. No building or structure shall have a metal finish unless such finish simulates wood, stucco or stone. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.52.100 Implementation of crime prevention through environmental design (CPTED) standards.
A.    Review projects for conformance with and implementation of CPTED design strategies.

1.     “Natural surveillance” is a design strategy that is directed at keeping intruders under observation.

2.     “Natural access control” is a design strategy that is directed at decreasing crime opportunity. The primary thrust of an access control strategy is to deny access to a crime target and to create a perception of risk in offenders.

3.     “Territorial reinforcement” is an “umbrella” design strategy that realizes that physical design can create or extend a sphere of influence so that users of a property develop a sense of proprietorship over it. Territorial strategies will often embody natural surveillance and natural access control strategies.

B.     Natural Surveillance Design Standard.

1.     Design space to facilitate observation by increasing “visual permeability” i.e. the ability to see what is ahead and around. Measure the need for privacy and/or limited sightlines against the need for personal safety.

2.     Is this level responsive to the needs for observation? Place vulnerable activities, such as cash handling/child care and others, in places that can be naturally well-monitored. Develop potential for “eyes on the street” by strategically aligning windows, work stations and other activity generators towards these areas of “vulnerable activity.”

3.     Has the need for observation been carried consistently throughout the project? Take special care to ensure that each phase of the project enhances and complements natural surveillance opportunities created in the design phase. This is particularly critical with respect to the landscaping and lighting phases. As an example, multifamily houses can be strategically designed and placed to maximize observation to the entrance of the streets and the neighboring homes.

C.     Natural Access Control Design Standard.

1.     Does the design decrease criminal opportunity by effectively guiding and influencing movement? Provide for “eyes on the street” through the strategic placement of entrances, windows, etc. Direct normal access to observable areas and prevent access to unobservable areas. Design space to provide people with a sense of direction while giving them some natural indication as to where they are and are not allowed.

2.     Will safety be compromised by limiting access? Provide a limited number of access routes while allowing users some flexibility in movement.

3.     Does the design develop natural access control opportunities without considering their impact on natural surveillance? Take special care to ensure that natural access control opportunities enhance and complement natural surveillance objectives. As an example, multiple entrances into this parking lot can be replaced by a single, well observed entrance that includes a fence and control gate.

D.    Territorial Reinforcement Design Standard.

1.     Does the design act as a catalyst for natural surveillance and access control opportunities? Enhance the feeling of legitimate ownership by reinforcing existing natural surveillance and natural access control strategies with symbolic or psychological barriers. Accomplish this by demonstrating the transition between public, semi-public and private space so that unwanted intrusion elicits a protective response that offenders will perceive. This is often easily accomplished with the strategic use of bollards and signs.

2.     Does the design create ambiguous spaces? Minimize the creation of ambiguous spaces (a space is ambiguous when it lacks any sort of clue as to what it is for, and who it is for). Accomplish this by identifying potential “leftover spaces,” for instance landscape areas. Take some positive design action to develop this space so that users of the property take responsibility for it.

3.     Will the design create heavy or unreasonable maintenance demands? Design space to allow for its continued use and intended purpose. Create durable environments that limit the need for maintenance especially where it affects natural surveillance and access control. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.52.110 Appeals.
Any action taken by the committee and the planning commission in considering a site plan application may be appealed to the city council pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.75. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.52.120 Site plan issuance.
Upon expiration of the appeal period pursuant to Chapter 17.75, or upon final action relating to an appeal if filed, the director of planning or his/her designee shall advise the applicant in writing of the determination and include any applicable requirements and conditions. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.52.130 Site plan expiration.
A site plan shall become null and void if the architectural and site plan review has not been used for its intended purpose within one year from the date of the approval action. Upon written request filed by the applicant with the city prior to the expiration date, the expiration date may be extended by the planning director for an additional period of up to, but not exceeding, ninety days. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

Chapter 17.53 HOME OCCUPATIONS
17.53.010 Intent and purpose.
A.    It is the intent of the following criteria to reduce the impact of a home occupation within areas zoned for RS uses to the degree that its effects on the neighborhood are nearly indistinguishable from normal and usual residential activity.

B.     The purpose of establishing home occupation standards within the RS district of Waterford is to encourage the use of home office types of businesses where professional and technical specialists can work at home and, through the use of modern telecommunications technologies, telecommute to distant office or work centers or otherwise provide professional services within a home or living quarters that is not disruptive to the neighborhood within which it is located or create a nuisance. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.53.020 Permit required—Application, issuance, expiration.
A.    A home occupation shall be defined as an activity which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of a dwelling for residential purposes.

B.     A home occupation permit can only be issued by the planning director to a residence located within a residential (R) district and used for exclusive residential purposes. The residence must comply with all building code and public health and safety requirements of the city, county of Stanislaus and state of California as set forth in the uniform building, fire and other applicable codes.

C.     An application for a home occupation permit shall contain information deemed necessary by the planning director to ensure satisfactory compliance with required conditions for issuance of the permit.

D.    Home occupations shall be permitted only after a home occupation permit has been issued by the planning director and a business license secured from the city finance department. A home occupation which varies from the requirements and limitations of this section shall be required to obtain a conditional use permit from the planning commission.

E.     The home occupation permit shall be valid for one year and shall be renewed by the applicant each year prior to expiration. The director shall renew the permit upon determining that the home occupation complies with required conditions.

F.     In the event an enforcement action is sustained by the planning director, the permit shall not be renewed. In such cases a new permit shall be required. Subsequent applications for home occupation permit by the same applicant, who has been found in violation of conditions during the term of the past permit, shall be accompanied by triple the amount of fees previously required.

G.    Any person not satisfied with the decision of the planning director may appeal the decision in writing to the planning commission by paying the required appeal fee and submitting in written form the basis for the appeal. Upon receipt of the appeal the planning director shall set the matter for hearing and give notice in the time and manner provided by law. In deciding such appeal, the planning commission shall consider evidence in the record, including the report of the director and information supplied by the appellant. The decision of the planning commission shall be rendered within forty-five days of the receipt of any such appeal. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.53.030 Required conditions.
A.    A home occupation shall not change the residential character of either the dwelling or the surrounding neighborhood.

B.     A home occupation shall be conducted within a maximum of five hundred square feet or no more than fifty percent of the area within a single-family residence, and shall not be permitted in any required garage or parking area, accessory structure or within any yard space. Vehicles used in the performance of the home occupation can be parked within the required garage area.

C.     A home occupation shall be operated and maintained only by the full-time residents of the dwelling in which such home occupation occurs.

D.    No person, other than a resident of the dwelling shall be employed on-site, or report for work at the site, in the conduct of the home occupation. This prohibition applies also to independent contractors.

E.     The area where the home occupation is conducted shall have direct access to the interior of the residence.

F.     A home occupation shall not utilize mechanical or electrical equipment except that which is customary for purely domestic or hobby purposes.

G.    No home occupation shall be operated in such a manner as to cause offensive noise, vibration, smoke, or other particulate matter, odorous matter, heat, humidity, glare, electronic interference, or constitute a nuisance or safety hazard.

H.    No wholesale, jobbing or retail business shall be permitted unless it is conducted entirely by mail and/or telephone. No article will be sold or offered for sale on the premises.

I.      There shall be no outdoor storage of materials, supplies or equipment used to conduct a home occupation.

J.      A home occupation shall not be permitted to generate vehicular traffic, pedestrian traffic and parking beyond that normal to the zoning district in which it is located.

K.    Any vehicle used in conjunction with the home occupation and maintained, parked or stored at the residence where the home occupation is conducted, shall be of such a size that it can be parked within the garage of the residence and shall not be parked on the street at or near the residence.

L.     No sign, nameplate, or any other form of advertising, including advertising on a vehicle larger than two square feet on either side of the vehicle, shall be displayed on the premises in connection with any home occupation including any advertising on a vehicle, trailer or similar piece of equipment associated with the home occupation or the operator of the business that is stored in such a manner that it is visible from a neighboring property or public right-of-way.

M.    The address of the home occupation will not be advertised in any publication, not including business cards and letterheads.

N.    In no event shall a home occupation be interpreted to include an animal hospital or kennel; vehicle repair and/or body shop; manufacturing, including cabinet or wood shops; barber shop, beauty shop or other personal service establishment; business, dance, or music school; campground or RV park; contractor’s storage yard; medical, doctor or dentist office; fuel wood sales and/or processing; guest lodging; laundry; mortuary; outdoor sales or repair; private club; repair shop or service establishment; retail sales or on-site service business; restaurant or bar; video arcades or amusement centers.

O.    A home occupation may include individual music instruction and swimming lessons, taught by the resident of the home, when no more than two students are on the premises at any one time and this service activity does not create any noise that disturbs adjacent residences.

P.     A home occupation may include the growing of vegetables and green goods for sale at a farmer’s market or in accordance with other provisions of the WMC.

Q.    No use involving the storage, sale or use of any hazardous or explosive materials, beyond that normally found in a single-family residence, shall be allowed as a home occupation.

R.     The planning director may arrange for annual review of any home occupation and may conduct an on-site inspection as part of this review. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

Chapter 17.54 OFF-STREET PARKING
17.54.010 Specific purposes.
In addition to the general purposes listed in Section 17.01.020, the specific purposes of the off-street parking and loading regulations are to:

A.    Ensure that off-street parking and loading facilities are provided for new land uses and for major alterations and enlargements of existing uses in proportion to the need for such facilities created by each use.

B.     Establish parking standards for commercial uses consistent with need and with the feasibility of providing parking on specific commercial sites.

C.     Ensure that off-street parking and loading facilities are designed in a manner that will ensure efficiency, protect the public safety, and, where appropriate, insulate surrounding land uses from adverse impacts. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.54.020 Basic requirements for off-street parking and loading.
A.    When Required. At the time of initial occupancy of a site, construction of a structure, or major alteration or enlargement of a site or structure, off-street parking facilities and off-street loading facilities shall be provided in accord with the regulations prescribed in this chapter, except that for the purposes of these requirements, “major alteration or enlargement” shall mean a change of use or an addition that would increase the number of parking spaces or loading berths by not less than ten percent of the total number required prior to the alteration or enlargement.

B.     Nonconforming Parking or Loading. No existing use of land or structure shall be deemed to be nonconforming solely because of the lack of off-street parking or loading facilities required by this chapter; provided, that facilities being used for off-street parking and loading as of the date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this title shall not be reduced in number to less than that required by the provisions of this chapter.

C.     Spaces Required for Alteration or Enlargement. The number of parking spaces or loading berths required for an alteration or enlargement of an existing use or structure, or for a change of occupancy, shall be in addition to the number of spaces or berths existing prior to the alteration, enlargement, or change of occupancy unless the preexisting number is greater than the number prescribed in this chapter. In this case, the number of spaces or berths in excess of the prescribed minimum shall be counted in determining the required number of spaces or berths.

D.    Spaces Required for Multiple Uses. If more than one use is located on a site, the number of off-street parking spaces and loading berths to be provided shall be equal to the sum of the requirements prescribed for each use. If the gross floor area of individual uses on the same site is less than that for which a loading berth would be required by Table 54-1, but the aggregate gross floor area of all uses is greater than the minimum for which loading berths would be required, the aggregate gross floor area shall be used in determining the required number of loading berths.

E.     Joint Use. Off-street parking and loading facilities required by this chapter for any use shall not be considered as providing parking spaces or loading berths for any other use except where the provisions of Section 17.54.040, Collective provision of parking, apply or a joint facility exists. Such a facility shall contain not less than the total number of spaces or berths as determined individually, subject to the provisions of subsection G of this section, or fewer spaces may be permitted where adjoining uses on the same site have different hours of operation and the same parking spaces or loading berths can serve both without conflict. A determination of the extent, if any, to which joint use will achieve the purposes of this chapter shall be made by the planning director, who may require submission of survey data necessary to reach a decision.

F.     Location and Ownership. Parking in an “R” district required to serve a residential use shall be on the same site as the use served. Parking required to serve a nonresidential use may be on the same or a different site under the same or different ownership as the use served; provided that parking shall be within the following distances of the use served, measured from the near corner of the parking facility to the entrance of the use served via the shortest pedestrian route.

 

 

Customer/Visitor Spaces

Employee Spaces

200 feet

400 feet

 

Facilities for off-site parking shall be restricted to that use by a recorded deed, lease, or agreement for a minimum period of ten years from the date a zoning permit requiring the parking is issued; provided, that the planning director may lift the restriction upon finding that substitute parking facilities meeting the requirements of this chapter are provided. No use may be continued if the parking is removed unless substitute parking facilities are provided.

G.    “R” Districts. No off-site parking for a nonresidential use shall be permitted in an “R” district unless the nonresidential use served is permitted or conditionally permitted in the “R” district where the off-site facility is to be located.

H.    Reserved Parking Spaces for Multifamily Residential Uses. No more than one parking space shall be reserved for the exclusive use of an individual unit unless additional parking is provided above the amount required by this section. Such additional parking may be assigned for the exclusive use of an individual unit.

I.      Common Loading Facilities. The off-street loading facilities requirements of this chapter may be satisfied by the permanent allocation of the prescribed number of berths for each use in a common truck loading facility; provided that the total number of berths shall not be less than the sum of the individual requirements. As a requirement of approval, an attested copy of a contract between the parties concerned setting forth an agreement to joint use of the common truck loading facility shall be filed with the application for a zoning permit.

J.      Computation of Spaces Required. If, in the application of the requirements of this chapter, a fractional number is obtained, one parking space or loading berth shall be required for a fraction of one-half or more, and no space or berth shall be required for a fraction of less than one-half.

K.    Uses Smaller than Two Thousand Square Feet. Deviations from regular parking standards may be approved by the planning director for uses smaller than two thousand square feet. Circumstances which would warrant such consideration and possible approval include:

1.     A shared parking arrangement which meets the findings in Section 17.54.040.

2.     Submission of data substantiating that a particular use meets the findings in Section 17.54.060.

3.     Ample on-street parking.

4.     A reduction in the standard parking requirement would result in an on-site benefit such as preservation of heritage trees, substantial landscape screening, a unique structure, or other similar site attributes. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.54.030 Off-street parking and loading spaces required.
Independently accessible off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided in accord with the following Table 54-1. References to spaces per square foot are to be computed on the basis of gross floor area unless otherwise specified, and shall include allocations of shared restroom, halls and lobby area, but shall exclude area for vertical circulation, stairs or elevators. Where the use is undetermined, the planning director shall determine the probable use and the number of parking and loading spaces required. In order to make this determination, the planning director may require the submission of survey data from an applicant or collected at an applicant’s expense.

 

Table 54-1 Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces Required

 

Use Classification

Off-Street Parking Spaces

Group residential

1 per 2 beds; plus 1 per 100 sq. ft. used for assembly purposes

Live/work quarters

1 per unit

Multifamily Residential

 

Studio units

1.2 spaces per unit

One or two bedroom units

1.5 spaces per unit

Three or more bedrooms

2.0 spaces per unit

NOTE: At least one space per unit shall be covered

 

Residential care (limited)

1 per 3 beds

Single-family residential

2 including 1 covered/unit

Senior citizens’ housing

0.5 spaces per unit. (Also see §17.54.050)

Public and Semipublic

 

Cemetery

As specified by development permit

Clubs and lodges

1 per 100 sq. ft. used for assembly purposes

Conference and meeting facilities

1 per 100 sq. ft. used for assembly purposes or as specified by use permit

Convalescent facilities

1 per 3 patient beds

Cultural facilities

1 per 300 sq. ft.

Day care (general)

1 per 7 children; maximum enrollment based on maximum occupancy load

Detention facilities

As specified by development permit

Government offices

1 per 300 sq. ft.

Heliports

As specified by development permit

Hospitals

1 per 1.5 beds

Maintenance and service facilities

1 per 500 sq. ft.

Park and recreation facilities

As specified by development permit

Public safety facilities

As specified by development permit

Religious assembly

 

In a residential district

1 per 4 fixed seats, or 1 per 50 sq. ft. of seating area if there are no fixed seats

In a commercial district

1 per 8 fixed seats, or 1 per 100 sq. ft. of seating area if there are no fixed seats

Residential care (general)

1 per 3 beds; plus additional specified by use permit

Schools, public or private

As specified by permit

Utilities, major

As specified by permit

Commercial

 

Ambulance services

1 per 500 sq. ft.; plus 2 storage spaces

Animal sales and services

 

Animal boarding

1 per 400 sq. ft.

Animal grooming

1 per 400 sq. ft.

Animal hospitals

1 per 400 sq. ft.

Animals, retail sales

1 per 250 sq. ft.

Use Classification

Off-Street Parking Spaces

Artists’ studios

1 per 1,000 sq. ft.

Banks and savings and loans

1 per 250 sq. ft.

Drive-up service

Queue space for 5 cars per teller

Building materials and services

1 per 1,000 sq. ft. of lot area

Catering services

1 per 400 sq. ft.

Bowling alleys

3 per alley; plus 1 per 250 sq. ft. of public assembly and retail areas

Electronic game centers

1 per 400 sq. ft.

Tennis and racquetball clubs

4 per court

Theaters

1 per 5 fixed seats, or 1 per 35 sq. ft. of seating area if there are no fixed seats

Other commercial recreation and entertainment

As specified by use permit

Communications

1 per 500 sq. ft.

Eating and drinking establishments

1 per 4 fixed seats, or 1 per 50 sq. ft. of seating area if there are no fixed seats

Cocktail lounge

1 per 3 fixed seats or 1 per 50 sq. ft. of seating area if there are no fixed seats

With live entertainment

1 per 5 fixed seats, or 1 per 35 sq. ft. of seating area if there are no fixed seats; plus 1 per 35 sq. ft. of dance floor

With take-out service

3 per 100 sq. ft. of gross area; plus queue space for 5 cars for drive-up service

Food and beverage sales

1 per 200 sq. ft.

Funeral and interment services

1 per 35 sq. ft. of seating area

Horticulture (limited)

1 per 2 acres

Laboratories

1 per 500 sq. ft.

Maintenance and repair services

1 per 500 sq. ft.

Plant nurseries

1 per 1,000 sq. ft. of lot area for first 10,000 sq. ft., 1 per 5,000 sq. ft. thereafter; plus 1 per 250 sq. ft. of gross floor area

Offices, business and professional

1 per 300 sq. ft.

Offices, medical and dental

1 per 250 sq. ft.

Personal improvement services

1 per 250 sq. ft.

Dance or music studio

1 per 600 sq. ft.

Personal services

1 per 250 sq. ft.

Research and development services

1 per 400 sq. ft.

Retail sales not listed under another use classification

1 per 200 sq. ft. for less than 5,000 sq. ft.; 1 per 250 sq. ft. over 5,000 sq. ft.

Vehicle/Equipment Sales and Services

 

Automobile rentals

1 per 400 sq. ft.; plus 2 storage spaces

Automobile washing

1 per 200 sq. ft. of sales, office, or lounge area; plus queue for cars per washing station

Service stations

1 per 250 sq. ft. of floor area; plus 1 per service bay

Use Classification

Off-Street Parking Spaces

Service station with convenience store

1 per 250 sq. ft. of floor area; plus 1 per service bay

Vehicle/equipment repair

1 per 600 sq. ft. of service bay and storage area

Vehicle/equipment sales and rentals

1 per 1,000 sq. ft. of lot area

Vehicle storage

1 per 500 sq. ft.

Visitor accommodations

 

Bed and breakfast inns

1 per guest room; plus 2 spaces

Hotels and motels

1 per guest room; plus 1 per 50 sq. ft. of banquet seating area

Warehousing and storage (limited)

1 per 2,000 sq. ft.

Warehousing and storage (mini storage)

2 per office; plus 2 per caretaker’s residence; plus 1 per 10,000 sq. ft. of storage

Industrial

 

Industry (custom)

1 per 1,000 sq. ft.

Industry (general)

1 per 1,000 sq. ft.

Industry (limited)

1 per 750 sq. ft.

Industry (research and development)

1 per 500 sq. ft.

Wholesaling (distribution and storage)

1 per 1,500 sq. ft.

 

(Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.54.040 Collective provision of parking.
A.    Application. A use permit may be approved for the collective provision of parking serving more than one use of a site. The collective parking may be provided by the private acquisition and development of property or by a public agency in the manner specified by the use permit. A use permit application may include a request to waive all or some of the provisions of Section 17.54.020(D) through (G). The planning commission may approve such use permit if it finds:

1.     That the collective provision of parking and conditions of approval are in accord with the objectives of this title and the purposes of this chapter; and

2.     That the collective provision of parking and conditions of approval are consistent with the general plan and will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare of persons residing or working in or adjacent to the neighborhood of such use, nor detrimental to properties or improvements in the vicinity or to the general welfare of the city; and

3.     That the collective parking will comply with all conditions attached to the permit.

B.     Reduced Parking. A use permit for collective off-street parking may reduce the total number of spaces required by this chapter. Any applicant shall submit data substantiating a request for reduced parking requirements. A use permit may reduce the number of collective parking spaces required if the following additional findings are made:

1.     That parking demand will be less than the requirement in Table 54-1; and

2.     That the probable long-term occupancy of the building or structure, based on its design, will not generate additional parking demand.

C.     Special Conditions. In lieu of or in combination with all or a part of the parking provided under subsection A of this section, approval of the use permit may include conditions requiring the payment of fees, the participation in a future or existing parking district, and/or other mechanisms deemed appropriate by the city to promote the collective provision of parking. The replacement of parking space requirements by such in-lieu fees shall not be considered a reduction in parking or a reduction in the number of spaces required by this chapter. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.54.050 Increased parking in senior citizens’ housing developments.
The number of spaces required may be increased above the number specified in Table 54-1 for senior citizen housing developments; provided, that findings are made for each of the following:

A.    The extent of parking problems, if any, in the neighborhood;

B.     The probability that the prospective residents will have more than two vehicles per dwelling unit;

C.     The age and socioeconomic characteristics of prospective tenants;

D.    The ability to alleviate and correct unexpected parking problems resulting from the proposed development in the future; and

E.     The proximity of public transportation or the availability of a separate transportation system for the residents of the development.

Approval of reduced parking shall require that a covenant be recorded stipulating that all parking requirements of this title will be met in the event of a change in the use of the property. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.54.060 Reduced parking for other uses.
A.    A use permit may be approved reducing the number of spaces to less than the number specified in the schedules in Section 17.54.030; provided, that the following findings are made:

1.     The parking demand will be less than the requirement in Tables 54-1 and 54-2; and

2.     The probable long-term occupancy of the building or structure, based on its design, will not generate additional parking demand.

B.     In reaching a decision, the planning commission shall consider survey data submitted by an applicant or collected at the applicant’s request and expense. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.54.070 Parking spaces for the handicapped.
All parking facilities shall comply with the requirements of the California Administrative Code (Title 24, Part 2, Chapter 2-71) and with the sign requirements of the California Vehicle Code, Section 22507.8. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.54.080 Bicycle parking.
A.    Where Required. Bicycle parking spaces shall be provided as required by this section.

B.     Number Required.

1.     Bicycle spaces shall be provided in accordance with the following Table 54-2.

 

Table 54-2 Number of Bicycle Parking Spaces Required

 

Land Use or Location

Physical Location

Bicycle Capacity

City park

Adjacent to restrooms, picnic areas, fields and other attractions

8 bicycles per acre

School

Near office entrance with good visibility

8 bicycles per 40 students

Public facilities (city hall, libraries, community centers)

Near main entrance with good visibility

8 bicycles per location

Commercial, retail and industrial developments over 10,000 gross square feet

Near main entrance with good visibility

1 bicycle per 15 employees or 8 bicycles per 10,000 gross square feet

Shopping centers over 10,000 gross square feet

Near main entrance with good visibility

8 bicycles per 10,000 gross square feet

Commercial districts

Near main business entrance with good visibility not to obstruct auto or pedestrian movement

2 bicycles every 200 linear feet of walkway

Transit stops

Near stop or security

1 bicycle per 30 parking spaces

 

2.     All other commercial use classifications: five percent of the requirement for automobile parking spaces, except for the following classifications, which are exempt:

a.     Ambulance services;

b.     Animal boarding;

c.     Animal grooming;

d.     Catering services;

e.     Commercial filming;

f.      Horticulture, limited;

g.     Funeral and interment services;

h.     Swap meets, recurring;

i.      Vehicle/equipment sales and services (all classifications).

C.     Design Requirements. For each bicycle parking space required, a stationary object shall be provided to which a user can secure both wheels and the frame of a bicycle with a user-provided six-foot cable and lock. The stationary object may be either a freestanding bicycle rack or a wall-mounted bracket.

1.     The rack element (part of the rack that supports the bike) should keep the bike upright, supporting the frame in two places and allowing one or both wheels to be secured.

2.     Install racks so there is enough room between adjacent parked bicycles. If it becomes too difficult for a bicyclist to easily lock their bicycle, they may park elsewhere. A row of inverted “U” racks should be installed with fifteen inches minimum between racks.

3.     Empty racks should not pose a tripping hazard for visually impaired pedestrians. Position racks out of the walkway’s clear zone.

 



Diagram 17.54-1 Bicycle Parking Spaces Adjoining a Building

(The diagram is illustrative)

 

(Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.54.090 Parking space dimensions.
Required parking spaces shall have the following minimum dimensions as set forth in Table 54-3:

 

Table 54-3 Parking Space Dimensions

 

Use

Type of Space

Car (ft.)

Residential

In separate garage or carport housing 6 or fewer cars, or with door at rear of each space

9 x 19

Residential

In garage or carport housing more than 6 cars with access via aisle

9 x 18

Nonresidential

All spaces

9 x 18

All

Parallel spaces

8 x 22

 

(Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.54.100 Application of dimensional requirements.
A.    The planning director shall consider evidence presented by an applicant demonstrating lower ratios of customer demand and may adjust parking space size requirements accordingly for a specific use.

B.     Relation to Aisles.

1.     Each parking space adjoining a wall, column, or other obstruction higher than 0.5 feet shall be increased by one foot on each obstructed side; provided, that the increase may be reduced by 0.25 feet for each one foot of unobstructed distance from the edge of a required aisle, measured parallel to the depth of the parking space.

2.     An aisle providing access to a parking space perpendicular to the aisle shall extend two feet beyond the required width of the parking space.

C.     Vertical Clearance. Vertical clearance for parking spaces shall be seven feet, except that an entrance may be 6.67 feet and the front five feet of a parking space servicing a residential use may be 4.5 feet.

D.    Wheel Stops. All spaces shall have centerline wheel stops 2.5 feet from a fence or wall. When a parking space abuts a landscaped planter, the front two feet of the required length for a parking space may overhang the planter. When a parking space abuts a walkway, the front two feet of the required length of a parking space may overhang the walkway if the walkway is at least seven feet wide; otherwise the full length shall be provided, and a wheel stop shall be installed two feet from the walkway.

 



Diagram 17.54-2 Parking Spaces Adjoining an Obstruction

(The diagram is illustrative)

 

(Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.54.110 Aisle dimensions.
Aisle widths adjoining large-car spaces shall be as set forth in Table 54-4:

 

Table 54-4 Parking Aisle Dimensions

 

Increase in Parking

Minimum Aisle Width for Specified Parking Angle (ft.)

Space Width (ft.)

90°

75°

60°

45° or less

0.00

24

22

16

12

0.25

23

21

 

 

0.50

22

20

 

 

0.75

21

10

 

 

1.00 or more

20

 

 

 

 



Diagram 17.54-3 Parking Driving Aisle Width Requirements

(The diagram is illustrative)

 

Aisle widths adjoining small car spaces having a base width of 7.5 feet, except where increased by adjoining obstructions, shall be as follows:

 

Table 54-5 Minimum Aisle Width Required

Minimum Aisle Width for Specified Parking Angle (ft.)

 

90°

75°

60°

45° or less

20

17.4

14

11

 

(Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.54.120 Specific parking area design.
Where an applicant can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the planning director that variations on the dimensions otherwise required by this chapter are warranted, to accommodate tandem spaces, for example, a specific parking area design may be approved under the following limitations:

A.    The area affected by the specific design shall be for parking by persons employed on the site only. Visitor parking stalls shall meet the dimensions required, with variations permitted only for a valet parking program.

B.     The surface area available for parking shall not be less than would be required to accommodate the minimum required number of stalls for large and small cars, with reductions permitted only for tandem parking and valet parking programs. No use for which a tandem or valet parking program has been approved shall be continued if such a program is abandoned unless the parking area is reconfigured to provide the number of independently accessible spaces required by this chapter. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.54.130 Parking access from street.
Access to parking spaces, other than four or fewer spaces serving a residential use in an R district, shall not require backing across a street property line. An alley may be used as maneuvering space for access to off-street parking. All spaces in a parking facility shall be accessible without reentering a public right-of-way unless it is physically impossible to provide for such access. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.54.140 Driveway widths and clearances.
Driveways shall have the widths set forth in Table 54-6 plus a minimum of one foot additional clearance on each side of a vertical obstruction exceeding 0.5 foot in height.

 

Table 54-6 Driveway Widths and Clearances

 

A. Serving a residential use

6 or fewer spaces

8 ft.

 

7 or 25 spaces

12 ft.

 

26 or more spaces

12 ft. 1-way

 

 

20 ft. 2-way

B. Serving a nonresidential use

14 or fewer spaces

12 ft.

 

15 or more spaces

12 ft. 1-way

 

 

20 ft. 2-way

 

In addition, all driveways shall comply with the fire department’s standards for access roads and fire lanes. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.54.150 Driveways and intersections—Visibility.
Visibility of a driveway crossing a street property line shall not be blocked between a height of three and one-half feet and seven feet for a depth of five feet from the street property line as viewed from the edge of the right-of-way on either side of the driveway at a distance of fifty feet or at the nearest property line intersecting the street property line, whichever is less (see Diagram 17.54-4). For intersections, no structure, including but not limited to fences and gates, shall be maintained higher than three feet above grade within a triangular area bounded by the right-of-way lines and a diagonal line joining points on the right-of-way lines twenty-five feet back from the point of their intersections.

 



Diagram 17.54-4 Driveway Visibility

(The diagram is illustrative)

(Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.54.160 Parking area screening—Walls and fences.
A parking area for five or more cars serving a nonresidential use shall be screened from an adjoining R district, or a ground-floor residential use, by a solid concrete, solid wood, or masonry wall six feet in height, except that the height of a wall adjoining a required front yard in an R district shall be three feet. A carport or open parking area for five or more cars serving a residential use shall be screened from an adjoining lot in an R district, or a ground-floor residential use, by a solid wall or fence six feet in height, except that the height of a wall or fence adjoining a required front yard in an R district shall be three feet. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.54.170 Lighting.
Outdoor parking and loading area lighting shall not employ a light pole higher than eighteen feet in industrial districts, nor higher than twelve feet in other districts and conform to the standards of Sections 17.44.080 and 17.44.090(B). Parking lot light poles in industrial areas within one hundred feet of residentially zoned property shall be no higher than twelve feet, unless the light source will be blocked from adjacent residentially zoned properties. No light source shall create a cone of direct illumination greater than sixty degrees from a light source higher than six feet, and shall not directly shine onto an adjacent street or an adjacent lot. Minimum illumination at ground level shall be 0.5 foot-candles, and shall not exceed 0.5 foot-candles in an R district. No light source within a parking structure in an R district shall be visible from a public right-of-way adjoining an R district. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.54.180 Parking lot landscaping.
Parking lot landscaping shall be as prescribed by Chapter 17.45. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.54.190 Driveways and carports—Design and location in R districts.
The following provisions shall apply to driveways, garages, and carports in R districts, whether they are accessory structures or part of a principal structure:

A.    Driveways. Driveways shall be paved and shall have widths and clearances prescribed by Section 17.54.140, subject to the visibility requirements of Section 17.54.150.

B.     Carports. Carports shall be designed and located so that parked vehicles are not visible from a street, except that not more than two vehicles in a carport in a required rear yard may be visible from a street. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.54.200 Additional design standards for parking lots and structures.
Parking stalls shall be paved; parking lots shall have paving, drainage, concrete curbs, lighting, space marking, directional signs, litter collection containers, and queuing space for drive-in facilities or ticket-dispensing booths or machines. Maximum driveway grades shall be sixteen percent. Wheel stops shall only be permitted where parking spaces directly abut a wall or fence, with no intervening walkway or planter, or along a property line where no perimeter landscaping strip is required. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.54.210 Location and design of off-street loading spaces.
A.    Required spaces shall not be within a building, but shall be on the site of the use served or on an adjoining site. On a site adjoining an alley, a required loading space shall be accessible from the alley unless alternative access is approved by the planning director. A required loading space shall be accessible without backing a truck across a street property line unless the planning director determines that provision of turn-around space is infeasible and approves alternative access. An occupied loading space shall not prevent access to a required off-street parking space. A loading area shall not be located in a required yard.

B.     Except in a C or I district, a loading area visible from a street shall be screened on three sides by a fence, wall, or hedge at least six feet in height. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.54.220 “In-lieu-of” parking payments.
Off-street parking for properties where on-site parking is not practical or does not promote the type of development that the general plan encourages for the Waterford downtown area, and where in-lieu-of payments are a permitted alternative to on-site parking, parking requirements of this chapter may be met as follows:

A.    Within the area of the city of Waterford designated as the Waterford redevelopment area, on-site parking requirements may be met through the payment of in-lieu-parking fees.

B.     In-lieu-parking fees, paid to the city, shall be in an amount equal to the value of the required parking on a per parking place basis. From time to time the city council shall establish, by resolution, the value of the off-street parking facilities on a per parking place basis. Funds collected by the city from such payment of in-lieu-parking fees shall be deposited in a special fund and used only by the city to acquire and/or develop on-street or off-street parking and related facilities, in addition to maintenance and improvements to existing parking facilities which, in the determination of the city council, is necessary to meet the parking needs of the commercial/residential development in the Waterford redevelopment area.

C.     Such parking, as developed and maintained by this in-lieu-parking program, shall be available to the public and shall be in or near downtown Waterford commercial and residential development and enhance the economic vitality of the area.

D.    Funds paid to the city for in-lieu-parking shall not be refundable except as otherwise provided for by state law.

E.     All in-lieu-parking fee revenues shall be paid prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. In the case of a multi-tenant building, the fees shall be calculated based on and paid prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for each individual tenant space. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

Chapter 17.55 MOBILE FOOD SERVICE
17.55.010 Intent.
The city of Waterford declares that it is the policy and intent of the city and this chapter to declare a statement of policy to regulate mobile food vendors within an adjacent to the city of Waterford to preserve and enhance the business community of Waterford and promote public health and safety in a manner consistent with goals, policies and standards of the Waterford general plan. (Ord. 2019-07 §4; Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.55.020 Purpose.
The purpose of this section is to regulate mobile food service and sales within the city through a permitting process that ensures that such uses are operated at an appropriate location and in a manner that is safe and secure, and will not create adverse impacts to either the property on which they are located or to the immediate neighborhood so as to:

A.    Eliminate the blighting potential of allowing the random location of business take-out food businesses in the city along roadways and highways that create potential traffic hazards;

B.     Preserve the characteristics of the city’s commercial districts and promote uniform standards of appearance and service that promotes the established commercial areas of the city;

C.     Minimize the creation of litter and trash on city streets and within public areas from the illegal disposal of wrappings and scraps from take-out food sold by mobile food vendors. (Ord. 2019-07 §4; Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.55.030 Definitions.
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall be construed as hereafter set out, unless it shall be apparent from the context that they have a different meaning.

A.    “Mobile food vendor, service or sales unit” means any vehicle, or similar means that is propelled by an internal combustion engine or electric motor for the purposes of conveying food or providing food service. Does not include sidewalk vendor as defined by Senate Bill 946.

B.     “Hot food service” means a mobile food vendor service or sales unit selling to the consuming public a hot, cooked or warmed ready to eat food product that can be consumed on the location where the sale or service transaction is conducted.

C.     “Cold food service” means a mobile food vendor service or sales unit selling to the consuming public a cold, frozen or uncooked ready to eat food product, such as ice cream or candy, which can be consumed on the location where the sale or service transaction is conducted.

D.    “Mobile food delivery service” means any delivery truck, trailer or vehicle that is used to deliver prepackaged food to a restaurant, store, residence or that will be stored, consumed or resold through a duly permitted and licensed business operating within the city of Waterford. (Ord. 2019-07 §4; Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.55.040 Mobile vendors for food sales purposes prohibited—Exceptions.
It is unlawful for any person to occupy or use any mobile unit for selling any food product or service upon any street, alley, lane, highway, municipal off-street parking lot or other public place, or upon any lot, piece, parcel or tract of land within the city except as provided below:

A.    Within a lawfully established industrial zone where the mobile food is screened from adjacent properties or public roadways and is serving workers and employees of an established industrial facility and is not accessible to the general public.

B.     Within a lawfully established city-authorized public event, such as a street fair, farmers market, carnival, circus or similar event where the mobile food vendor is an owner or operator of a food service business licensed, in accordance with Chapter 5.06, to serve food within the city of Waterford. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.55.050 Mobile food service.
A.    It is unlawful for any owner, lessee, or occupant of any lot, piece, parcel, or tract of land within the city, whether for gain, hire, reward, gratuity or otherwise, to permit the same to be occupied or used by any mobile food service unit; provided, however, that the prohibition contained in this section shall not apply where a duly approved and valid mobile food service and sales permit has been issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

B.     Any person must obtain a mobile food service and sales permit, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, prior to operating a mobile food service and sales activity within the city. The approval shall be specific to a location and shall not be transferable to other locations or operators. An application for a permit shall be submitted for approval of a mobile food service and sales permit not less than fifteen days before the use is intended to begin.

1.     The application shall be on a form prescribed for that purpose, and shall include the written consent of the owner of the property on which the use is to be located and, if different, the business owner providing restroom facilities within two hundred feet as prescribed by the California Commercial Retail Food Code.

2.     If the mobile food vending unit is proposed to be located on public property, street or right-of-way, an approved encroachment permit, issued by the Waterford public works department must be approved prior to the application for a permit.

C.     Mobile food service and sales vendors may conduct business within the city of Waterford subject to first obtaining a permit in accordance with the following:

 

1.     An administrative permit, issued in accordance with Chapter 17.73 is required for any mobile vendor subject to the following:

a.     The mobile vendor is to be located within an “I” manufacturing zone.

b.     The mobile vendor is not located along or visible from either “F” Street (Oakdale Waterford Highway-Hickman Road) or Highway 132.

c.     The mobile vendor business site has direct street access, is not located on a public street or right-of-way and has sufficient off-street parking so as to not impact the neighborhood within which it is located.

2.     A temporary permit, issued in accordance with Chapter 17.74 by the city manager, where the mobile vendor will be permitted to temporarily locate within a C (commercial) zone or a P-F public facilities zone on or adjacent to a public street or right-of-way or on private or public property to conduct business and participate in a city of Waterford sanctioned special event such as a street fair, certified farmers market, carnival or similar activity subject to the following:

a.     The temporary mobile vendor is to be located within an I manufacturing zone.

b.     The mobile vendor business site has direct street access, is not located on a public street or right-of-way and has sufficient off-street parking so as to not impact the neighborhood within which it is located.

D.    A mobile food and service vendor shall be required to first obtain a business license to conduct business within the city of Waterford and shall comply with all applicable health, sanitation, and other applicable laws and regulations that apply to the business. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.55.060 Mobile food vendor exceptions.
The provisions of Section 17.55.040 shall not apply to:

A.    Mobile food vendors conducting business from a non-motorized vending unit providing “cold food service” and is duly licensed in accordance with Chapter 5.06.

B.     Any mobile food delivery service, operating in accordance within the requirements of Chapters 5.06 (Vendors) and 5.04 (Business License Tax). (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.55.070 Exemption for parking or storage on owned or leased premises.
Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the owner or operator of any mobile food service unit from parking or storing his or her mobile food service unit upon premises owned, leased or otherwise lawfully occupied or used by the owner provided:

A.    The mobile food service unit is located in an area where such vehicle storage is permitted or conditionally permitted in accordance with the requirements of this title;

B.     The mobile food service unit is not being used for sales or distribution of food products and is not otherwise occupied while in storage;

C.     The mobile food service unit is located within a structure, garage or otherwise screened from public view from adjacent properties or any street, highway or public road. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.55.080 General operating standards.
A.    Prior to the issuance of permit for a mobile food and service in the city of Waterford, the issuing authority shall review the proposed use in accordance with the following standards:

1.     The proposed location is on an improved property that is entirely paved and shall not interfere with the operation of any approved uses on the site;

2.     The site is adequate to support the operation of the mobile food service and sales activity and the mobile food service and sales activity will not adversely affect adjacent structures and uses, or the surrounding neighborhood;

3.     The proposed use will not adversely affect the circulation and flow of vehicular and pedestrian traffic in the immediate area;

4.     The proposed use will not create a demand for additional parking which cannot be met safely and efficiently in existing parking areas;

5.     The proposed use will not conflict with the terms or intent of any planned unit development permit or conditional use permit currently in effect on the property;

6.     The proposed use and location complies with all applicable requirements of the Waterford Municipal Code, the California Building and Fire Codes, and any other applicable local, regional, state or federal laws or regulations;

7.     The proposed use will not otherwise constitute a nuisance or be detrimental to the public welfare of the community;

8.     The vending area is within an area of the city where adequate parking, access, utilities, services are available; and

9.     The vendor vehicle shall not be permitted to operate, locate or travel in the city of Waterford in such a manner as to create a safety hazard to other motorized or non-motorized and pedestrian traffic within the city of Waterford.

B.     Conditions. In authorizing an application for a mobile food service and sales permit, the planning director shall include as conditions of approval, the following minimum provisions:

1.     The use shall conform to all applicable building, electrical, fire, plumbing, engineering, solid waste, wastewater, water quality, and environmental regulations and laws;

2.     No permanent structures may be constructed on the site to support the operation of the mobile food service and sales activity;

3.     No signs, balloons, or flags may be displayed off the site to promote the mobile food service and sales activity except those permanently affixed to the mobile food vehicle/trailer;

4.     No outdoor music, live or amplified, is permitted;

5.     Temporary canopies or tents less than one hundred twenty square feet may be erected but must be removed at the end of each business day;

6.     No more than two small tables seating up to a total of ten people may be permitted and must be removed at the end of each business day;

7.     Vehicle and temporary canopies or tents shall not be located closer than twenty feet to a building or structure;

8.     Vehicle and any temporary canopies or tents shall not be located on the same parcel, or closer than one hundred feet from the lot line of an adjacent parcel, on which a flammable, combustible, or liquid petroleum gas dispensing or storage container is located;

9.     Provisions for fire protection and fire vehicle access shall be made as prescribed by the fire marshal;

10.   The site shall be continuously maintained free of weeds, litter and debris;

11.   Within three days after ceasing operation of the mobile food service and sales at any location, the site shall be completely cleaned; all trash, debris, signs, sign supports, and temporary electrical service will be removed;

12.   An agreement for the use of properly operating restroom facilities within two hundred feet of the vehicle’s location shall be maintained at all times; and

13.   Any additional limitations or conditions as required by the planning director as conditions of approval.

C.     Fee. A fee shall be paid by the applicant to cover the costs of processing and administering the mobile food service and sales permit application. Such fee shall be set by city council resolution, and may be amended from time to time.

D.    Any mobile food service and sales permit shall be automatically suspended and may be revoked in the even that the operator violates any condition of approval of the permit or if the permit issued by the Stanislaus County environmental health department is suspended or revoked for any reason. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.55.090 Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of any police officer, the building official, the health officer and any other employee of the city designated by the city manager, in writing filed with the city clerk, to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The building official, community code enforcement official or any regularly appointed employee of the city so designated by the city manager is empowered to make arrests and issue citations pursuant to Sections 836.5 and 853.6 of the Penal Code of the state for violations of this chapter. As set forth in Chapter 17.80 (Enforcement), penalties under the administrative enforcement provisions of Chapter 1.17 of this code may be imposed in lieu of, but not in addition to, penalties imposed by the court for any single violation. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

Chapter 17.56 PRODUCE STANDS AND PRODUCE MARKETS
17.56.010 Purpose and intent.
A.    The purpose of these regulations is to provide workable, clearly stated land use regulations that allow farmers and growers in the city of Waterford to market their produce directly to local consumers, travelers and tourists.

B.     These regulations are intended to encourage the sale of farm produce and related goods that promote the sale of locally grown agricultural produce. However, these regulations are not intended to encourage the proliferation of traditional retail stores or convenience markets in non-commercial (R) residential, (AG) agricultural and similar districts of the city. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.56.020 General standards.
The following general standards shall apply to all produce stands and produce markets regulated by this chapter:

A.    A produce stand shall not exceed an area greater than six hundred square feet in size, including any outside display area, and sell only raw, unprocessed fruits, vegetables, nuts and other agricultural produce in their raw or natural state that is grown on the site where the stand is located.

B.     A produce market shall include a sales/display area not exceeding three thousand five hundred square feet in size, including any outside display area, and are primarily used to sell raw, unprocessed fruits, vegetables, nuts and other agricultural produce in their raw or natural state. Produce markets also may be used for limited sales of processed foods and non-food items.

C.     Retail Food Law. Produce markets and produce stands are subject to California Code regulating health and sanitation standards for retail food facilities. Retail food law shall be administered and enforced by the Stanislaus County department of environmental resources (DER), unless another agency is specifically identified by law. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.56.030 Produce market.
A.    One produce market per parcel may be allowed, subject to approval as set forth in this chapter. Applications submitted for review shall be on a form provided by the planning department.

B.     A produce market shall be allowed only if:

1.     It is located within the AG (agriculture) or C (commercial) zoning district subject to the rules, regulations and standards of the applicable district.

2.     When located in an AG district:

a.     It is accessory to agricultural production on the same parcel.

b.     At least twenty-five percent of the total area upon which the market is located is devoted to agricultural production.

c.     The entire parcel is owned or leased by the produce stand/market proprietor.

d.     The produce market and parking shall be set back from any public right-of-way in compliance with requirements of the AG district zoning. This yard or setback area shall be kept clear to provide unobstructed visibility for motorists.

e.     There shall be safe ingress and egress from the site as determined under review by the Stanislaus County public works department.

f.      Produce stands and produce markets may have a maximum of six double-faced free-standing signs and one attached sign, not to exceed twenty square feet on each face. No illuminated signs or off-site signs shall be allowed without specific approval of the planning commission. All signs shall be located outside public rights-of-way.

g.     A building permit issued by the Waterford city building department shall be required for all structures larger than one hundred twenty square feet or as required by Uniform Building Code.

h.     The point of origin of each commodity sold at the produce market, including the name of the farm and county where it was grown, shall be prominently displayed using legible lettering.

i.      Produce markets also may be subject to the laws and regulations administered by other city of Waterford departments including the building, public works department, and, as well as the requirements of other applicable agencies such as the Stanislaus County agricultural commissioner’s and department of environmental resources (DER), the California Department of Transportation (CALTRANS) and the California Department of Food and Agriculture (CDFA).

j.      No agricultural produce may be sold from a motorized vehicle.

k.     Permits granted in accordance with this chapter may include additional conditions regarding the construction, size, and use of the structure and/or operation.

l.      Driveway locations shall be approved by the appropriate jurisdiction. Access controls and driveway approaches may be required as needed to insure safety.

3.     Commercial produce markets may be permitted subject to the following standards and requirements:

a.     One off-street parking space shall be provided for each three hundred square feet of gross floor area, with a minimum of at least three parking spaces. Parking spaces shall comply with the standards and specifications contained in Chapter 17.54 and Waterford city improvement standards, including pavement and stripping, and shall not encroach upon any public rights-of-way or create a traffic hazard.

b.     A produce market shall be used to sell primarily raw, unprocessed fruits, vegetables, nuts and other agricultural produce in their raw or natural state.

c.     Up to twenty-five percent of the display area may be used for the display of pre-packaged, processed, non-potentially hazardous foods such as dried fruit, roasted and salted nuts, jams and jellies, and fruit pies. All processed foods are subject to any applicable retail food law and must be obtained from approved sources.

d.     Up to five percent of the display area may be used for sales of taxable items such as snack foods, craft items and promotional non-food items that advance the sale of agricultural products or educate the public about the agricultural industry.

e.     Except as otherwise provided herein, no taxable items, including but not limited to petroleum products, alcoholic beverages, tobacco or magazines, may be sold or dispensed at produce markets.

f.      Cold storage accessory to a produce market shall be located within or attached to the main structure. Cold storage shall be used only to store raw produce products and bottled water.

4.     When located in a C district a produce market will be subject to all rules, standards and requirements of the C district within which it is located including, but not limited to:

a.     Parking;

b.     Driveway location;

c.     Signage;

d.     Setback;

e.     Outdoor displays and sales, etc. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.56.040 Produce stands.
Produce stands are permitted within C, I, AG or RS districts subject to rules of and issuance and approval of a temporary use permit issued in accordance with Chapter 17.74 and subject to the following standards and requirements:

A.    One off-street parking space shall be provided for a produce stand in a manner that accommodates safe and reasonable vehicular access to the stand and does not create a hazard or public nuisance to normal vehicular traffic in the area or have an adverse impact on adjacent properties.

B.     A produce stand may sell only raw, unprocessed fruits, vegetables, nuts, and other agricultural produce in their raw or natural state produced on land that the produce stand proprietor controls. No other commodities may be sold from a produce stand.

C.     Produce stand structures not used for a period of one hundred twenty consecutive days shall be removed from the premises at the landowner’s expense or used in accordance with the regulations for the district in which it is located.

D.    Cold storage shall not be allowed in conjunction with a produce stand operation.

E.     Signs may only be placed in accordance with the sign rules applicable to the district within which the produce stand is located.

F.     A produce stand may located within the front yard setback area in back of the property line or sidewalk and does not create a visual obstruction to traffic and/or otherwise obstruct pedestrian traffic in the area. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

Chapter 17.57 MOBILE AND MANUFACTURED HOMES
17.57.010 Purpose.
Manufactured homes are part of the housing stock of the city of Waterford. It is the intent of the city to provide opportunities for the placement of manufactured homes in R districts and in manufactured home parks, and to ensure that such manufactured homes are designed and located so as to be harmonious within the context of the surrounding houses and neighborhood. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.57.020 Mobile and/or manufactured housing.
Manufactured housing, as defined by this title, shall be permitted within all residential zoning districts when the following findings can be made:

A.    All development standards, including, but not limited to, setbacks, off-street parking, lot coverage, density, height and minimum floor area requirements, of the applicable zoning district have been met.

B.     The proposed manufactured home has been certified by the state of California under the National Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 as amended.

C.     The proposed manufactured home will be installed on a permanent foundation approved by the building official.

D.    The proposed manufactured home complies with the minimum design standards for single-family residences in the development regulation, architectural and site plan review, Chapter 17.52. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.57.030 General requirements.
Manufactured homes may be used for residential purposes as follows:

A.    If such manufactured homes are located in an approved manufactured home park in conformity with the conditions imposed upon development and use of the manufactured home park; or

B.     If such manufactured homes are located in an R district; or

C.     If such manufactured homes have been approved by the planning director for a location in an OS district or an I district as caretaker housing.

D.    All manufactured home parks shall have a minimum lot area of four acres and may be allowed only through approval of a planned community (PC) or specific plan (SP) district under the provisions of Chapter 17.30 or 17.32. Manufactured homes also may be used for temporary uses, subject to the requirements of a temporary use permit issued under Chapter 17.74.

E.     Design Criteria. A manufactured home shall be compatible in design and appearance with structures in the vicinity and shall meet the following standards:

1.     It must be built on a permanent foundation approved by the building official.

2.     It must have been constructed within ten years of the date of application for a zoning permit, and must be certified under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974.

3.     The unit’s skirting must extend to the finished grade.

4.     Exterior siding must be compatible with adjacent structures and shiny or metallic finishes are prohibited.

5.     The roof must be of concrete or asphalt tile, shakes or shingles complying with the most recent editions of the Uniform Building Code fire rating approved in the city of Waterford.

6.     The roof must have eaves or overhangs of not less than one foot.

7.     Required covered parking shall be compatible with the manufactured home design and with other buildings in the area.

F.     Cancellation of State Registration. Whenever a manufactured home is installed on a permanent foundation, any registration of said manufactured home with the state of California shall be canceled, pursuant to state laws and regulations. Before any occupancy certificate may be issued for use of such a manufactured home, the owner shall provide to the building official satisfactory evidence showing that the state registration of the manufactured home has been or will, with certainty, be canceled; if the home is new and has never been registered with the state, the owner shall provide the building official with a statement to that effect from the dealer selling the home. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

Chapter 17.58 ALTERNATIVE ENERGY SYSTEMS
17.58.010 Purpose.
The conservation of energy and the development of alternative energy sources are primary goals of this nation, and the city council has adopted ordinances to encourage energy conservation in new development.

A.    It is now financially feasible and cost effective to provide for the installation of alternative energy systems in certain developments and for certain purposes.

B.     It is therefore the purpose of this chapter to establish requirements for the installation of alternative energy systems.

C.     As it is the policy of the city to encourage development of alternative energy systems, nothing contained in this title shall be interpreted to unreasonably restrict solar energy systems by significantly increasing the cost or decreasing the efficiency of such systems or prohibiting alternative energy systems of comparable cost and efficiency. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.58.020 Definitions.
A.    “Alternative energy system” means the application of any technology, the conservation of energy, or the use of solar, biomass, wind, geothermal, hydroelectricity under twenty-five megawatts, or any other source of energy, the efficient use of which will reduce the use of fossil and nuclear fuels.

B.     “On-grid” means a small wind energy or photo voltaic system that is connected to the public utility grid, where power in excess of the customer’s demand flows to the utility grid.

C.     “Passive thermal system” means a system which utilizes the structural elements of a building to provide for the collection, storage or distribution of heating or cooling. In semi-passive thermal systems such structural elements may be augmented by mechanical components.

D.    “SES” means a small energy system consisting of a small-scale energy generating system comprised of solar voltaic, solar hot water heating, or wind energy system (including blades or wind turbine, tower, ladder, associated controls) along with associated, conversion electronics and storage batteries used primarily for on-site energy consumption. An SES does not include use of an engine-driven electrical generating system.

E.     “Solar energy system” means the integrated use of equipment, including solar collectors, to collect and transform solar energy into thermal, chemical or electrical energy to transfer and distribute such energy for purposes of water heating, space heating or cooling and power generation. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.58.030 Restriction on use of electricity generated by an SES.
A.    An SES shall be used primarily to supply electrical power for on-site consumption, except that when a parcel on which an SES is installed also receives electrical power supplied by a utility company, excess electrical power generated by the SES and not presently needed for on-site use may be used by the utility company in exchange for a reduction in the cost of electrical power supplied by that company to the parcel for on-site use. Small energy systems utilizing wind energy conversion technology shall be regulated by Chapter 17.59.

B.     Excess electrical power generated by an SES, not needed for on-site use, may be sold provided that at least sixty-one percent of the electrical power generated each year is used for on-site consumption. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.58.040 Orientation of units.
To the greatest extent possible, all new subdivisions and lots therein, all dwelling units and all residential, public, commercial and industrial buildings and structures should be oriented in a southerly direction to promote the use of a solar energy system, and should be designed to promote passive thermal systems and alternative energy systems. To carry out the foregoing, lots and buildings shall be oriented with due consideration for local climate (including sun orientation), parcel configuration, contours, landscaping, cost and other design and improvement requirements contained in the general plan and this title. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.58.050 Solar easements.
A.    Developers of new residential subdivisions may dedicate easements for the purpose of assuring that each lot or dwelling unit shall have the right to receive sunlight across adjacent lots or units for use of a solar energy system. The easements may be contained in a declaration of restrictions for the subdivision which shall be recorded concurrently with the recordation of the final map or issuance of permits, whichever occurs first.

B.     The easements shall prohibit the casting of shadows by vegetation, structures, fixtures or any other object, except for utility wires and similar objects upon areas which have been designated for solar energy collectors pursuant to the approved development plan. The instrument creating the solar easement shall include a description of the dimensions of the easement expressed in measurable terms, such as vertical or horizontal angles measured in degrees, or the hours of the day on specified dates during which direct sunlight to the solar collector, device or structural design feature may not be obstructed, or a combination of these descriptions, as approved by the planning director and the city attorney.

C.     The planning director and the city attorney shall determine the form of the most appropriate legal description based upon the size and nature of the project, topography, existing vegetation, design of parcels and necessary specificity of legal description. Solar easements shall not reduce allowable densities or lot coverage requirements set forth in this title. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.58.060 Prohibition on casting of shadows.
In accordance with state law, no person owning or in control of property shall allow a tree or shrub to be placed, or, if placed, to grow on such property, subsequent to the installation of a solar collector on the property of another so as to cast a shadow greater than ten percent of the collector absorption area upon that solar collector surface on the property of another at any one time between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m.; provided that this section shall not apply to specific trees or shrubs which at the time of installation of a solar collector or during the remainder of that annual solar cycle cast a shadow upon that solar collector. Each and every violation of this section shall be an infraction punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars and shall be subject to abatement as a public nuisance in accordance with the provisions of Section 25983 of the Government Code and Sections 370 and 371 of the Penal Code. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.58.070 Approval by architectural review committee.
A.    The development plan for every building or structure submitted in accordance with Chapter 17.52 shall satisfy the requirements of this chapter. Any such development plan shall be reviewed and acted upon by the architectural review committee in accordance with and subject to all procedures, requirements, findings and considerations contained in Chapter 17.52.

B.     The development plan review board may require roof pitch and directional alignment of buildings for the placement of solar energy collecting devices. The development plan review board may by resolution specify a range of permissible roof pitches and directional alignments which will optimize efficiency of solar energy systems.

C.     To achieve the intent of this chapter, the architectural review committee in reviewing any development plan shall consider skylights, operable windows, thermal mass, landscaping, reduction of mechanical systems for lighting, heating, cooling and ventilation, and other design elements.

D.    Ground-mounted solar energy systems shall comply with building and setback regulations and shall be set back not less than five feet from the property line and no less than ten feet above the ground. A collector may be less than ten feet in height only if, in addition to the five-foot setback, the collector is set back three times the amount lowered.

E.     The architectural review committee may propose that the Waterford city planning commission and city council adopt standards and regulations to effectuate the purposes of this chapter. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

Chapter 17.59 WIND TURBINE ENERGY SYSTEMS
17.59.010 Purpose.
The city of Waterford finds that:

A.    Wind energy, in some locations in the city, is a renewable, and nonpolluting energy resource which, when converted to electricity, reduces dependence on nonrenewable energy resources and reduces air and water pollution that results from conventional sources; and

B.     Small wind energy systems enhance the reliability and power quality of the power grid, reduces peak power demands, increases in-state electricity generation, diversify the city energy supply portfolio, and makes the electric supply market more competitive by promoting a consumer choice. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.59.020 Definitions.
A.    “AWEA” means American Wind Energy Association.

B.     “FAA” means Federal Aviation Administration.

C.     “Guy wires” means a wire or cable used with tension to secure a small wind energy system, communications antenna or similar structure to the ground to support the tower structure.

D.    “Small wind energy system” means a small-scale energy generating system as defined in this section, and also consisting of a blade or wind turbine, tower, ladder, associated controls, and conversion electronics.

E.     “Small wind energy system tower” means the vertical component of a small wind energy system upon which the wind turbine or blades are mounted.

F.     “Tower height” means the height above grade of the fixed portion of the tower measured from the ground to the top of the tower, excluding the wind turbine, blades and wind-measuring devices.

G.    “Wind turbine” means a non-commercial small wind turbine consisting of a wind turbine generator and rotors, which has a rated capacity of not more than one hundred kilowatts (kW) and which converts kinetic energy in wind into mechanical energy. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.59.030 Permitted use.
A.    Small wind energy wind turbine system shall be permitted in any AG, RE and I district subject to certain rules and standards as set forth in this section.

B.     A conditional use permit, pursuant to Chapter 17.75, approved by the planning commission, shall be required for small wind energy systems that exceed the maximum allowable height limit within a district. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.59.040 Development standards.
Unless indicated otherwise, the following requirements and standards shall apply to small wind energy systems.

A.    Setback.

1.     The base of the tower shall be set back from all property lines, public rights of-way and public utility lines a distance equal to the height of the small wind energy system, including any blades or wind turbines as extended.

2.     No part of the small wind energy system blade shall extend within twenty feet of the ground, tree, public utility lines, or any other structure.

3.     No part of the small wind energy system shall be located within or over drainage, utility, or other established easements. Each system shall be set back from above-ground public communication or electrical line by a distance which is equivalent to the height of the wind turbine.

4.     All small wind energy system structures, including guy wire anchors, shall conform to setback requirements set for in the district in which they are erected.

B.     Sound Limitations. Sound produced by the small wind energy system shall not exceed sixty decibels as measured at the property line of the site upon which the system is erected.

C.     Signage. At least one sign shall be posted at the base of the tower warning of the electrical shock or high voltage. No brand names or advertising on the tower, rotor, generator, or tail vane shall be visible from the ground.

D.    Lighting. No illumination of the small wind energy system or tower shall be allowed unless required by the Federal Aviation Administration. All required lighting shall be shielded from adjacent properties, and no other lights shall be placed upon the tower.

E.     Electromagnetic Interference. The small wind energy system shall be operated in such a manner that no disruptive electromagnetic interference is caused. If it can be determined that the small wind energy system is causing harmful interference, the operator shall properly mitigate the interference.

F.     Rotor Safety/Speed Controls.

1.     Each small wind energy system must be equipped with both manual and automatic controls to limit the rotational speed of the blade below the design limits of the rotor.

2.     An on-grid small wind energy system shall be designed to shut off within forty-eight hours from the time the on-grid connection is lost and/or the batteries of the system are fully charged.

3.     A licensed engineer or architect must certify that the rotor and over sped controls have been designed and fabricated for the proposed use in accordance with good engineering practices.

G.    Drawings to scale of the entire small wind energy system structure, including location and elevation of all elements of the proposed small wind energy system, including the tower, base, wind turbine, blade, footing, guy wires, and all other elements of the system. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.59.050 Application.
An application for a conditional use permit for a small wind energy system when required by Chapter 17.75 shall include the following:

A.    Engineered drawings to scale of the entire small wind energy system structure, including the tower, base, wind turbine, blade, footings, guy wires, and other elements of the system;

B.     Location and elevation of all elements of the proposed small wind energy system in relation to trees, structures, utilities, public rights-of-way, and easements; and

C.     Evidence, satisfactory to the planning director, that the proposed small wind energy system meets the following standards:

1.     The small wind energy system generator is certified by a qualified licensed engineer as meeting the requirements of wind turbines-specific safety and/or performance standards adopted by the national or international standards setting body such as the American Wind Energy Association.

2.     The small wind energy system has a manufacturer’s warranty with at least five years remaining from the date of the application.

3.     Documentation evidencing that the small wind energy system shall be used primarily to reduce onsite consumption of electricity.

4.     Where an on-grid system is proposed, the application shall include evidence that the electric utility service provider, which serves the proposed site, has been informed to the intent to install a customer-owned small wind energy system. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.59.060 Abandonment.
A.    If a small wind energy system is inoperable for six consecutive months, the owner shall be notified that the system must be restored to operating condition with six months of receiving the notice.

B.     If the owner fails to restore the system to operating condition within six months from notification, the owner shall be required, at the owner’s expense, to remove the entire small wind energy system from the site upon which it is located.

C.     Should the owner of the small wind energy system fail to properly dispose of the inoperable system, the planning director may pursue enforcement as provided by this code and have the system removed at the owner’s expense. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

Chapter 17.60 SIGNS
17.60.010 Intent.
The location, height, size and illumination of signs are regulated in order to maintain the attractiveness and orderliness of the appearance; to protect business sites from loss of prominence resulting from excessive signs on nearby sites; and to protect the public safety and welfare. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.60.020 Definitions.
For the purpose of these sign regulations, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

A.    “Area of a sign” means the entire area within a single continuous perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of all elements such as boards or frames, perforated or solid backgrounds, ornamental embellishments, writings, representations, emblems or any figures or similar characters, including any spires, masts, shafts or similar projections, but excluding the necessary supports or uprights on which such sign is placed. Where a sign has two or more faces, the area of all faces shall be included in determining the area of the sign, except where two faces are placed back to back and are at no point more than two feet from one another. The area of the sign shall be taken as the area of one face if the two faces are of equal area or as the area of the larger face if the two faces are of unequal area.

B.     “A-frame sign” is a freestanding sign usually hinged at the top, or attached in a similar manner, and widening at the bottom to form a shape similar to the letter “A.” Such signs are usually designed to be portable; hence they are not considered permanent signs. See Section 17.60.160, Signs in commercial districts.

C.     Banner, Flag, Pennant or Balloon. Any cloth, plastic, paper or similar material used for advertising purposes attached to any structure, staff, pole, line, framing or vehicle, including captive balloons and inflatable signs but not including official flags of the United States, the state of California and other states of the nation, counties, municipalities, official flags of foreign nations and nationally or internationally recognized organizations.

D.    “Bench sign” means a bench located outdoors with advertising matter thereon.

E.     “Bulletin board” means a sign used to announce a coming event or attraction or used to convey a specific message related to the building or use of the property on which the bulletin board is located. In all zones, bulletin boards that are displayed so as to be viewed from a public street, highway, parking lot, walkway or mall shall be subject to the sign regulations of the zone in which the building or property is located.

F.     “Canopy” means a shelter, which may or may not be attached to a building and which does not encroach into nor overhang a public street or alley right-of-way.

G.    “Canopy sign” means a sign attached to or affixed to or hung from a canopy but not projecting from the face of the canopy. A canopy sign shall be parallel to the face of a canopy except for a sign hung under a canopy. If the canopy has a roof slope flatter than forty-five degrees (one horizontal to one vertical), no sign shall project above the face of the canopy. If the canopy has a slope of forty-five degrees or steeper, a canopy sign shall not project above the highest point of the canopy roof behind the sign.

H.    “Construction sign” means a sign with the names of the architects, engineers, contractors, subcontractors and financing agencies of buildings and structures being constructed upon the premises on which the sign is located. See Section 17.60.140(C)(3), Special purpose signs.

I.      “Corporate flag” means a flag identifying a business or firm.

J.      “Directional sign” means one or two types of signs. An exterior directional sign shall mean a sign oriented to a street and used to direct and control pedestrian or vehicular traffic and located on the same lot or premises as the use which it is intended to serve. An interior directional sign shall mean a directional, warning or informational sign not bearing any advertising message readable from any street right-of-way. It shall be located on the same lot or premises as the use which it is intended to serve. See Sections 17.60.130, Exempt signs, and 17.60.140, Special purpose signs.

K.    “Electronic message board sign” means a sign capable of displaying words, symbols, figures, or images that can electronically or mechanically be changed by remote or automatic means.

L.     “For sale or rent sign” means a sign advertising that the subject building or real property or portion thereof is for sale, rent or lease. See Section 17.60.140(C)(1), Special purpose signs.

M.    “Freestanding sign” means a sign detached from any building or structure, and the supports of which are permanently affixed in the ground. See Sections 17.60.150, Signs in residential districts; 17.60.160, Signs in commercial districts; 17.60.170, Signs in industrial districts; and 17.60.190, Temporary signs.

N.    “Garage sale sign” means a sign which is used to advertise the sale of used or secondhand merchandise at dwellings and on residentially zoned property; such sales are also commonly known as patio sales, yard sales, etc.

O.    “Height” means the vertical distance from the highest point of the sign.

P.     “Identification sign” means any sign which is used to identify or advertises the occupant of a building, lot or premises or the merchandise or activity available at the building, lot or premises where the sign is located.

Q.    “Lighted sign” means any sign which is illuminated whether directly or indirectly by artificial light. See Sections 17.60.040, Illuminated signs; 17.60.050, Motion or simulated motion restricted; and 17.60.100, Prohibited signs.

R.     “Marquee” is a permanent roofed structure attached to and supported by a building and projecting over public property.

S.     “Marquee sign” means a sign attached to or hung from a marquee but not projecting from the face of the marquee or above the top of the ridgeline of the building. “Marquee sign” also means a sign similarly mounted on any other roof structure that overhangs into public property.

T.     “Memorial plaque” is a flat plate or disk that is ornamented or engraved for mounting as a wall decoration to serve as a remembrance of a person or event normally imbedded into the wall and made of an incombustible material. See Section 17.60.130.

U.    “Monument sign” is a specific type of ground sign supported from grade to the bottom of the sign with the appearance of having a solid base. These signs are generally located at the primary entry points to a project, and identify the name of center or group of buildings rather than that of an individual tenant.

V.    “Multiple-family housing project sign” means a sign identifying the name of a multiple-family housing project and located within the boundaries of a multiple-family project.

W.    “Open house directional sign” means a sign with the words “open house” and may include an arrow or other directional symbol and real estate office name.

X.    “Outdoor advertising sign or billboard” is any sign advertising an establishment, merchandise, service or entertainment which is not sold, produced, manufactured or offered at the property on which the sign is located. See Section 17.60.100(K), Prohibited signs.

Y.    “Political sign” means any impermanent sign or advertising device or display, with or without letters, words, numbers or figures thereon, which is designed to advertise a candidate for political office, a political party or a measure scheduled for an election. See Section 17.60.140(B), Special purpose signs.

Z.     “Portable sign” is any sign not permanently attached to the ground or other permanent structure, or a sign designed to be transported. See Sections 17.60.100(F), Prohibited signs and 17.60.160, Signs in commercial districts.

AA.  “Principal frontage” means that wall of a building or structure which has frontage on a public street, highway, parking lot walkway or mall, and which is designated by the owner or occupant thereof as the principal frontage of the building or structure for the purpose of Section 17.60.160 of these regulations.

BB.  “Projecting sign” means any of the following:

1.     Any sign attached to and projecting from the face of a wall, canopy or marquee;

2.     Any sign mounted on a canopy roof or building roof that has a slope flatter than a forty-five degree angle (one horizontal to one vertical).

CC.  “Ridgeline” means the peak of the roof, the top of a parapet, or the top of the wall of a building.

DD.  “Seasonal signs” means holiday greetings, decorations and displays such as those which relate to Christmas, Halloween and the like, excluding advertising signs disguised as seasonal decorations. See Section 17.60.190, Temporary signs.

EE.   “Shopping center sign” means a grouping or cluster of tenants on a single property comprised of one thousand square feet or more of retail sales area.

FF.   “Sign” means any structure, device, letter, figure, character, poster, picture, trademark or reading matter which is used or designated to announce, declare, demonstrate, display or otherwise identify or advertise or attract the attention of the public.

GG.  “Subdivision sign” means a sign indicating the name of a recorded subdivision, the name of the contractor or subdivider, the name of the owner or agent and/or giving information regarding directions, price and/or terms. See Section 17.60.140(C)(4) through (6), Special purpose signs.

HH.  “Subdivision directional sign” means a sign indicating the name of a recorded subdivision and information regarding location. The name of the contractor or subdivider, the name of the owner or agent and/or information regarding price and/or terms may also be noted. See Section 17.60.140(C)(4) through (6), Special purpose signs.

II.     “Temporary sign” means any banner, pennant, valance, balloon, streamer, placard or similar impermanent or advertising device or display with or without letters, words, numbers or figures thereon which directs, promotes service or price, or which is otherwise designed to attract attention. See Section 17.60.190, Temporary signs.

JJ.    “Wall” means any wall or element of a wall or any member or group of members which defines the exterior boundaries or courts of a building or structure and which has a slope steeper than one horizontal to two vertical, with the horizontal.

KK.  “Wall sign” means any sign painted on, attached to or erected against the wall of a building or structure with the exposed face of the sign in a place approximately parallel to the plane of the wall and which does not project beyond the tip or ends of the wall.

LL.   “Window sign” means any sign temporarily displayed on the inside of a window or temporarily painted on a window and facing a street, highway, parking lot, walkway or mall. See Section 17.60.130(E), Exempt signs.

MM. “Zone” means one of the various classes, districts or areas into which the city has been divided by this title. (Ord. 2018-04 §1; Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.60.030 Safety.
All signs shall in no way endanger the health and safety by causing distraction to operators of motor vehicles on the streets and highways. Location, lighting and color of sign shall not cause confusion with public signs and traffic signals. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.60.040 Illuminated signs.
Any illuminated sign or lighting device shall employ lights emitting a light of constant intensity, which includes deflected lighting. No sign shall be illuminated by or contain flashing, intermittent, rotating or moving light or lights. In no event shall an illuminated sign or lighting device be so placed or directed so as to permit the beams and illumination there from to be directed or beamed upon a public street, highway, sidewalk or adjacent premises so as to cause glare or reflection that may constitute a traffic hazard or nuisance. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.60.050 Motion or simulated motion restricted.
No sign shall simulate movement by means of fluttering, spinning or elective devices. Rotating signs shall be prohibited except barber poles which are subject to planning commission approval. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.60.060 Encroachment.
Signs shall not extend over street or other public right-of-way or over areas within official plan lines for streets which have been adopted or which hereafter may be adopted, except in those areas where there is not required building setback line and for which official plan lines have not been set.

A.    Signs not attached to a building shall not extend nearer to the curb line than two feet. The signs attached to a building shall not extend into the street or other public right-of-way more than six feet;

B.     Signs permitted to project into street or other public rights-of-way more than two inches shall have a minimum of sixteen feet above public driveways and alleys;

C.     Vertical supports shall not be constructed closer than seven feet behind the curb line. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.60.070 Sign height.
A.    No sign shall be higher than the roof or ridgeline of a building or structure.

B.     The height of all freestanding signs shall be as approved by the planning commission. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.60.080 Square footage determination.
The square footage of a sign made up of letters, words or symbols within a frame itself. The square footage of a sign composed of only letters, words or symbols shall be determined from imaginary straight lines drawn around the entire copy or grouping of such letter, words or symbols. Only those portions of the construction elements that are an integral part of the sign itself shall be considered in the allocation of square footage allowed. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.60.090 Construction.
All signs shall be structurally safe, shall be of rust-inhibitive material and shall be maintained in good condition in the opinion of the building inspector. It shall further be the responsibility, of the property owner of the land and/or improvements to remove any sign or signs on premises where the use has been discontinued for a period of over thirty days. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.60.100 Prohibited signs.
A.    Signs constituting a potential traffic hazard by being placed in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear vision of pedestrian traffic, or which simulate in size, color, lettering or design any traffic sign or signal.

B.     Signs within the public right-of-way, including those on street trees, utility poles, street signals, street lights, street name signs, traffic warning signs or sidewalks, except official signs or other signs specifically permitted by Section 17.60.210.

C.     Signs consisting of any moving, swinging, rotating, flashing, blinking or otherwise animated components, except barber poles, clocks or thermometers.

D.    Vehicle signs or signs on/or affixed to trucks, vans, automobiles, trailers or other vehicles which advertise, or provide direction to, a use or activity not related to the lawful making of deliveries or sales of merchandise or rendering of service from such vehicle. Vehicles used for the lawful activities described shall be parked in reasonable proximity to the business they advertise when not in use, as determined by the planning director.

E.     Obstructing signs or signs erected in such a manner that any portion of this surface or supports will interfere in any way with the free use of any fire escape, exit or standpipe or obstruct any required stairway, door ventilator or window.

F.     Roof signs or any signs erected, constructed and maintained upon or over the roofline of any building.

G.    Any sign located on vacant or unoccupied property that was erected for a business which has since vacated.

H.    Indecent signs or signs containing statements, words or pictures of matters considered indecent, immoral, obscene or patently offensive. The planning director in determining whether this provision is applicable will consider location and visibility of the sign.

I.      Outdoor advertising and billboard signs which advertise an establishment, merchandise, service or entertainment which is not sold, produced, manufactured or offered at the property on which the sign is located.

J.      Roof signs. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.60.110 Signs on vehicles.
Signs painted on or attached to vehicles which are parked on the premises for a period in excess of twenty-four hours shall be considered signs within the meaning of this title and shall be specifically prohibited except such signs as are normally displayed on business vehicles. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.60.120 Building permit required.
No person, firm or corporation shall erect, construct, enlarge, modify or relocate any sign in the city without first obtaining building permit for each such sign or an exemption from the building official as described. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.60.130 Exempt signs.
The following signs shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter:

A.    Official notices authorized by a court, public body or public officer;

B.     Directional, warning or information signs authorized by federal, state or municipal authority;

C.     Memorial plaques and building cornerstones when cut or carved into a masonry surface or when made of incombustible material and made an integral part of the building or structure;

D.    Commemorative symbols, plaques and historical tablets;

E.     Real estate signs are exempt pursuant to Section 17.60.160(C). (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.60.140 Special purpose signs.
The following special purpose signs shall be permitted:

A.    Direction Signs. In any zone, one parking directional sign not exceeding ten square feet in area or six feet in height at each parking area entrance or exit.

B.     Political Sign.

1.     In any residential zone, one unlit sign for each building not exceeding eight square feet. In all other zones, one unlit sign for each building not exceeding thirty-two square feet;

2.     Freestanding signs shall not exceed six feet in height and thirty-two square feet in size;

3.     No sign shall be located in public right-of-way or on unoccupied premises (without consent of the property owner) or be attached to a tree or utility pole;

4.     A political sign shall not be displayed more than ten days after election to which it pertains.

C.     General Real Estate and Development Signs.

1.     For Sale or Rental Signs. One unlighted sign not exceeding six square feet on each street frontage adjoining a site plus one open house sign. Freestanding signs shall not exceed six feet in height;

2.     Commercial Signs. The following regulations apply primarily to single-tenant buildings or multiple-tenant buildings located on sites less than one acre in size. Shopping centers, major single-tenant and multi-tenant buildings located on sites more than one acre in size are described in subsection (C)(2)(g) below:

a.     Any number of parallel attached signs is permitted as long as the total area does not exceed one square foot of sign area per lineal foot of primary business frontage and one-half square foot of sign area per lineal foot of secondary business frontage.

b.     Awning, canopy and marquee signs are allowed and considered as attached signs, as long as the sign copy is placed on the vertical portion of fringe. These signs may project into the public right-of-way, to be maintained a minimum height of eight feet above the sidewalk and two feet from the face of the curb.

c.     One monument sign is permitted not to exceed twenty-five square feet in area and six feet in height.

d.     Reader boards are permitted as part of the allowed sign area for the following uses: live or filmed entertainment; sporting events; religious, cultural or educational institutions; hotels/motels; and convention complexes. Reader boards for other types of commercial businesses may be allowed only as approved by the planning director.

e.     In addition to the allowable signs noted above, one freestanding or attached menu board may be permitted for uses with drive-through windows, subject to the approval of the planning director. These signs may not be located within any required setback, may not be located along the primary street frontage and may not be permitted to obstruct traffic visibility. The main function of this type of sign is for customer convenience rather than business advertisement.

f.      Signs more than six feet in height may be allowed for certain uses listed later in this section.

g.     A sign program approved by the planning commission in conjunction with any discretionary permit or approval shall be required of all new commercial and industrial centers consisting of four or more tenant spaces. The purpose of the program shall be to integrate signs with building and landscaping design to form a unified architectural statement. This shall be achieved by:

i.      Using the same background color and generally allowing signs to be of up to three different colors and up to two type styles per multi-tenant center;

ii.     Using similar types of cabinet supports, or method of mounting for signs of the same type, or by using the same type of construction materials for components, such as sign copy, cabinets and supports;

iii.    Using the same form of illumination for all signs;

iv.    Using the same lettering height for all signs;

v.     Major tenants will be permitted to deviate from the sign program to accommodate national trademarks or logos.

3.     Construction Signs. On the site of a project actively under construction, one unlighted sign not exceeding ten square feet in area for each contractor, architect or engineer engaging the project, except that the total area of all signs shall not exceed thirty square feet. Signs may be combined. Freestanding signs shall not exceed six feet in height.

4.     Directional Subdivision Signs. In any zone, unlighted signs advertising subdivisions containing only the name of the subdivision, the name of the developer and/or agent, an identification emblem and directional message shall be permitted, provided:

a.     There shall be no more than three such signs located within separation of one thousand feet within the city limits for each subdivision.

b.     The total height of each sign shall not exceed fifteen feet.

c.     The total area of each sign shall not exceed thirty-two square feet.

d.     Directional subdivision signs may be displayed during the two years following the date of recordation of the final map or until one hundred percent of the lots have been sold, or whichever comes first. The planning commission may consider applications for extensions if such applications are received at least one month prior to the date of expiration of timeframe as described above.

5.     On-site subdivision signs shall be permitted provided there shall be no more than three hundred square feet of total sign area for each subdivision and a total of six signs. Such on-site signs shall be permitted to remain only as long as a sales office is maintained in the subdivision and provided that such signs are maintained in good condition as determined by the building inspector.

6.     Subdivision Entrance Signs. At the major street entrance to a subdivision or development, not more than two signs, each not exceeding twenty square feet in area, incorporated within and not extending above a wall or fence, indicating the name of the subdivision or development. Such signs shall be constructed of materials and affixed to the wall or fence in such a manner as to render them not readily susceptible to vandalism; the developer of the subdivision is responsible for the establishment of a maintenance district to properly manage this activity.

7.     For the purpose of administering this section, apartment or group housing complexes of five units or more shall be considered within the definition of a subdivision.

D.    Special Signs for Religious Assembly Uses.

1.     Electronic message board signs, as defined in Section 17.60.020, are permitted for religious assembly uses subject to the following requirements:

a.     Conditional Use Permit Required. Electronic message board signs may be permitted with the approval of a conditional use permit. The provisions of a conditional use permit are provided in Chapter 17.75.

b.     Location. An electronic message board may only be located in a religious assembly use as defined in Section 17.04.040 and be perpendicular to the public right-of-way/vehicular traffic.

c.     Type. Electronic message board signs shall be designed and constructed similar to the design of a monument sign as defined in Section 17.60.020(U) or a freestanding sign as defined in Section 17.60.020(M).

d.     Size. Electronic message board signs shall not exceed thirty-two square feet per each side of sign area.

e.     Height. Electronic message board signs shall not exceed a height of eight feet as from measured from the ground for a monument sign and thirteen feet as measured from the ground for a freestanding sign. The sign height may exceed this requirement if the portion exceeding eight/thirteen feet is an architectural element.

f.      Design. The following design standards apply for electronic message board signs:

i.      The base of the monument sign shall be solid structure of masonry, stone, or brick. The sign design shall be architecturally consistent with the property in which it is located.

ii.     Freestanding signs shall have a permanently landscaped area at their bases, and shall be maintained with live plant materials with a minimum landscape area of five feet in width from the base in each direction. The minimum square footage for required landscaping shall be equal to or greater than one hundred square feet. Reductions to the required landscape area shall be reviewed and approved by the planning director, such as plaques, architectural features, etc.

g.     Illumination. An automatic dimming circuit to reduce the level of illumination glare between dusk and dawn shall be incorporated into all electronic message board signs. The sign’s brightness shall not exceed 0.3 footcandles (over ambient levels) as measured using a footcandle meter at a distance of one hundred feet from the sign face.

h.     Hours of Operation. Electronic message board signs may operate as changeable signs between the hours of six a.m. and ten p.m. and must be programmed to remain static between the hours of ten p.m. and six a.m.

i.      Frequency of Change. Copy and messages may be changed at a maximum of once each sixty seconds.

j.      Off Premises. Message displayed shall only direct attention to religious assembly use located on the site. No off-site advertising is permitted. Community emergency messages authorized by the public works director are permitted subject to the approval of the property and/or sign owner.

k.     Audio. Use of any audio or sound producing device in conjunction with electronic message board signs is not permitted.

l.      Video. Use of any video images in conjunction with electronic message board signs is not permitted.

m.    Restrictions. Electronic message board signs shall be prohibited from containing animated, moving, blinking, or flashing images.

2.     Findings. In granting any permit for electronic message board signs, the city shall make the following findings:

a.     The sign is designed and located in such a manner that it does not obstruct visibility of pedestrians or vehicular traffic.

b.     The sign as designed and located conforms to all provisions of the zoning code and to the goals and policies of the general plan.

c.     Granting the sign request will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, convenience, or welfare, or injurious to other property or improvements in the vicinity.

d.     Sign design provides for integration with architecture and landscaping of the site to provide a unified architectural statement through the use of such means as consistency of colors, materials, and architectural form.

e.     Any nonconforming or illegal signs located on the site shall be removed in conjunction with the installation of the electronic message board sign.

E.     Other Special Signs. Flags, emblems, insignias and posters of any nation, state, international organization, political subdivision or other governmental agency, unlighted nonverbal religious symbols attached to a place of religious worship and temporary displays of a patriotic, religious, charitable or civic character shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter; however, if the height exceeds thirty-five feet, such signs shall be subject to a conditional use permit. (Ord. 2018-04 §2; Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.60.150 Signs in residential R districts.
Except as prescribed in Section 17.60.140, Special purpose signs, only the following signs shall be permitted in a residential R district:

A.    Residential Uses.

1.     Single-Family Dwelling Units. One unlighted nameplate not exceeding one square foot in area indicating the name of the occupant. On a site with more than one dwelling unit, nameplates shall not be combined, except by permission of the planning director through approval of a home occupation permit.

 

2.     Multifamily Dwelling, Apartment Developments, Boarding Houses or Rooming Houses, Dormitories. One unlighted identification sign not exceeding thirty-two square feet in area. Freestanding signs shall not exceed six feet in height. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.60.160 Signs in commercial C districts.
Except as prescribed in Section 17.60.140, Special purpose signs, only the following signs shall be permitted in a commercial zone:

A.    Commercial and Office Uses in a C District, except Service Stations.

1.     For each shopping center, one freestanding lighted sign indicating the name of the shopping center not exceeding seventy-five square feet in area. Freestanding signs shall not exceed thirty feet in height.

2.     For each retail store or tenant, any number of signs whose aggregate sign area shall not exceed one and one-half square feet of area for each lineal foot of property frontage or portion thereof shall be permitted on the building fronting on a street or parking lot.

3.     Window Signs. Signs in windows not exceeding twenty-five percent of the window area. Coverage of aggregate window area beyond twenty-five percent is not allowed.

4.     Portable signs, including A-frame signs, which are no larger than three feet by three feet in commercial zones and four feet by six feet in highway frontage zones. One A-frame sign is allowed per legal parcel within commercial and highway frontage zones. The sign square footage for permitted A-frame signs is not counted in the total square footage allowed for each business.

B.     Service Stations in Commercial C Districts.

1.     One lighted, freestanding sign not exceeding fifty square feet in area. Such sign shall not exceed thirty feet in height;

2.     Not more than one price sign not exceeding sixteen square feet in area;

3.     Informational or other permanent promotional signs such as those indicating the availability of state approved services or trading stamps shall be permitted up to a combined maximum area of six square feet.

C.     Public and Semi-Public Uses in Commercial C Districts. One lighted sign not exceeding thirty square feet in area. Freestanding signs shall not exceed six feet in height. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.60.170 Signs in industrial I districts.
Except as prescribed in Section 17.60.140, Special purpose signs, only the following signs shall be permitted in an industrial district:

A.    Industrial Uses.

1.     For each use, one single-faced, lighted wall or canopy sign not exceeding one square foot of area for each lineal foot of building or portion thereof, may be placed on the side of the building facing the principal street frontage up to a maximum of one hundred square feet;

2.     For each use, one lighted, freestanding sign not exceeding seventy-five square feet in area; provided, however, that there be no more than one such sign per lot or parcel of land. Where more than one use is being conducted on a single lot or parcel of land, the permitted sign area for each use shall be combined into one freestanding sign up to maximum of one hundred square feet. Freestanding signs shall not exceed thirty feet in height.

B.     Public and Semi-Public Uses in Industrial Districts. One lighted sign not exceeding thirty square feet in area. Freestanding signs shall not exceed six feet in height. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.60.180 Signs in mobile home parks.
At the major street entrance to the mobile home park, not more than two lighted signs, each not exceeding twenty square feet in area, may be attached to and not extending above a wall or fence indicating the name of the mobile home park. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.60.190 Temporary signs.
Temporary signs, as defined in Section 17.60.020(HH) of this chapter, may be authorized in any zone district by the planning director upon issuance of a temporary sign permit. The issuance of a temporary sign permit does not waive nor void any public health or safety regulation of this chapter. Section 17.60.210 applies to all temporary signs except for the following:

A.    For sale or rent sign;

B.     Garage sale sign;

C.     Open house directional sign;

D.    Political sign;

E.     Seasonal sign;

F.     Window sign;

 

G.    Corporate flag;

H.    Grand opening and special event signs. Temporary signs used in conjunction with a grand opening such as windblown devices and signs whose movement is designed to attract attention, such as pennants, flags, inflatable signs or helium filled balloons, inflatable animals or similar signs are permitted as long as the grand opening does not exceed thirty calendar days. Temporary signs used in conjunction with a special event such as a sidewalk sale may be displayed for a maximum of seven days for four special events per calendar year. Signs displayed in conjunction with permits issued for temporary uses shall be allowed for the specified duration of the use. The permit issued shall specify the number of signs and the date the signs are to be removed. Paper signs tacked or otherwise fastened to the side of a building or bulletin board or outside a window are temporary signs unless enclosed in a frame with a glass, plexiglass or equivalent cover. This sign area will be subject to the wall and canopy sign standards. See Section 17.60.140, Special purpose signs. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.60.200 Freestanding signs—Commission review.
A.    All freestanding signs except special purpose signs as designated in Section 17.60.140 and permitted signs in residential R districts shall be subject to the review and approval of the planning commission.

B.     The fee for the review shall be as established by resolution of the city council.

C.     In its review, the planning commission shall consider the size, shape, scale and location of the proposed sign as it relates to surrounding land uses in order to insure compatibility between sign and other structures and to reduce possible detrimental effects.

D.    Planning commission review shall not be required where such signs have been approved in conjunction with commission approval of a conditional use permit or variance or other architectural review process. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.60.210 Freestanding signs—Appeal of commission action.
If after reviewing a proposed freestanding sign, the planning commission should not approve the sign as submitted, or, if the applicant does not agree with the conditions of approval required by the commission, the applicant may appeal the decision to the city council as prescribed in Chapter 17.78. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.60.220 Maintenance and use of nonconforming signs—Removal without compensation.
A.    Any sign legally established pursuant to any prior ordinance or regulation of the city that fails to conform to the requirements of this chapter shall be allowed continued use, except that any such sign shall not be:

1.     Expanded, moved or relocated;

2.     Used, if its use has ceased, or the structure upon which the sign is located has been abandoned by its owner for a period of thirty days or more.

B.     Any legally nonconforming sign which fails to conform to the provisions of this chapter shall be either abated or removed, or in the alternative, brought into compliance with the provisions of this chapter without the payment of any compensation to the owner if any of the criteria set forth in California Business and Professions Code Section 5497, as it presently exists or as it may be amended, are found to exist. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.60.230 Removal of illegal signs—Procedures.
A.    Illegal Signs. Any sign which was prohibited or illegal at the time of installation, and which does not conform to the provisions of this chapter and any legally nonconforming sign which meets the criteria set forth in California Business and Professional Code Section 5497, as it presently exists or as it may be amended, shall be either abated or removed, or in the alternative, brought into compliance with the provisions of this chapter, without payment of any compensation to the owner, pursuant to the procedure provided herein.

B.     Notice of Violation. The planning director or his/her designee, after conducting an investigation, shall order the abatement and removal of any such sign, or in the alternative, direct that such sign shall comply with the provisions of this chapter, by giving notice of violation to the business owner using said sign and to the owner of the real property upon which the sign is located. The notice of violation shall contain the following information:

1.     It shall describe or otherwise identify the sign and specify the violation requiring its removal or correction.

2.     It shall order that the sign be either removed or that in the alternative, it be brought into compliance thirty days from the date that the notice of violation is mailed.

3.     It shall contain a notice of the right to appeal as provided herein.

C.     Mailing of Notice. The notice of violation shall be sufficient if it is mailed via first class U.S. mail to the business owner at the business address upon which the sign is located and to the property owner at the address shown on the last equalized assessment roll of the county. If there is no known business owner conducting business upon the property, then notice to the owner of the real property as provided herein shall be sufficient.

D.    Appeal. If the business owner and/or the real property owner does/does not agree with the determination of the planning director or his/her designee, either or both such parties may appeal the determination by filing with the office of the planning director a notice of appeal, which notice shall be served and received by the planning director not later than thirty days from the date that the notice of violation was mailed.

E.     Extension of Time. The planning director shall have the authority to extend the thirty-day time period for the removal or correction of a sign if he/she determines that the affected party is acting in good faith. Such extensions of time shall not exceed a total of one hundred twenty days without the prior approval of the planning commission.

F.     Hearing. Upon the timely receipt by the director of a notice of appeal, an administrative hearing shall be set before the planning commission within thirty days of receipt of the said notice of appeal. Written notice of the date of the hearing on the appeal shall be given to the applicant via first class U.S. mail at least ten days prior to the hearing date.

G.    Final Decision. The planning commission shall hear and determine the appeal from the planning director. The planning commission decision may be appealed within thirty days by the business owner and/or the real property owner to the city council, as an appeal from the planning director is appealed to the planning commission. The decision of the city council shall be final.

H.    Removal of Sign. Upon a determination by the planning commission that the offending sign must be removed, or in the absence of an appeal and upon the expiration of the thirty-day compliance period, the city may cause the removal of the sign, either by use of its own personnel or by contracting for its removal with appropriate and qualified contractors. The owner of the real property and the owner of the business upon which the sign is located shall be jointly responsible for all costs and expense incurred by the city for the removal of the sign and the city may cause a lien to be placed against said real property and/or the owner of the business located upon said property.

I.      Storage.

1.     Signs removed by the city pursuant to this chapter shall be stored for a period of thirty days, during which time they may be recovered by the owner upon payment to the city of all costs of removal and storage. The city shall give written notice to the business owner and/or the owner of the real property of their right to reclaim the stored property within thirty days upon the payment to the city of all costs of removal and storage. The written notice so given shall contain a statement of the amount required to redeem said property. Said notice shall be served as provided in subsection C of this section.

2.     If said property is not recovered prior to the expiration of the thirty-day period, the sign and supporting structures shall be deemed abandoned, title thereto shall vest in the city and the city may sell or otherwise dispose of the property as it may determine and apply any proceeds received there from to the satisfaction of its costs and expenses. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.60.240 Abandoned, dilapidated or unsafe signs, frames, structural members and supporting poles.
A.    Signs considered dilapidated or signs determined to be unsafe and dangerous or hazardous to the public safety or welfare shall either be repaired or removed from the site by the owner, agent or person having the beneficial use of the building, structure or premises upon which such sign may be found within ten days after written notification.

B.     The owner of an abandoned sign shall remove said sign within thirty days after receipt of written notification if there is no further intended use of the sign and its structural portion. However, the owner of a sign, the purpose of which has been abandoned, who desires to make subsequent use of the structural portions of such sign in its present location may, within thirty days after receipt of written notification, make an application to the planning director for an extension of time. Where the owner submits reasonable evidence that he/she is endeavoring to secure a use for the sign (i.e., a new tenant, arrival of new product line, etc.), the planning director may grant extensions of time. The planning director may require as a condition of granting such extensions to paint out, obscure or remove some or all elements of the message or face portion or structural members of the sign in such a manner as to leave the remaining structure neat and unobtrusive in appearance and in harmony with the structure to which it is attached and may require that such work be done within a specified time period after the granting of such extension or the extension shall be invalidated by such failure. The city will follow the same procedures set forth in Section 17.60.230 if the owner fails to comply with removal obligations. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

Chapter 17.61 MURALS
17.61.010 Intent.
It is the intent of the city council, for purposes of promoting the local economy, tourism, and for further purposes of beautifying the city of Waterford, to adopt this chapter regarding murals, their location and design. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.61.020 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

A.    “Mural” means a permanent picture painted directly on an exterior wall or on panels to exterior walls.

B.     “Mural project permit” means a permit issued by the city to a private party authorizing the painting of a mural within the city. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.61.030 Location of murals.
A.    It is the intent of the city council that murals be located on the side of public, commercial, industrial and multifamily residential buildings.

B.     Murals shall be located in the “downtown” area of the city of Waterford in that area bounded by buildings located on the west side of and visible from “F” Street to the west; buildings located on the east side of and visible from “E” Street to the east; buildings located on the south side of and visible from Highway 132 (Yosemite Parkway) to the south; and buildings located on the north side of and visible from Bentley Street to the north.

C.     Other murals may be located within commercial or industrial areas of the city subject to approval by the Waterford city council. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.61.040 Character for design of murals.
The following criteria shall apply to the design of murals submitted for approval:

A.    The subject matter shall be of historical significance of the growth and development of the city of Waterford and its surrounding environs or the natural terrain and/or geographical features.

B.     The paint to be used and applied shall be appropriate for the use in an outdoor locale and for an artistic rendition and shall be of a permanent, long lasting variety.

C.     To the extent feasible, the mural shall be vandal and graffiti resistant.

D.    The council may, from time to time by resolution, adopt additional criteria and guidelines for the design of murals. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.61.050 Application for permit and fees.
A.    Mural Design Approval Required—Permit Issuance. Prior to painting, installation and execution of a mural, an application must be submitted for review and approval by the planning commission.

B.     Mural Design Amendment—Approval Required. Prior to amending a mural design (whether painted or not yet painted) that has been approved by the city planning commission, an application for an amendment of the permit shall first be reviewed and recommended for approval by the architectural review committee.

C.     Upon approval by the planning commission, the permit for the mural shall be deemed amended.

D.    Application Fee and/or Permit Issuance. In the event the city council determines it appropriate, it may set, by resolution, a fee for the application and/or permit issuance.

E.     Planning commission approval of a mural design shall occur only after public notice and an opportunity being provided to any interested party to present any appropriate comments, considerations and/or concerns, either in writing or orally, to the city council.

F.     Mural design review applications for mural permits may be referred to the Waterford chamber of commerce or similar business group for review and comment prior to action and referral by the architectural review committee. The chamber may offer suggestions and recommendation to the applicant, the architectural review committee and/or the city council to assist in the mural permit decision-making process. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.61.060 Maintenance, repair and removal.
All murals shall be maintained in good repair and condition by a sponsor as named in the mural application. The sponsor or building owner shall agree to maintain the mural in an attractive condition or the city shall have the mural repaired, removed or otherwise maintained at the building owner’s sole cost and expense. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

Chapter 17.62 FENCING, WALLS AND HEDGES
17.62.010 Purpose.
A.    To provide residents and businesses with greater security and protected outdoor living space through fencing of property while allowing light, views, access and visibility for the health, safety and welfare of the citizenry. Limitations on fencing also serve to maintain the aesthetic value of the city.

B.     To promote security for people and property by improving natural surveillance, natural access control and territorial reinforcement. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.62.020 Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all new fences constructed on private property after January 1, 1995. All fences built prior to the date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter may remain subject to the conditions of this chapter. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.62.030 Standard fences—Height, regulation and exceptions.
A.    All property within an R (residential) district shall conform to the following:

1.     Front Yard.

a.     Maximum three feet high within front yard setback;

b.     Fences with visual clearance (such as chain link) may be allowed up to four feet in height, subject to staff approval.

c.     Maximum six feet high between front yard setback and rear yard.

2.     Side Yard.

a.     Interior Property Line. Maximum six feet high between front yard setback and rear yard;

b.     Corner. Maximum three feet high in front yard setback; six feet high outside of setback.

c.     Side and Corner Lots. Fences with visual clearance (such as chain link) may be allowed up to four feet in height, subject to staff approval.

3.     Rear Yard. Maximum six feet on rear property line.

4.     Reverse Corner Lots—Fences Up to Six Feet. Fences, walls and hedges not exceeding six feet  in height, measured from the highest finished grade from any adjoining and subject properties, may occupy a side or rear yard area, provided:

a.     That such fence, wall or hedge does not extend into any front yard.

b.     That, in the case of reverse corner lots where such lot has a rear yard that abuts the front yard of an adjacent lot’s front yard and corner lots, such side yard fence shall not be located closer than ten feet to the street side curb-face or beyond the property line, whichever is closer to the street. In the instance where such side yard fence extends into a public right-of-way or easement, the fence shall be subject to review, approval, restrictions and limitations described herein.

c.     Such fence shall not be within fifteen feet of any street side curb-face within twenty feet of the intersection of any alley and street right-of-way line.

B.     All property within all districts where R (residential) uses are not permitted and all AG (agricultural) and RE (residential estate) districts, fence, wall and hedge standards shall be as prescribed in the respective district standards.

C.     Height Exceptions.

1.     Front and Side Yard (Corner). No fence, wall, hedge or screen planting of any kind located between the front property line and the required front yard setback shall be constructed, grown or maintained to exceed three feet in height, unless architectural review approval as to its height, placement and design is obtained pursuant to the procedures of Chapter 17.52.

a.     Exceptions. This provision shall not apply to the following items; provided that such amenities do not significantly obstruct vehicular or pedestrian visibility or significantly obscure light and views to affected properties:

i.      Specimen trees or shrubs;

ii.     Light poles or pilasters (not to exceed seven feet in height and eighteen inches in width);

iii.    Front yard fence posts with attached lights (not more than two permitted, not to exceed four feet in height plus light fixture and not to exceed eighteen inches in width and depth);

iv.    Gates no higher than the permitted fence height;

v.     Trellises used for pedestrian purposes (not to exceed eight feet in height, five feet in width and five feet in depth);

vi.    One mailbox structure not to exceed four feet in height;

vii.   Up to three statuary structures not to exceed eight feet in height, two feet in width and two feet in depth;

viii.  Chain link fences either vinyl coated or galvanized shall be allowed in residential, commercial and industrial areas;

ix.    Fencing of electrical substations, which may be constructed to the height required by law;

x.     Fences which enclose school grounds, public playgrounds, tennis courts, public swimming pools or other public areas which are used for athletic purposes may be erected to a height in excess of six feet with the approval of the planning director;

xi.    Other structures which in the opinion of the planning director are of a similar nature.

2.     Rear and Interior Side Yards. No fence, wall or hedge of any kind located between the required front yard setback and the rear property line shall be constructed or maintained to exceed six feet in height unless architectural review approval as to its height, placement and design is obtained pursuant to the procedures of Chapter 17.52.

3.     Exceptions. This provision shall not apply to the following items:

a.     All fences exceeding six feet in height to a maximum of eight feet (including those with lattice work) require a building permit and written consent of property owner(s) adjacent to the proposed fence;

b.     Accessory structures. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.62.040 Clear zones.
For the purpose of creating visibility to and from the public right-of-way, as well as preserving adjacent property views, the following “clear zones” are required:

A.    Street Corner. A “clear zone” shall be maintained at the street corner, whether the intersection is controlled or not. The clear zone is created by extending the property line to a point and measuring from the point along the property line and street yard property line to a distance of forty feet to a point and connecting these two points to create a “clear zone” triangle.

B.     Height Within Clear Zone. Generally, nothing over three feet in height may be placed or permitted to grow within the “clear zone.” A tree or other statuary structures may be permitted by the planning director if site visibility is provided. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.62.050 Materials permitted.
A.    Materials for construction of permanent fences and walls along property lines shall be limited to the following: redwood, cedar, brick, slump stone, stucco, plaster, cement, wrought iron, or similar materials as determined by the planning director.

B.     Fences and wall proposed along roadways or pedestrian walkways shall be surfaced or screened with landscaping or vegetative material for the purpose of discouraging graffiti. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.62.060 Maintenance.
All fences and landscaping shall be properly maintained so as not to present a safety hazard or nuisance or a blight to the neighborhood. Failure to maintain the fence and/or landscaping is considered to be a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.62.070 Nonconforming fence regulations.
A “nonconforming fence” is a fence which does not comply with one or more provisions of this chapter, such as height, material, setback, or clear zone, as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

A.    Continuation and Maintenance. A nonconforming fence may be continued, and may be maintained, except as provided in this chapter or otherwise provided by law.

B.     Adding on to Nonconforming Fences. No person shall add on to a nonconforming fence in any manner which increases its nonconformance.

C.     Maintenance or Repair of Existing Nonconforming Fences. Maintenance or repair, including structural repairs, may be made to any nonconforming fence or portions thereof, provided the nonconforming portion(s) of the fence are not changed, or if the change does occur, it is in conformance with the code.

D.    Reconstruction of Damaged Nonconforming Fences. A nonconforming fence damaged by fire or calamity may be reconstructed. If the fence is reconstructed, the nonconforming portions of the fence which relate to health, safety and welfare, shall be brought into conformance with this code. Health, safety and welfare include fences within the front, street side yard and clear zones that do not meet the provisions of this code, including construction standards.

E.     Compliance.

1.     All portions of nonconforming fences shall be brought into conformance with the chapter, including meeting the required construction standards, when the nonconforming fence is clearly on the subject property and the property owner applies to the building department for a building permit which requires a site plan, such as a new house, garage, carport, second-story additions, exterior remodeling, new decks, re-siding and similar projects, provided the estimated value of the improvements exceeds twenty thousand dollars as determined by the city.

2.     If the nonconforming fence is on the property line and the property owner, who applies to the building department for a building permit, does not have complete control over nonconforming portions of the fence, as evidenced by a land survey or other accurate means to determine property lines and fences as approved by staff, the property owner shall not be required to bring the nonconforming portions of the fence into conformance.

3.     The following shall not require compliance: re-roofing, interior remodeling, electrical and gas conversions and the like. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.62.072 Noise attenuation—Wall regulations.
Noise attenuation wall may be located within a residentially designated or R zoning district subject to high traffic noise levels may be permitted to erect a noise attenuation wall subject to following standards consistent with the general plan and this municipal code.

A.    Noise Attenuation Considerations. Design and construction of noise attenuation walls are subject to the standards set forth in Section 16.03.070, Noise attenuation.

B.     General Design Considerations.

1.     Sound walls should be made of materials which have a good sound absorption rate.

2.     A combination of sound wall and an earth mound or berm should be utilized along road ways to provide landscape areas and improved noise attenuation.

3.     Landscaping shall be included in all wall designs to improve the visual impacts of a wall, reduce potential for graffiti and reduce noise reflection.

4.     Wall design should avoid design that provide a flat even alignment and smooth surface to improve acoustic reflection and visual impacts.

C.     Noise Attenuation Wall Standards. Noise attenuation walls shall be considered permitted subject to the following:

1.     The property fronts on a street, highway or roadway that is designated a major collector or arterial on the city general plan circulation map.

2.     The property is developed or proposed to be developed with a noise sensitive use (i.e., residential) in accordance with the city’s general plan noise element.

3.     The property does not have direct access to the street which is the source of noise but is rather accessed from an alley or driveway to a secondary street.

4.     The construction of the noise attenuation wall can be placed behind property lines and public utility lines and maintains a distance of at least five feet between the noise attenuation wall and the residential structure.

5.     The noise attenuation wall will not obscure sight visibility along the roadway or obstruct pedestrian traffic along any existing or planned sidewalk or walkway.

6.     The noise attenuation wall does not exceed six feet in height, is engineered for stability, and the plan is approved by the city engineer.

7.     The noise attenuation wall is subject to the architectural review standards and procedures of the city and is landscaped in such a manner as to be aesthetically pleasing and graffiti resistant. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.62.080 Enforcement.
A.    The fence standards shall be enforced through the planning department.

B.     Should a fence be found not to be in compliance with this chapter, the owner has the following options:

1.     Modify the fence to conform to the requirements, or

2.     Seek a variance through the variance process contained in this chapter.

C.     Should the property owner fail to comply with the standards within this chapter, the property owner shall be considered in violation of this chapter and subject to the code violation process. This process may culminate in either removal of the fence, a fine, or both in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 17.80, Enforcement. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.62.090 Prohibited fences.
The following types of fences are prohibited, including, but not limited to, the following:

A.    Barbed wire or razor wire, except as follows:

1.     Upon securing a conditional use permit from the city council that the use of barbed wire or razor wire at the top portion of a fence which is at least six feet in height, after demonstrating a need for security purposes;

2.     On the finding by city council that the use of barbed wire or razor wire is not a direct health hazard to the citizens of the city and surrounding communities and to domestic and wild animals.

B.     Electrically charged fences.

C.     All wire, twine or rope fences consisting of one or more strands.

D.    Fences constructed or maintained in the public right-of-way without an encroachment permit.

E.     Fences constructed or maintained closer than three feet to any fire hydrant.

F.     Fences constructed or maintained so as to sag or lean.

G.    Dilapidated fences.

H.    Fences creating a safety hazard to motorists and/or pedestrians.

I.      Razor wire (see exception).

J.      Chicken wire.

K.    Wire mesh (see exception).

L.     Pallet fences.

M.    Trailers or other similar storage units.

N.    Spiked fences.

O.    Paper.

P.     Visqueen plastic, and the like. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.62.100 Required walls and fences.
A.    When office, commercial or industrial uses abut property zoned or used for residential, a minimum of six-foot-high solid concrete block or masonry wall shall be required. If a wall meeting these standards already exists on the abutting residential property, protection from vehicle damage shall be provided by a method approved by the planning director. Design and layout of such walls shall provide pedestrian or vehicular access adjacent to existing or planned pedestrian or vehicular ways as approved by the planning director.

B.     Industrial screening walls abutting arterial highways shall be architecturally compatible with surrounding properties, constructed of a minimum six-foot-high decorative masonry block. Approval of an architectural review approval shall be required prior to construction of such walls pursuant to Chapter 17.52.

C.     Swimming Pool Fences.

1.     All private swimming pools for all residential dwellings, hotels, and motels shall be fenced by a minimum five-foot-high wall or fence constructed so as to isolate the pool from access by the general public. Said fence shall be provided with a self-closing and self-latching gate or gates. Latches or opening devices shall be located at least four and one-half feet above ground level or adjacent raised platforms. No pool shall have the finish plaster coat applied or be filled with water until the enclosing fence has been constructed and approved by the building official.

2.     Swimming pools, as used in this section, include spas and hot tubs outside of an enclosed building.

D.    Fence Standards.

1.     Clearance Setback. All fences shall maintain a minimum three-foot clearance around fire hydrants, transformers, and other public facilities. The director of public works shall determine the extent of setback around specific public works facilities and structures such as street signs, lights, sewer clean-outs, meter boxes, etc.

2.     Overhang and Obstruction of Public Sidewalks. No point of the fence, or landscaping maintained within or adjacent to the fence, shall overhang or create an obstruction to the sidewalk or in the absence of a sidewalk, to the projected lot side of the sidewalk as established by the city.

3.     Public Safety. The fence shall be constructed so that no hazards, such as nails, spikes, wires, thistles, or other sharp or pointed objects, protrude from or exist upon the fence.

4.     Public Protection. The fence shall adhere to the principals of CPTED, as outlined in Section 17.52.080, by promoting natural surveillance, natural access control and territorial reinforcement to aid the Waterford police in their public protection mission.

E.     Pedestrian Safety Along Sidewalks. Fences, hedges, walls and other ornamental landscaping or other visual obstruction over three feet high above the sidewalk and/or driveway elevation shall not be permitted to be located within the triangular area adjacent to a private driveway formed by measuring ten feet from the driveway along a sidewalk and ten feet along the driveway from the sidewalk. In the event that there is no sidewalk, the measurements shall be to the projected sidewalk as established by the city.

F.     Fences Within Public Rights-of-Ways or Easements.

1.     No fence shall be constructed upon the public right-of-way or within any easement, including a public utility easement, prior to the issuance of a permit by the Waterford public works department and no such fence shall be regarded as conforming to this section or the permit until after it has been inspected and approved by the public works department. The permittee shall call the public works department for inspection immediately after completion of construction. Unless the public works department accepts the construction as conforming to the permit within thirty days from the date of the permit, such permit shall be void and the fence shall be removed from the public right-of-way or easement at the owner’s expense.

2.     Fences located in the right-of-way or easement shall be maintained by the owner on the property enclosed by the fence. Such fence shall be kept in good repair and maintained in a manner that protects public safety as determined by the public works director.

3.     The city reserves the right to remove, at the sole expense of the owner of the property or properties enclosed by the fence located on a public right-of-way or easement, in an emergency.

4.     The city further reserves the right, upon thirty days’ written notice and at the sole expense of the owner of the property or properties enclosed by the fence, to remove any fence in the public right-of-way or easement should the city desire other use be made of the public right-of-way or easement or required non-emergency additions, maintenance and/or repairs to any utilities located within the easement or right-of-way. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

Chapter 17.63 NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES
17.63.010 Applicability.
Nonconforming uses and structures are governed by the regulations set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.63.020 Continuance.
A lawful nonconforming use or structure may be continued; provided that no such use or structure shall be enlarged or increased, nor be extended to occupy a greater area than that occupied by such use prior to the date such use or structure became nonconforming. Nor shall a nonconforming use or structure be allowed to create a public health and safety hazard. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.63.030 Extension.
The nonconforming use of a portion of a building may be extended throughout the building; provided that in each case a use permit shall first be obtained. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.63.040 Change to more restrictive use.
The nonconforming use of a building may be changed to a use of the same or more restricted nature; provided that in each case a use permit shall first be obtained. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.63.050 Abandonment.
If a nonconforming use ceases for a continuous period of six months, it shall be considered abandoned and shall thereafter be used only in accordance with the regulations for the district in which it is located. If a nonconforming structure is more than fifty percent damaged by fire or otherwise ceases to exist, it can only be re-established in accordance with the code provisions applicable in the district within which it is located. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.63.060 Maintenance and repair.
Ordinary maintenance and repairs may be made to any nonconforming building provided no structural alterations are made and providing that such work does not exceed fifteen percent of the appraised value in any one-year period. Other repairs or alterations may be permitted; provided, that a use permit shall first be secured in each case. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.63.070 Change, enlargement, expansion or restoration.
A.    The planning commission, after a public hearing, may authorize the change, enlargement, expansion or restoration of a nonconforming use or structure:

1.     If necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of substantial property rights of the applicant;

2.     If it will not, under the circumstances of the particular case, be detrimental to the health, safety and general welfare of persons residing or working in the neighborhood of such use;

3.     If it will not be detrimental or injurious to property and improvements in the neighborhood or to the general welfare of the city.

B.     In authorizing such change, enlargement, expansion or restoration of a nonconforming use or structure, the planning commission may include such conditions as it deems necessary and reasonable under the circumstances to carry out the intent of this chapter. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.63.080 Minor expansion, residential buildings.
Expansion of a legal nonconforming single-family dwelling or duplex by not more than twenty-five percent of the floor area of the existing dwelling shall be permitted with the approval of the planning director. Such expansion shall meet all other requirements of this code and shall not result in the creation of more dwelling units than currently exists. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

Chapter 17.64 BED AND BREAKFAST INN
17.64.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this section is to provide for and regulate single-family residences which provide overnight guest or transient accommodations. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.64.020 Intent.
The intent of this section is to allow bed and breakfast inn as an alternative form of lodging accommodation in the city of Waterford. The operator of a bed and breakfast inn shall be a permanent resident of the home and the “inn” portion of the residence is to be used for transient occupancy, as defined in Chapter 3.44 for a period of not more than five consecutive days. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.64.030 Zoning compatibility.
A bed and breakfast inn may be permitted only as part of a single-family residence in all residential zoning districts, and shall at a minimum comply with the following:

A.    Conformance with City Standards. The residence within which the bed and breakfast inn is to be located must conform to all applicable city zoning and building codes.

B.     Off-Street Parking. A bed and breakfast inn shall provide one off-street parking space for each guest room in addition to two covered spaces for the main dwelling.

C.     Signs. Within any R district, a single sign, no larger than four square feet, may be permitted to identify the bed and breakfast inn. In addition, house numbers must be clearly visible from the street. Within C districts, signs shall be regulated by applicable sign regulations.

D.    Maximum Occupancy. Individual rooms shall not be occupied by more than two adults.

E.     The owner-operator of a bed and breakfast inn shall comply with Chapter 3.44 with respect to registration of the inn with the city and payment of all applicable transient occupancy taxes. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.64.040 Permit process.
All applications for bed and breakfast inns shall be processed as follows:

A.    Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, a conditional use permit application shall be filed with the planning department for an administrative use permit in accordance with Chapter 17.73 and processed in accordance with the provisions of this title.

B.     Prior to opening, inspections shall be made and passed by the following persons or their representatives:

1.     County health department;

2.     City building official;

3.     Fire chief and/or fire marshal;

4.     Planning director.

C.     The planning commission may review the administrative use permit at the following intervals:

1.     Annual review after the permit is granted;

2.     Upon receipt of substantial complaints on bed and breakfast inn operations.

D.    Bed and Breakfast Inn in Designated Historic Resource Residences.

1.     A bed and breakfast inn with three or fewer guest rooms operated by the resident within a residence listed as a designated historic resource in accordance with historical building preservation provisions of this code shall be considered a permitted use subject to first obtaining appropriate licenses and related permits and passage of all relevant inspections.

2.     The planning director shall issue a certificate to operate a bed and breakfast inn operated within a residentially used designated historic resource subject to review and determination that the inn complies with all applicable regulations of this chapter.

E.     Bed and Breakfast Inn in a Single-Family Residence Within or Adjacent to a Commercial District.

1.     A bed and breakfast inn with three or fewer guest rooms operated by the resident within a residence located within a C district or immediately contiguous to property in a C district shall be considered a permitted use subject to first obtaining appropriate licenses and related permits and passage of all relevant inspections.

2.     The planning director shall issue a certificate to operate a bed and breakfast inn operated within a residentially used property in or adjacent to a C district subject to review and determination that the inn complies with all applicable regulations of this chapter. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.64.050 Conditional approval.
The following standard conditions shall be attached to all use permits for bed and breakfast inns:

A.    A fire escape map, approved by the fire chief and/or fire marshal, shall be posted in each guest room and common use area.

B.     All rooms, including those used exclusively by the principal occupant, and common use guest area, must have operating smoke alarms and fire extinguishers.

C.     Guests arriving by motor home or other large vehicle shall be required to comply with all applicable city parking regulations. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.64.060 Findings for approval.
The planning director must make the following findings when granting an administrative use permit for a bed and breakfast inn:

A.    The establishment of the bed and breakfast inn is not likely, under the circumstances of the particular application, to be detrimental to the health, safety, peace, morals, comfort and general welfare of persons residing or working in the neighborhood or the general welfare of the city.

B.     The proposed bed and breakfast inn complies with all applicable requirements of this title.

C.     The proposed bed and breakfast inn is not likely to adversely impact traffic and parking conditions in the neighborhood.

D.    The proposed bed and breakfast inn is expected to be compatible with the neighborhood within which it is proposed. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.64.070 Miscellaneous standards.
The following standards shall apply to all bed and breakfast inns:

A.    No cooking or cooking facilities shall be allowed in the guest rooms.

B.     A minimum of one guest bathroom shall be provided for every two guest rooms.

C.     Only meals for registered guests and permanent residents may be served.

D.    House rules will be posted permanently in each guest room. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.64.080 Grounds for permit revocation.
A permit to operate a bed and breakfast inn can be revoked if, in the determination of the planning commission, the bed and breakfast inn operator has failed to maintain the facilities in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and/or:

A.    The operator has failed to pay all applicable city taxes and fees in a timely manner.

B.     The facility has been found to be in violation of any city or county regulations. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.64.090 Special and/or unique circumstances.
A.    Upon the recommendation of the planning director, the planning commission may consider a facility with additional rooms if a unique or historically significant structure is involved. In such cases, the commission shall consider the merits of the individual structure and make appropriate findings and conditions to support any deviation from these requirements.

B.     Such consideration shall not constitute a variance when a unique or historically significant structure is involved. In all other circumstances, variances to these requirements shall be discouraged. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

Chapter 17.65 SIDEWALK VENDING
17.65.010 Intent.
The city of Waterford declares that it is the policy and intent of the city and this chapter to declare a statement of policy to regulate sidewalk vendors within or adjacent to the city of Waterford to preserve and enhance the business community of Waterford and promote public health and safety in a manner consistent with goals, policies and standards of the Waterford general plan. (Ord. 2019-07 §5).

 

17.65.020 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a sidewalk vendor permitting and regulator program that complies with Senate Bill 946 (Chapter 459, Statutes 2018). The provisions of this chapter bring the city into compliance with Senate Bill 946 by removing total prohibitions on sidewalk vending activities while still permitting regulation and enforcement of such activities. Sections 53036-53039 of the California Government Code confers upon local governments the authority to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. The requirements set forth in this chapter are intended to protect the public’s health, safety, and welfare by ensuring that vendors on public property provide safe and sanitary conditions for customers and the general public, are adequately insured, are properly licensed with other agencies, and that the total number of allowed vending permits in the commercial districts is limited. This chapter is adopted pursuant to the city’s police powers for the purpose of regulating vending on public property. (Ord. 2019-07 §5).

 

17.65.030 Definitions.
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall be construed as hereafter set out, unless it shall be apparent from the context that they have a different meaning.

A.    “Certified farmers’ market” means a location operated in accordance with Chapter 10.5 (commencing with Section 47000) of Division 17 of the Food and Agricultural Code and any regulations adopted pursuant to that chapter, or any successor chapter.

B.     “Roaming sidewalk vendor” means a sidewalk vendor who moves from place to place and stops only to complete a transaction.

C.     “Sidewalk” means that portion of a highway, other than the roadway, set apart by curbs, barriers, markings or other delineation specifically.

 

D.    “Sidewalk vendor” means a person who sells food or merchandise from a pushcart, stand, display, pedal-driven cart, wagon, showcase, rack, or other nonmotorized conveyance, or from one’s person, upon a public sidewalk or other pedestrian path.

E.     “Stationary sidewalk vendor” means a sidewalk vendor who vends from a fixed location. (Ord. 2019-07 §5).

 

17.65.040 Permit.
Only sidewalk vendors with a valid permit issued by the finance department pursuant to Chapter 5.06 of this code may vend upon the city’s public right-of-way. The following persons, entities or activities are exempt from the permit requirement of this chapter:

A.    Any vendor or person engaged solely in artistic performances, free speech and/or petitioning activities.

B.     Nonprofit education institutions, fraternal and service clubs, bona fide religious organizations and agencies of any federal, state or local governments.

C.     Nonprofit private clubs where a basic membership fee covers the cost of the use of the facilities.

D.    Community organizations/events not otherwise regulated by the Waterford Municipal Code, upon approval of the city manger or designee.

E.     Business and trades that are exempt from licensing and tax regulations under federal and state statutes.

F.     Any organization, society, association or corporation desiring to solicit or have solicited in its name money, donations of money or property or financial assistance of any kind or desiring to sell or distribute any item of literature or merchandise to persons other than members of such organizations upon the streets, in office or business buildings, by house-to-house canvass or in public places for charitable, religious, patriotic or philanthropic purpose exclusively. (Ord. 2019-07 §5).

 

17.65.050 Regulations.
General regulations shall include the following:

A.    To maintain accessibility standards for the city’s disabled residents, every sidewalk vendor operating on any sidewalk or public right-of-way must ensure that no obstruction is placed in the sidewalk or public right-of-way that would reduce the width of the sidewalk to less than forty-eight inches, exclusive of the top of the curb. No obstruction shall be located in a sidewalk or public right-of-way less than six feet in width when the sidewalk is adjacent to the curb.

B.     To prevent foodborne illness and protect the health and safety of the city’s residents, every sidewalk vendor selling any food or beverage is required to wear a hairnet and food service gloves.

C.     To prevent dangerous distractions and promote the general welfare of the city’s residents, sidewalk vendors shall not emit any loud, unnecessary and unusual noises beyond that of a typical use in the surrounding area.

D.    A vending permit does not provide an exclusive right to operate within any specific portion of the public right-of-way.

E.     No equipment or objects used for sidewalk vending purposes may be left or maintained in public spaces or in any portion of the public right-of-way from ten p.m. to eight a.m. Any equipment or objects left overnight in public spaces or in any portion of the public right-of-way will be considered discarded and may be seized or disposed of by the city.

 

F.     To facilitate the enforcement of this chapter, every sidewalk vendor must display their city-issued vending permit on the street-side portion of their pushcart, stand, display, pedal-driven cart, wagon, showcase, rack, or other non-motorized conveyance when operating in the public right-of-way.

G.    Sidewalk vending hours limitations in areas zoned for nonresidential use will be as restrictive as any limitations on hours of operation imposed on other businesses or uses on the same street, excluding those permitted to operate 24 hours.

H.    Roaming sidewalk vendors are limited to the hours of nine a.m. through five p.m. for areas that are zoned exclusively residential. Stationary sidewalk vendors are strictly prohibited in areas zoned exclusively residential.

I.      A sidewalk vendor is prohibited from operating within three hundred feet of a permitted certified farmers’ market, a permitted swap meet, or any area subject to a temporary use permit for the duration of the permit.

J.      Vending within three hundred feet of any public school is prohibited from seven a.m. through four p.m. on the days the public school is in session. (Ord. 2019-07 §5).

 

17.65.060 Violation—Penalty.
A.    A violation of this chapter by a sidewalk vendor who has a valid vendor permit from the city is punishable only by an administrative citation pursuant to Chapter 1.17 in amounts not to exceed the following:

1.     One hundred dollars for the first violation.

2.     Two hundred dollars for the second violation within one year of the first violation.

3.     Five hundred dollars for each additional violation within one year of the first violation.

4.     The valid vendor permit shall be revoked by the city upon the fourth violation.

B.     A person engaged in sidewalk vending without a valid city vendor permit is punishable by an administrative citation pursuant to Chapter 1.17 in amounts not to exceed the following, in lieu of the amounts set forth in subsection A:

1.     Two hundred fifty dollars for a first violation.

2.     Five hundred dollars for a second violation within one year of the first violation.

3.     One thousand dollars for each violation within one year of the first violation.

4.     Upon proof of valid vendor permit issued by the city, the administrative citations set forth in this subsection shall be reduced to amounts set forth in this subsection A.

C.     A violation of this chapter shall not be punishable as an infraction or misdemeanor. No person alleged to have violated the provisions herein shall be subject to arrest except when otherwise permitted by law.

D.    Failure to pay an administrative citation issued pursuant to this section shall not be punishable as an infraction or misdemeanor. Additional fines, fees, assessments, or any other financial conditions beyond those authorized herein shall not be assessed.

E.     Any fine issued under this chapter will be accompanied with a notice of and instruction regarding the right to request an ability-to-pay determination.

F.     If the requestor is receiving public benefits under Government Code Section 68632, subdivision (a), or has a monthly income which is one hundred twenty-five percent or less than the current poverty guidelines updated periodically in the Federal Register by the United States Department of Health and Human Services, the city will limit the total amount of the requestor’s administrative fine to twenty percent of the total. (Ord. 2019-07 §5).

Chapter 17.70 GENERAL ADMINISTRATION OF ZONING
17.70.010 Interpretation.
The purposes of an interpretation are to:

A.    Determine if the nature of a use not specifically listed in this title is, in fact, similar to a use which is specifically listed as a permitted or conditionally permitted use within a particular zoning district.

B.     Interpret the provisions of this title whenever any ambiguity arises. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.70.020 Administration.
A.    The planning director shall have the authority to make only determinations as to the similarity of one use which is not listed in this title to another use which is listed.

B.     The planning commission shall resolve all matters related to ambiguity.

1.     Such resolution shall occur at a regularly scheduled meeting of the commission and shall be in response to a written request which clearly identifies the ambiguity.

2.     The planning commission, in making its interpretations, shall seek the advice of the city attorney and the planning director.

3.     No public hearing shall be required of the city planning commission in making an interpretation of this title. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.70.030 Types of zoning applications.
A.    There are two main types of applications:

1.     Ministerial applications, which must be approved by city departments if they meet all city code requirements. Plot plans for land uses permitted by right in a zoning district (permitted uses, administrative use permits and temporary use permits) are an example of ministerial applications although certain exceptions may apply.

2.     Discretionary permits, where the planning director or planning commission must make the following findings before permits for projects can be approved (conditional use permits are examples of “discretionary” application):

 

a.     There is no substantial evidence that the project will have a significant effect on the environment with the implementation of the proposed mitigation measures and/or conditions of approval;

b.     The proposed project is consistent with the city of Waterford general plan and this code;

c.     The proposed project is compatible with adjacent uses, properties, and neighborhoods; and

d.     The proposed project will not be a nuisance or detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare.

B.     Processing procedures for these applications are as follows:

1.     Plot Plans.

a.     Plot plan review and approval by the planning department is required for all uses, with a few exceptions, to determine if they comply with city code requirements, the city general plan, and applicable zoning regulations.

b.     Processing. If a building permit is required for the proposed use, the city building department will route the plot plan with the building permit to other city departments for their comments. If a building permit is not required, the planning department will route the plot plan to other city departments for comments, prior to approval.

2.     Administrative Permits.

a.     Administrative permits are permits for uses of land that require special review to ensure they are compatible with the neighborhood and surrounding residences. They are considered more likely to have greater impacts than uses permitted by right in the zone, but lesser impacts than uses permitted under conditional use permits. The processing of an administrative permit is completed at one of two levels: (i) planning department staff approval where conditions are limited to compliance with city code and standards; (ii) planning director approval where additional conditions may be applied that lessen the impact or conflict of the project on neighboring uses and promote neighborhood compatibility of a use. The level of review is determined by the project proposal, its location, potential for controversy or opposition and potential environmental impacts. The planning director can refer an application to the planning commission if there are significant unresolved issues or neighborhood issues or concerns.

b.     Processing.

i.      Planning Department Staff Approval. Staff approval may be given for an administrative permit that complies with all applicable standards of this title.

ii.     Planning Director Administrative Approval. If a project is not controversial and there are no unresolved issues after referral to affected agencies, city departments, adjacent property owners for review and comment, and the conclusion of environmental review, if necessary, the application may be reviewed and acted on by the planning director. If the project has unresolved issues, it is referred to the planning commission for a public hearing and decision. On a designated date, the director shall make a decision on the application. If approved, and no appeal is filed within five days, the administrative permit is mailed to the applicant and building permits may be processed and/or the use may be established.

 

iii.    Administrative permit approval or denial actions shall be reported to the planning commission at their next regular meeting following the planning director’s action.

3.     Conditional Use Permits. The standards for processing a conditional use permit are contained in Chapter 17.75.

a.     Conditional use permits (CUP) are discretionary permits for uses of land that require special review to insure they are compatible with the neighborhood and surrounding residences or other uses. They are considered more likely to have greater impacts than uses permitted by right or by administrative permit. CUPs shall be reviewed and approved, denied or conditionally approved by the planning commission after review and recommendation by the planning director.

b.     The applicant submits the proper forms, plot plans, and processing fees to the planning department. The planning department shall send out referrals to affected agencies and city departments and adjacent property owners for their review and comment. After the referral period and the conclusion of environmental review, if necessary, the project is then scheduled for a public hearing before the planning commission. At the conclusion of the public hearing, the planning commission will make a decision on the application. If approved, and no appeal is filed within five days, the conditional use permit is mailed to the applicant. Building permits may then be processed and/or the use may be established.

4.     Modifications to Administrative Permits, Temporary Permits and Conditional Use Permits. Applications may be processed by the planning department for two types of modifications or changes to administrative permits and conditional use permits: major modifications and minor modifications.

a.     Major modifications must be approved by the body which originally approved the permit and minor modifications may be approved by the planning director without a public hearing. For major modifications, all processing, referral notification and hearing procedures apply as previously described in subsections (A)(2) and (B) of this section.

b.     A modification to a permit may be considered minor if the planning director can make the following findings:

i.      The modification will not have a significant effect on the environment (i.e., it is exempt from CEQA);

ii.     The modification is a minor, less than ten percent change to the approved permit from the standpoint of:

(A)   The area, space, or volume occupied by the uses;

(B)   Automobile and truck traffic;

(C)   Number of employees;

(D)   Business or production output;

(E)   Generation of wastewater or emissions of other pollutants;

iii.    The modification will not be materially detrimental to other properties or land uses in the area.

c.     All minor permit modifications shall be reported to the planning commission for review and are subject to reversal at the next regular commission meeting upon majority vote of the commission. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.70.040 Zone changes and relief from zoning standards.
Procedures for processing a zone change or amendment are contained in Chapter 17.77.

A.    Zone Code Text Amendments. A zone code text amendment (ZCTA) begins with an application to add to, delete, or modify any part of the text of the zoning code. If approved by the city council, it is effective city wide.

1.     Processing. An applicant submits an application for a ZCTA to the planning department, indicating what code text is being proposed for revision and the justification for the revision, together with initial processing fees. When the application materials are deemed complete and it is determined if environmental review will be necessary, referrals are sent to appropriate affected agencies and city departments for review and comment.

2.     Public Hearings. After the referral period and the conclusion of the environmental review, if necessary, the project is scheduled for a public hearing before the planning commission. At the conclusion of the public hearing, the planning commission will make a written recommendation to the city council. The council will also hold a public hearing and make a final decision on the application. If approved, the ZCTA will be adopted by ordinance.

B.     Zone Changes. All land in the city of Waterford is classified into various zoning districts. These zones are outlined on one or more of the city zoning district maps. Chapters 17.08 through 17.26 of this title describe the uses of land that are allowed in each zone and the development standards for those uses.

C.     Zone Variances—Minor Deviations. Procedures for processing a variance are contained in Chapter 17.76.

1.     Purpose and Application.

a.     Variances are exceptions to the zoning requirements for a property to enjoy the same privilege enjoyed by property in the vicinity based on a physical hardship such as parcel shape or topography. An example is a lot with a steep ravine where a home site can only be constructed in a required building setback area. A variance can be granted to legally allow the home to be constructed within the normal setback area. It is very difficult to meet the state’s legal requirements for granting zone variances. Variances are also not permitted for uses of property not authorized in a particular zone.

b.     Minor deviations are minor adjustments from setback standards and may be considered with more leniency than variances based on criteria in subsection (C)(3) of this section. Application for and action on zone variances from development standards are considered at a public hearing by the planning commission with notice as provided in Chapter 17.77, similar to conditional use applications. Applications for minor deviations are acted on by the planning director after notice is given to adjacent property owners.

2.     Minor Deviation Criteria. The planning director may grant a minor deviation from zone code setback requirements for property subject to the finding: the deviation does not grant such property privileges not enjoyed by other properties in the vicinity under identical zoning classification and, further, that the minor deviation is not materially detrimental to surrounding property. The following deviations may be considered:

a.     Up to twenty-five percent of front yard setback requirements but no closer than fifteen feet from the property line.

b.     Up to forty percent of the side yard setback requirements but no closer than three feet from the property line.

c.     Up to forty percent of the rear yard setback requirements but no closer than fifteen feet from the property line.

d.     Up to ten percent increase in height allowed for buildings and structures. Conditions or performance standards to achieve objectives of this title may be attached to minor deviations.

3.     Expiration. Approval of a minor deviation shall expire within one year unless exercised or extended by the planning director. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.70.050 Application submittal.
A.    Pre-Application Review by Staff. Applicants are encouraged to talk to planning department staff about their project in a pre-application review prior to the filing of an application. The planning department will formalize the application submittal requirements as set forth in subsection C below. The planning department will coordinate this review with other concerned city departments. This review will examine issues that may include technical or design criteria of a development project, general plan criteria, or sensitive environmental issues. The pre-application review allows staff to resolve these issues and prevent delays before a project has been accepted as complete and processing has begun.

B.     Who May Apply. A property owner, lessee with a five-year lease, or a person with written authorization to act on behalf of the property owner may apply for a ministerial approval, discretionary permit, zone variance/minor deviation, or zone change. Any interested party may apply for a zone code text amendment since they apply city-wide.

C.     Required Plans and Materials. The following plans and materials shall be submitted; provided, that the planning director may waive submission of items deemed unnecessary to determine compliance with applicable requirements of this title:

1.     A fully dimensioned site plan showing:

a.     The architect’s or designer’s name, address, and telephone number,

b.     Scale of plan and north arrow,

c.     Street address of site and vicinity map showing the relationship of the site to the surrounding area,

d.     Existing and proposed property lines, right-of-way lines, dedications, and easements,

e.     Locations of existing and proposed structures, driveways, walks and open spaces, and

f.      Locations, heights, and materials of existing and proposed walls and fences;

2.     A statement describing the proposed use and calculations in tabular form showing compliance with applicable density, coverage, parking, and open space regulations;

3.     A fully dimensioned landscape plan if required;

4.     A grading plan, when required, showing proposed changes in grade and the total volume of land to be cut or filled, with proposed drainage patterns indicated by arrows;

5.     A fully dimensioned parking and loading plan, when required, showing:

a.     Locations and dimensions of all parking and loading spaces, driveways and vehicular entrances, with proposed traffic circulation patterns indicated by arrows, and

b.     Calculations showing the number of parking and loading spaces required by size and the number proposed including shared parking or parking off-set proposals,

c.     Proposal for in-lieu parking fee payment and proposed public transportation improvements;

6.     Elevations of proposed structures, showing exterior wall openings and describing exterior materials;

7.     Floor plans showing the proposed use and exterior wall openings;

8.     Locations, dimensions, and heights of all signs.

D.    Application Filing and Determination. The application shall be prepared by the applicant and submitted to the planning department where staff will make the following determinations, if applicable:

1.     Is the proposal consistent with the city of Waterford general plan?

2.     Is the proposed use allowed within the zone for which it is intended?

3.     Type of permit required.

4.     Legal status of property.

5.     Are there any outstanding violations on the property which need to be cleared prior to application acceptance?

E.     Parcels with Code Violations. No building permits, administrative permits, conditional use permits, zone changes, or other entitlements shall be processed for parcels in violation of the city code unless the proposed entitlement corrects the violation.

F.     Required Application Contents. Applications for review of any permit or change of zone or zoning standards shall include all information prescribed on lists available from the planning department (State Government Code Section 65940). (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.70.060 Initial review and acceptance of applications.
A.    Determination of Completeness. Within the timelines prescribed by law, the planning department shall determine whether the required application materials are complete and what level of environmental review is necessary (State Government Code Section 65943).

1.     The environmental determination will assess whether the project is exempt from environmental review or requires either a negative declaration or environmental impact report.

2.     The applicant shall be informed by a letter that the application is complete and any remaining fees that are necessary in order for processing to begin; or that the application is incomplete and that additional information must be provided within fourteen days.

3.     Upon receipt of the fees and/or additional information, processing shall begin and the applicant shall be sent a processing schedule with tentative dates for referrals, environmental review and decision on the application.

B.     Withdrawal or Return of Application. The application may be withdrawn and returned to the applicant if requested by the applicant. The planning department may also terminate an application if the applicant fails to supply requested information necessary to formulate a recommendation within a reasonable period of time after notification.

C.     Referral of Application. At the discretion of the planning director and where required by city, state and federal law, any land use application may be referred to any responsible public agency that may be affected by or have an interest in the proposed land use. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.70.070 Environmental review.
A.    All agencies that have a regulatory function, such as Waterford public works department, are required by the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) to consider the effects of their decisions on the environment. Through CEQA, the state has established guidelines for assessing and mitigating potential impacts from land uses and activities, such as those commonly authorized by city of Waterford. When the planning department receives an application, an initial determination of whether the project is subject to CEQA is made in accordance with the city of Waterford CEQA policy and procedures guidelines and state law.

B.     The purpose of the city of Waterford’s CEQA policies and procedures is to fully disclose to the public the extent of impact that can be anticipated from a project’s implementation, and recommend adequate steps to avoid or mitigate the impact. However, projects with impacts that cannot be fully mitigated are not necessarily denied issuance of permits in accordance with the requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act and CEQA Guidelines. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.70.080 Staff report and recommendations.
A.    Staff Report Preparation. Except for approvals by the planning department staff, a staff report shall be prepared by the planning department that describes the conclusions of the staff about the proposed land use and any accompanying development. The report will identify the project compliance and consistency with the zoning code, other applicable city provisions, applicable community specific plans, and the general plan. The staff report shall include a recommendation for approval or denial of the application, based on the evaluation and consideration of information provided on the application and the initial environmental study or environmental impact report. The staff report shall include a list of recommended findings and conditions, as necessary.

B.     Report Distribution.

1.     Planning Director. Any reports, findings, or conditions for matters reviewed by the planning director shall be made available to the applicant and public prior to the director’s decision.

2.     Planning Commission. Staff reports for matters reviewed by the planning commission shall be distributed to individual commissioners and the applicant five days prior to the hearing date.

3.     City Council. Staff reports for matters reviewed by the city council shall be distributed to council members and the applicant five days prior to the hearing date.

4.     Affected City Departments, Outside Agencies and Interested Parties. Staff reports for matters reviewed by any decision body shall be distributed to any concerned department, agency or other party upon request. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.70.090 Plot plan/permit time limits.
A.    Initiation of Plot Plan Permit. Nondiscretionary approvals by the planning director, such as for a plot plan, are effective immediately. Decisions of the planning director or planning commission for a discretionary permit, such as for a conditional use permit, shall become final and effective on the tenth calendar day after approval, unless prior to the tenth day an appeal of the decision is filed under Chapter 17.78 (Appeals). Thereafter, the applicant shall proceed to carry out the conditions of approval and establish the approved use within one year.

B.     Expiration of Plot Plan/Permit. An approved plot plan or discretionary permit is valid for one year from its effective date. At the end of one year, the plot plan or permit shall expire and become void unless:

1.     The plot plan or permit has been implemented because of one or more of the following: conditions of approval prerequisite to construction have been satisfied, significant sums for engineering or construction design have been expended, any required building permits have been issued, or construction has progressed beyond site preparation and the completion of structural foundations; or

2.     The plot plan or permit has been implemented because a use not requiring construction permits has been established on the site and is in operation as approved, and all conditions of approval prerequisite to establishment of the use have been satisfied; or

3.     An extension of time has been granted according to subsection D of this section.

C.     Abandonment or Discontinuance. Where a previously initiated use under a city discretionary permit has been abandoned or discontinued for over one year, the planning department may initiate revocation proceedings at a public hearing before the body that originally approved the permit (see also Section 17.78.020). However, a nonconforming use or building that has been abandoned or discontinued for over one year is precluded from re-use without first obtaining a discretionary permit from the city of Waterford and/or meeting all existing code requirements.

D.    Extensions of Time. Prior to the expiration of the plot plan approval or discretionary permit, the applicant may request an extension of time. The request shall be in writing, and be accompanied by a nonrefundable filing fee established by the most current planning department fee schedule. After review, the planning director may extend the plot plan or permit for a period of one year provided that:

1.     The condition of the project area has not changed significantly;

2.     The project conforms to the zoning code;

3.     The project is consistent with the general plan;

4.     The number of consecutive one-year extensions shall be limited to five.

E.     Re-Application. If the one year time limit for implementation of an approved use expires, the plot plan approval or permit shall be terminated, as under subsection B of this section. After expiration, a new permit may be applied for at any time subject to the processing procedure of this code. No denial of an application by the planning director, planning commission, or city council shall be reconsidered within less than two years, unless the surrounding area has been rezoned or a major change in the area has taken place. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.70.100 Appeals.
Decisions of the planning director and the planning commission may be appealed as provided by the processes set forth in Chapter 17.78 and State Government Code Sections 65903, 65904.

A.    Appeal Subjects and Appeal Bodies. Actions and decisions that may be appealed, and the authority to act upon an appeal shall be as follows:

1.     Decisions of the Planning Director and Staff. The following actions of the planning director and staff may be appealed to the planning commission:

a.     Determinations on the meaning or applicability of the provisions of this code that are believed to be in error, and cannot be resolved with staff;

b.     Any determination that a permit application or information submitted with the application cannot be accepted or is incomplete, under State Government Code Section 65943;

c.     Any enforcement action, as provided by Chapter 17.80;

d.     Actions by the planning director or hearing officer to approve or deny a project.

2.     Decisions of the planning commission may be appealed to the city council.

B.     Who May Appeal. An appeal may be filed by any person or agency affected by a decision, administrative action, or interpretation of the planning commission or planning director as described in subsections (A)(1) and (2) of this section. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

Chapter 17.71 MONITORING COST RECOVERY
17.71.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the determination, imposition and collection of administrative costs associated with the monitoring and enforcement of mitigation measures or conditions of approval imposed upon the granting of any permit or other entitlement authorized by this title. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.71.020 Authority.
The planning director, or his/her authorized designee, is authorized to determine, impose and collect all administrative costs associated with the monitoring or enforcement of mitigation measures or conditions of approval imposed upon the granting of any permit or other entitlement pursuant to the provisions of this title. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.71.030 Procedure.
A.    All city departments which grant permits or entitlement under this title which impose or provide mitigation measures or conditions which require monitoring shall as a further condition of granting the permit or approving the entitlement specify that such monitoring shall be conducted and that the cost thereof shall be borne by the property owner or other person obtaining the permit or entitlement and shall be paid according to the provisions of this chapter.

B.     The planning director shall, at the time of the granting of the permit or approval of the entitlement, submit to the approving agency his/her reasonable estimate of the administrative cost of monitoring the mitigation measures or conditions. Such approving agency shall as a condition of approval require the owner or the other person obtaining the permit or entitlement to deposit that amount on a one-time or annual basis.

C.     If the deposit is required on an annual basis, it may be adjusted in subsequent years, by agreement of the planning director and the owner or by subsequent action by the authorizing agency at the request of the planning director or owner. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.71.040 Enforcement costs.
The planning director, or his/her authorized designee(s), is authorized to recover enforcement costs arising from the failure of any property owner or person in control to conform to or implement any mitigation measures or conditions of approval imposed by the city per Chapter 1.17. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

Chapter 17.72 STANDARDS OF REVIEW
17.72.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish uniform minimum standards in order to improve the compatibility of land uses and development with adjacent land uses and development. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.72.020 Review required.
Each project application submitted to the Waterford city planning department for review and action by the planning director or planning commission shall be subject to the following standards of review. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.72.030 Standards of review.
Unless otherwise addressed by other approval processes (i.e. major subdivisions, conditional use permits), all development shall comply with the following sections. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.72.040 Conformity.
A.    Any permit approved by the city of Waterford shall conform to the Waterford general plan and any applicable specific plan, area plan or similar planning program as adopted by the Waterford city council.

B.     Any permit approved by the city of Waterford shall conform to Waterford development standards, policies and applicable guidelines, including but not limited to:

1.     Standards and provisions of this title;

2.     City of Waterford improvement standards;

3.     City of Waterford architectural design guidelines. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.72.050 Availability of essential services.
A.    All projects that require the additional use of or new facilities for essential services (including, but not limited to, sanitary sewers, water lines, storm drains, fire hydrants, public streets, street lighting and similar services such as police and fire facilities, schools and/or other capital facilities), shall obtain preliminary approval as required by the agency providing such service prior to issuance of a building permit, or final land use permit if no building permit is required.

B.     The non-availability of essential services may be grounds for denying permits for additional development until such services are available.

C.     The city is not obligated to extend or supply essential services if capacity is not available obligated or reserved. If capacity is available, the extension of services shall be made by, and at the cost of, the developer.

D.    All service extensions shall be designed and installed in full conformance with city standards or the standards of the providing agency, as appropriate.

E.     All service extensions shall be subject to review, permit and inspection as required by other policies or ordinances of the city or the service provider.

F.     All development proposals shall be reviewed to assure consistency with the circulation policies and standards contained in the general plan. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.72.060 Environmental objectives.
A.    Whenever a “project” is proposed in the city of Waterford, as defined by the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) a review of potential environmental impacts shall be evaluated. All environmental impacts identified as potentially significant shall be mitigated to the maximum extent feasible.

B.     All development shall be designed to achieve the environmental goals and objectives of the city of Waterford as set forth in the Waterford general plan and the Waterford general plan EIR to the maximum extent feasible.

C.     Where a proposal does not comply with the standards of subsections A and B of this section, the applicant shall have the responsibility to provide documentation as to why such compliance with the city’s general plan and general plan EIR goals and standards is not feasible and a “waiver” to such compliance may be granted by the planning commission when the commission determines that the project benefits exceed the adverse impacts on the city’s environment resulting from the project.

D.    Such finding may be required for a project to be part of a statement of overriding considerations adopted as part of the certification process of a project environmental impact report (EIR). (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.72.070 Official plan lines.
Whenever an official plan line or right-of-way has been established for any street, the required yards shall be measured from the official plan line or right-of-way line. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.72.080 Utility installation.
All newly constructed public utilities which are used to service a commercial, industrial, residential and/or multiple-family lot shall be placed underground in accordance with existing city standards. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.72.090 Exceptions.
Under certain specific circumstances, exceptions to the requirements of this chapter may be approved by the planning director.

A.    Height Limits. In general, the height limitations established by this title shall not apply to church spires, belfries, cupolas and domes, monuments, water towers, silos, observation towers, distribution and transmission towers, lines and poles, chimneys, smokestacks, and flag poles.

B.     Design. The planning commission may require appropriate design changes or that an architectural review application be submitted and approved for any of the height exceptions listed above. Approval of any type of transmitting radio, TV, or other antenna, except satellite dish antenna, shall require approval of the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) prior to installation.

C.     Projections into Required Setback Areas. The following shall be permitted to project into a required setback area:

1.     Bay windows, cornices, canopies, eaves, greenhouse windows, chimneys, gutters, and other architectural features may project into required yards a maximum of three feet. However, no such feature shall project closer than three feet from a property line.

2.     A fire escape, or an unenclosed stairway, porch, patio, deck or balcony which is fully open to the sky, may extend or project into the required setback areas as follows:

a.     Not closer than three feet from a side yard property line;

b.     Six feet into any required front yard;

c.     Ten feet into the required rear yard.

D.    Ground-Level Decks. An unenclosed ground-level deck may extend or project not closer than three feet from a side yard or rear yard property line, and not more than six feet into the required front yard setback area.

1.     When located five feet or more from any residence at its closest point, a ground-level deck shall be no higher than thirty inches above the ground at its highest point.

2.     When located less than five feet from any residence at its closest point, or if attached to a residence, a ground-level deck shall be no higher than eighteen inches above the ground at its highest point.

E.     Gazebos and similar structures (such as solid patio shades) shall be considered accessory buildings and subject to the specific requirements contained elsewhere in this title. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.72.100 Limitation of exception provisions.
The exception provisions of this section shall not be interpreted so as to alter any minimum front, rear or side yard setbacks as otherwise required by this title. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

Chapter 17.73 ADMINISTRATIVE USE PERMITS
17.73.010 Purpose.
An administrative use permit is required for certain uses within specific zoning districts where the use is otherwise permitted, but due to the nature of the use or the area within which the use is proposed requiring special review/approval procedures. For the purposes of CEQA compliance, administrative use permits are not normally “discretionary” permits but rather are permits subject to established city standards for unique site and use applications and therefore considered “ministerial” and not subject to CEQA review. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.73.020 Administrative permit review.
A.    The following regulations shall be applied to the planning director’s review and approval of administrative use permits. Uses subject to administrative approval by the planning director shall be permitted only in those zone districts where administrative uses are specifically enumerated as a use subject to review and approval.

B.     Unless required under Government Code Section 65905, no public hearing need be held on the issuance of an administrative permit; provided, however, that the planning director may require that the planning commission conduct a public hearing because general public and/or neighborhood interest or concern over the use or activity that is proposed.

C.     Administrative uses may be established subject to review and approval by the planning director, as permitted in this title, provided the planning director finds that the public necessity, convenience and welfare justify the approval and that the establishment, maintenance and operation of the proposed use will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety or general welfare. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.73.030 Permit required.
An administrative use permit will be required for any of the uses enumerated in the zoning district where such use is identified as “A” or subject to an administrative use permit (AUP). The planning director may, from time to time, specify the form of the administrative permit application and permit. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.73.040 Required standards for an administrative use permit.
A.    Each administrative use shall comply with the regulations of the applicable zoning district within which it is physically located.

B.     Prior Determinations for an Administrative Use Permit Approval. The planning director shall only approve an application for a temporary use permit, if all of the following findings can be made:

1.     The proposed administrative use will be compatible with adjacent uses and will not adversely affect the surrounding neighborhood by means of odor, noise, dust, or other nuisance.

2.     The proposed administrative use has been referred to the planning commissioners for review and comment in accordance with normal city permit review processes.

3.     The proposed administrative use is consistent with all general plan, city, and municipal code regulations, including securing the required city of Waterford business license per Title 3 of this code.

4.     The proposed administrative use permit application has been subjected to the standards of review contained in Chapter 17.73.

C.     Conditions of Approval. The planning director may impose such conditions on an administrative use permit as is necessary to meet the purposes of this chapter and protect the public health, safety and welfare and adjacent uses. Conditions which may be imposed include, but are not limited to:

1.     Setbacks and open space requirements;

2.     Parking and circulation;

3.     Fences, walls or other screening;

4.     Signs;

5.     Vehicular and pedestrian ingress and egress;

6.     Property maintenance during the course of the activity;

7.     Control of illumination, noise, odor, vibration or other nuisances;

8.     Hours of operations.

D.    Notice and Posting. A notice of proposed use shall be posted on the site where an administrative use permit is to be considered by the planning director at least ten days prior to the planning director’s decision and a notice shall be similarly published in a newspaper of general circulation ten days prior to the decision to approve.

E.     Referral to the Planning Commission. The planning director may refer any administrative review application to the planning commission for review and approval.

F.     Appeal of Administrative Review Decision. Any person who is dissatisfied with the decision of the planning director may appeal that decision to the planning commission in accordance with the procedures in this title. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

Chapter 17.74 TEMPORARY USE PERMITS
17.74.010 Purpose.
A temporary use permit provides the mechanism through which the city can authorize, subject to specific standards, the temporary establishment of a use within a specific zoning district. For the purposes of CEQA compliance, temporary use permits are not normally discretionary permits but rather are permits subject to established city standards for unique site and use applications and therefore considered ministerial and not subject to CEQA review. (Ord. 2013-03 §1; Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.74.020 Temporary permit review.
A.    The following regulations shall be applied to the planning director’s review and approval temporary uses. Uses subject to temporary approval by the planning director shall be permitted only in those zone districts where such uses are, or are similar to, uses specifically enumerated as a use subject to review and approval.

B.     Unless Required Under Government Code Section 65905. No public hearing need be held on the issuance of a temporary permit; provided, however, that the planning director may require that the planning commission conduct a public hearing because of general public and/or neighborhood interest or concern over the use or activity that is proposed.

C.     Temporary uses may be established subject to review and approval by the planning director, as set forth in this title, provided the planning director finds that the public necessity, convenience and welfare justify the approval and that the establishment, maintenance and operation of the proposed temporary use will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety or general welfare. (Ord. 2013-03 §1; Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.74.030 Permit required.
A temporary use permit will be required for any of the uses enumerated in this chapter. The planning director may, from time to time, specify the form of the administrative use application and permit. (Ord. 2013-03 §1; Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.74.040 Uses permitted with a temporary use permit.
The following uses are eligible for a temporary use permit provided they meet the following criteria:

A.    Carnivals, circuses, fairs, festivals, animal displays, amusement rides, flea markets, certified farmers markets, special events promoting local agricultural products, promotions, and similar public assemblies on private property, and other similar gatherings, may be permitted only in a nonresidential zoning district for a maximum five-consecutive-day period of time upon the approval of a temporary use permit application by the planning director.

B.     Special temporary seasonal sales such as Christmas trees, fireworks, pumpkin retail sales or similar sales are limited to the period of time around the holiday as approved by the planning director. Operators must comply with all applicable city rules and regulations (see Chapter 8.30 for additional requirements for firework sales). Such sales lots shall be permitted only within commercial and industrial zoning districts and shall comply with the following requirements:

1.     Such lots shall be restricted only to the sale of goods or merchandise associated with the seasonal event.

2.     Such lots shall not be permitted to occupy any part of an off-street parking lot required to serve the permanent uses on the site unless it can be demonstrated that use of the required parking area will not materially diminish the functionality of the parking area and the temporary loss of such parking will not create congestion or use of public streets and rights-of-way to supplement required off-street parking to the satisfaction of the planning director.

3.     Such lots shall be permitted to display signs only in accordance with the provisions of the city’s sign ordinance.

C.     Grand openings, and special events, such as parking lot sales, clearance sales or other special temporary uses, which in the opinion of the planning director are similar to the uses listed in this chapter and consistent with the use standards of the district within which the temporary use is proposed, shall comply with the following:

1.     Such outdoor displays or sales or goods, merchandise or services shall be held no more than three times annually.

2.     Each display or sale shall be limited to a maximum of five consecutive days.

3.     All such sales shall be conducted by a business located on and conducting business within a building on the property upon which the temporary use is proposed.

D.    Sale of produce on the parcel of land on which such produce is grown provided that the principal use of said parcel is agricultural.

E.     Neighborhood or block parties, fairs or festivals organized, conducted and administered by neighborhood residents of the neighborhood within which the party, fair or festival is conducted.

F.     Temporary land uses, sales offices and buildings shall meet the following criteria:

1.     A temporary sales office, and/or construction offices, open to the general public, may be permitted by the planning director within a new residential subdivision for a maximum period of two years. An extension may be granted subject to planning commission review and approval.

2.     Temporary commercial, industrial and administrative buildings may be permitted for a maximum two-year period of time, but only after approval of a conditional use permit application by the city planning commission. An extension may be granted subject to planning commission review and approval.

3.     All temporary land uses, sales offices, construction offices and buildings shall be connected to water and sewer services as required by the building official, director of public works, fire chief and Stanislaus County health department.

G.    Each temporary use shall:

1.     Be described on the application and the permit therefor issued prior to the commencement of the activity. This permit shall be in addition to all other licenses, permits or approvals otherwise required by this title.

2.     Provide off-street parking spaces in a number equivalent to the number of parking spaces required applicable city codes and standards.

3.     All unimproved parking areas and main walk areas shall be kept damp or shall be covered with a material to prevent the raising of dust.

4.     No display shall encroach on a public right-of-way.

5.     All signs and structures shall conform to applicable city codes.

6.     Sanitary facilities, either portable or permanent shall be made available to all employees, attendants and participants of the activity during the operational hours of the event.

7.     All sites shall be completely cleaned of debris and temporary structures, including but not limited to: trash receptacle, signs, stands, poles, electric wiring or any other fixtures and appurtenances or equipment connected therewith within five days after the termination of the event.

8.     A bond or cash deposit in the amount set forth in the city code shall be deposited with the city for activities that occur on vacant or undeveloped lots to assure adequate clean-up. Additional bonding for other issues of liability may be required by the city.

H.    Prior Determinations for Temporary Use Permit Approval. The planning director shall only approve an application for a temporary use permit, if all of the following findings can be made:

1.     The proposed temporary use will be compatible with adjacent uses and will not adversely affect the surrounding neighborhood by means of odor, noise, dust, or other nuisance.

2.     The additional parking required by the temporary use will be provided pursuant to Chapter 17.54, Off-Street Parking Regulations.

3.     Increased traffic caused by the temporary use will not adversely affect the surrounding neighborhood or city at large.

4.     The proposed temporary use is consistent with all general plan, city, and municipal code regulations, including securing the required city of Waterford business license per Title 3 of this code, and for firework sales compliance with Chapter 8.30 of this code.

I.      Conditions of Approval. The planning director may impose such conditions on a temporary use permit as is necessary to meet the purposes of this chapter and protect the public health, safety and welfare and adjacent uses. Conditions which may be imposed include, but are not limited to:

1.     Setbacks and open space requirements;

2.     Parking and circulation;

3.     Fences, walls or other screening;

4.     Signs;

5.     Vehicular and pedestrian ingress and egress;

6.     Property maintenance during the course of the activity;

7.     Control of illumination, noise, odor, vibration or other nuisances;

8.     Hours of operations.

J.      Notice and Posting. A notice of proposed use shall be posted on the site where a temporary use permit is to be considered by the planning director at least ten days prior to the planning director’s decision, and a notice shall be similarly published in a newspaper of general circulation ten days prior to the decision to approve.

K.    Referral to the Planning Commission. The planning director may refer any temporary use permit application to the planning commission for review and approval.

L.     Appeal of Temporary Use Permit Decision. Any person who is dissatisfied with the decision of the planning director may appeal that decision to the planning commission in accordance with the procedures in this title. (Ord. 2013-03 §1; Ord. 2011-02 §1).

Chapter 17.75 USE PERMITS
17.75.010 Generally.
Use permits, which are revocable, conditional and valid for either a specified or an indefinite period of time, may be issued for any of the uses which, under the terms of this title, are identified as “U” or subject to a conditional use permit (CUP). The procedure for securing use permits shall be as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.75.020 Purpose.
The purpose of requiring a conditional use permit is to ensure the proper integration of uses which, because of their special nature, may be suitable only in certain locations and to provide that such uses are arranged or operated in a particular manner. The conditional use permit allows a particular use or activity not otherwise allowed as a matter of right within a zoning district. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.75.030 Application.
A.    Application for a use permit shall be made by the owner of the real property for which such use permit is sought, or by the authorized agent of such owner.

B.     Such application shall be filed with the planning commission, in writing, on a form prescribed by the commission and shall be signed by the owner or his/her authorized agent.

C.     The application shall be accompanied by plans, including elevations and other pertinent data, to show in detail the proposed use or buildings.

D.    A filing fee, in such amount as may be fixed from time to time by order or resolution of the city council, shall be paid at the time the application is filed. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.75.040 Public hearing.
A.    Unless required under Government Code Section 65905, no public hearing need be held on the issuance of a use permit provided, however, that the planning commission may hold any hearing it deems necessary.

B.     The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on a use permit when it determines that:

1.     The proposed use, for which a use permit is required, has a potential to be controversial in the neighborhood within which it is located;

2.     The proposed use has city or community-wide implications which require broad-based community input with respect to the proposed activity;

3.     A public hearing request is made by a resident of the city or an individual, organization or public body that may be adversely impacted by the project if it is approved;

4.     A majority of the commissioners feel that, for any reason, a duly noticed public hearing on the proposed use permit application should be required.

C.     In case a public hearing is deemed necessary, notice of such hearing shall be given in accordance with Chapter 17.79. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.75.050 Action by the planning commission.
A.    In order to obtain a use permit, the applicant must introduce evidence in support of the application sufficient to enable the planning commission to find that the establishment, maintenance and operation of the proposed use or building applied for will not, under the circumstances of the particular case, be detrimental to the health, safety, and general welfare of persons residing or working in the neighborhood of such use and that it will not be detrimental or injurious to property and improvements in the neighborhood or to the general welfare of the city.

B.     The planning commission may impose such conditions in connection with the use permit as it deems necessary to secure the purposes of this title, and may require a bond, undertaking or other assurance that such conditions are being or will be complied with.

C.     If the planning commission, after receiving and considering the evidence, and any proposed conditions, is unable to make the foregoing findings, the use permit shall be denied. In cases where the use permit is denied, the planning commission shall state its reasons for such denial. Use permits shall not become effective for ten days after being granted and in the event an appeal is filed, such permit shall not become effective until a decision is made by the city council on such appeal. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.75.060 Planning commission determination.
A.    The planning commission shall be responsible for determining the merits of a conditional use permit application. A conditional use permit application may be conditionally approved or denied.

B.     The planning commission shall conduct a public hearing on the application in accordance with this title and state law at the earliest reasonable time following the acceptance of the application materials as complete for processing and all requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) have been met.

C.     The planning commission may conditionally approve a conditional use permit application only if the following findings can be made:

1.     The proposed conditional use permit is substantially consistent with the general plan and this title; and

2.     The proposed use will not constitute a nuisance or be detrimental to the public health, safety, and general welfare, and will be in the best interest of public convenience and necessity.

3.     The site is adequate in size and shape to accommodate the proposed use, building(s) and all related activities.

4.     The site relates to streets and highways in such a manner that the type and quantity of traffic generated by the subject use will not have an adverse impact on the surrounding area.

5.     The proposed use will be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood.

D.    Any use found to be objectionable or incompatible with the character of the city and its environs due to noise, dust, odors, traffic, lack of off-street parking, or other undesirable characteristics may be prohibited.

E.     A conditional use permit shall not be issued until ten working days have elapsed from the granting thereof to allow for the filing of any appeals.

F.     All conditional use permits granted under the authority of this title shall be implemented within one year by either:

1.     Taking actual occupancy of the building or rental space cited in the conditional use permit application.

2.     Completion of the building foundation, passing a final building inspection of the foundation work, maintaining a valid building permit and making satisfactory progress as determined by the building official.

3.     Significant financial investment made in accordance with, and reliance on, the approved permit, as determined by the planning commission.

4.     Where a conditional use permit will lead to a land subdivision, the applicant must file a complete tentative map application with the city.

5.     If not implemented in accordance with the above provisions, a conditional use permit will expire unless extended by the planning commission prior to exportation.

6.     The maximum approval period of a conditional use permit is two years.

G.    A conditional use permit granted pursuant to the provisions of this title shall run with the land and shall be valid for the approved use or activity and for all successors in interest of the original grantee.

H.    The planning commission may require any or all of the following when conditionally approving a conditional use permit application if the public health, safety and general welfare will be better protected:

1.     Special setbacks, landscaped buffers, and/or screening;

2.     Fences and/or walls;

3.     Lighting;

4.     Regulation of operating hours;

5.     Regulation of vehicular points of ingress and egress;

6.     Regulation of displays, noise, vibration, and/or odors;

7.     Provision of public improvements, easements, and/or dedications;

8.     Any other such conditions as will further facilitate orderly and efficient development in conformity with the intent and purposes set forth in this title and the general plan. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.75.070 Application re-submittal—Building permits.
A.    No application for a use permit which has been denied wholly or in part by the planning commission, or by the city council on appeal, shall be resubmitted for a period of one year from the date said order of denial became final, except on grounds of new evidence or proof of changed conditions found to be valid by the planning commission or the city council, whichever issued said order of denial.

B.     No building permit shall be issued in any case where a use permit is required by the terms of this title unless and until such use permit has been granted by the planning commission or city council and then only in accordance with the terms and conditions of the use permit so granted. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

Chapter 17.76 VARIANCES
17.76.010 Purpose.
A.    The purpose of granting a variance is to allow, in certain cases, deviation from the strict application of the setback, building height, lot coverage, useable floor area, useable open space, floor area ratio, off-street parking or landscaped area requirements of this title, when appropriate.

B.     A variance may be granted only where the literal enforcement of the requirements of this title would involve practical difficulties or cause undue hardship that would necessarily deprive the property owner of reasonable use of the land or buildings involved by reason of:

1.     The exceptional narrowness, shallowness or unusual shape of a parcel of property;

2.     Exceptional topographic conditions, natural features, existing improvements or other extraordinary situation or physical conditions. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.76.020 Conditions for granting.
Where practical difficulties, unnecessary hardships and results inconsistent with the general purposes of this title may result from the strict application of certain provisions thereof, a variance may be granted as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.76.030 Application.
A.    Application for variance shall be made in writing on a form prescribed by the city council and shall be accompanied by a fee set by the city council from time to time by resolution, and a statement, plans and evidence showing:

1.     That because of special circumstances applicable to the subject property, including size, shape, topography, location or surroundings, the strict application of this title will deprive the subject property of privileges enjoyed by other properties in the vicinity and under identical zone classification;

2.     That the granting of the application is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of substantial property rights of the petitioner and will not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and zone in which the subject property is situated;

3.     That the granting of such application will not, under the circumstances of the particular case, materially affect adversely the health or safety of persons residing or working in the neighborhood of the property of the applicant and will not, under the circumstances of the particular case, be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property or improvements in said neighborhood.

B.     In no case shall a variance be granted to permit a use or activity which is not otherwise expressly permitted or conditionally permitted in the zoning district in which the property is located.

C.     In no case shall a variance be granted to allow an increase in the maximum allowable residential density; a reduction of the minimum lot area, average lot width or minimum street frontage; or to vary from city improvement standards.

D.    Neither personal, family, nor financial difficulties; the loss of prospective profits; or the existence of neighboring violations shall constitute justification for a variance.

E.     Application for a variance shall be made in writing, on the form provided by the city, by the owners of the property, or by the lessee, purchaser in escrow, or optionee only upon written consent of the owners.

F.     The planning commission may approve, or conditionally approve, a variance application only if the following findings can be made:

1.     The variance does not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with the limitations on other properties in the same zoning district and the vicinity.

2.     The variance will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, and general welfare.

3.     The variance will not materially impair the purposes of this title or the general plan.

4.     Because of physical circumstances such as size, shape, topography and location of surroundings, the strict application of the zoning ordinance deprives such property of privileges enjoyed by other property in the vicinity under identical zoning classification (State Government Code Section 65906).

5.     The variance, if approved, will be compatible with the neighborhood.

6.     Any variance may be subject to such conditions as will assure that the adjustment authorized shall not constitute a grant of special privileges inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and zone in which the property is situated. These conditions may be implemented through a development agreement.

G.    A variance shall not be issued until ten working days have elapsed from the granting thereof to allow for the filing of any appeals.

H.    A variance granted pursuant to the provisions of this title shall run with the land and shall be valid for the original purpose for the successors in interest of the original grantee.

I.      A variance granted under the authority of this title shall be implemented within one year of the date of approval in accordance with the standards of Chapter 17.75, Use Permits. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.76.040 Public hearing.
A.    Unless required under Government Code Section 65905, no public hearing need be held on the planning commission approval of a variance; provided, however, that the planning commission may hold any hearing it deems necessary.

B.     The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on a variance when it determines that:

1.     The proposed variance has a potential to be controversial in the neighborhood within which it is located;

2.     The proposed variance has city- or community-wide implications which require broad-based community input with respect to the proposed standard for which the variance is requested;

3.     A public hearing request is made by a resident of the city or an individual, organization or public body that may be adversely impacted by the approval of the variance;

4.     A majority of the commissioners feel that, for any reason, a duly noticed public hearing on the proposed variance application should be required.

C.     In case a public hearing is deemed necessary, notice of such hearing shall be given in accordance with Chapter 17.79. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.76.050 Action by planning commission.
A.    At the conclusion of the public hearing, the planning commission shall make a written finding of facts showing whether the circumstances enumerated in Section 17.76.020 apply to the land, building or use for which variance is sought and whether such variance shall be in harmony with the general purposes of this title.

B.     The planning commission may approve, conditionally approve or deny a variance application.

C.     No application for a variance which has been denied wholly or in part by the planning commission shall be resubmitted for a period of one year from the date said order of denial became final, except on grounds of new evidence or proof of changed conditions found to be valid by the planning commission. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

Chapter 17.77 AMENDMENTS
17.77.010 Amendments.
This title may be amended by changing the boundaries of districts or by changing any other provision thereof whenever the public necessity and convenience and the general welfare require such amendment by the procedure set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.77.020 Initiation.
An amendment may be initiated by:

A.    The verified petition of one or more owners of property affected by the proposed amendment, which petition shall be filed with the planning commission, and shall be accompanied by a fee of five hundred dollars, no part of which shall be returnable except that the fee shall be eight hundred dollars for amendments to planned community zones, three hundred dollars of which will be refunded when the project is completed (future changes in this fee shall be made by resolution of the city council); or

B.     Resolution of intention of the city council; or

C.     Resolution of intention of the planning commission. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.77.030 Public hearing.
The planning commission shall hold at least one public hearing in accordance with Chapter 17.79. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.77.040 Action by planning commission.
A.    Following the hearing described in Chapter 17.79, the planning commission shall render its decision in the form of a written recommendation to the city council. Such recommendation shall include the reasons for the recommendation, and the relationship of the proposed ordinance or amendment to the applicable general and specific plans.

B.     The favorable recommendation of any amendment shall be by a resolution of the planning commission carried by the affirmative vote of a majority of its total voting members. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.77.050 Action by the city council.
A.    Upon receipt of a report from the planning commission, the city council shall fix a time and place for public hearing of the proposed amendment and give notice in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 17.79.

B.     The city council may approve, modify or disapprove the recommendation of the planning commission; provided that any modification of the proposed ordinance or amendment by the city council not previously considered by the planning commission during its hearing shall be referred to the planning commission for a report and recommendation.

C.     The planning commission shall not be required to hold a public hearing thereon. Failure of the planning commission to report within forty days after the reference, or such longer period as may be designated by the city council, shall be deemed to be approval of the proposed modification. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.77.060 Prezoning of unincorporated territory.
A.    Unincorporated territory adjoining the city may be prezoned for the purpose of determining the zoning that will apply to such property in the event of a subsequent annexation to the city. Land to be prezoned must conform to the policies and standards of the Waterford general plan.

B.     The method of accomplishing such prezoning shall be the same as provided by this title, and by applicable state law for zoning within the city. Such zoning shall become effective at the same time that the annexation becomes effective. Notice of hearing shall be given in the manner prescribed by this title and the state planning, zoning and development law. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

Chapter 17.78 APPEALS
17.78.010 Appeals.
A.    Any order, requirement, decision, determination, interpretation, or ruling made by the planning commission, architectural review committee, planning director or other city staff regarding the implementation of this title, may be appealed by any interested person.

1.     The matter on which an appeal is based must have been raised at the public hearing.

2.     The participation and basic requirements shall not apply to permits or decisions not involving public notice or a public hearing.

B.     Appeals filed from decisions of the architectural review committee, planning director or other city staff regarding decisions made in the implementation of this title shall be made to the planning commission in writing within ten days after the date of the decision on a form prescribed for that purpose by the city.

1.     The planning director may require reasonable plans, drawings, photos, reductions and/or other information in order to facilitate the processing of the appeal and the conduct of the public hearing.

2.     The filing fee for an appeal shall be as set forth by the city council.

3.     At the scheduled public hearing, the planning commission shall affirm, reverse or modify the decision being appealed. The planning commission may remand the matter for reconsideration and further hearings because of a desire for additional information, or due to the submission of new material or evidence not previously considered.

4.     A final decision of the planning commission may be appealed to the city council by any interested person, provided that person participated in a prior public hearing on the decision. The participation requirement shall not apply to permits or decisions not involving a public hearing.

C.     Appeals filed from decisions of the planning commission regarding decisions made in the implementation of this title shall be made to the Waterford city council in writing within ten days after the date of the decision on a form prescribed for that purpose by the city.

1.     The appeal shall be submitted to the city clerk in writing, and shall be accompanied by the required fee as set forth by the city council.

2.     The city clerk shall place the appeal on the city council agenda within forty-five calendar days of the filing thereof.

3.     The city clerk shall publish notice of the appeal as required by state law and this title and shall provide written notification to the appellant, applicant and owner at least five business days prior to the date set for the hearing.

4.     Unless a continuance has been granted, the city council shall proceed to hear the appeal on the specific issues cited in the appeal request.

5.     Following termination of the public hearing, and within forty-five calendar days thereof, the city council shall by resolution affirm, reverse, or modify the decision of the planning commission. An appeal may be referred back to the planning commission by the city council because of a desire for additional information, or due to the submission of new material or evidence which the planning commission had not considered in rendering its decision.

6.     An appeal may be granted by the city council and referred back to the planning commission for the application of conditions consistent with the decision of the council.

7.     A member of the city council shall have the right to call up for review by the city council any decision or action of the planning commission, city staff or other body within five business days of the decision or action. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.78.020 Permit re-application.
A.    If an application for a zoning amendment, conditional use permit, variance or other permit, license or entitlement of any kind is denied, and the applicant does not file an appeal within the required time period, said application shall not be eligible for re-submittal as a new application for a period of one year after the date of such denial.

B.     If an application for a permit, license or entitlement of any kind is denied “without prejudice,” it may be resubmitted as a new application for consideration at any time. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

Chapter 17.79 PUBLIC HEARINGS
17.79.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish uniform public hearing and notification standards for all zoning actions taken by the city of Waterford that require a public hearing. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.79.020 Notice of hearing.
Notice of a public hearing shall be given as follows:

A.    All public hearing notices shall be prepared in such a way as to allow interested persons to understand the basic nature of the proposal. A public hearing notice shall include all of the information required by state law including, but not limited to, the following:

1.     The date, time and location of the public hearing;

2.     The body conducting the public hearing;

3.     A brief description of the project;

4.     The project street address and general location;

5.     The names of the project applicant and property owner;

6.     The city file and/or permit number;

7.     A statement as to the contemplated CEQA action on the project; and

8.     A statement advising interested persons that they have the right to appear at the public hearing and be heard.

B.     If the proposed action includes a determination under California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), including, but not limited to, an Exemption Determination, Negative Declaration or Final Environmental Impact Report or other CEQA action pursuant to Section 17.70.070 (Environmental review) of this title, the city of Waterford CEQA policy and procedures, and California state law, the hearing notice shall include a statement that the hearing body will also consider approval of the proposed CEQA action and the nature of that action.

C.     Notice of a public hearing shall be provided in a minimum of two of the following:

1.     Publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city of Waterford not less than ten working days prior to the date of the hearing.

2.     Posting the notice of the hearing at the site of the property involved not less than ten working days prior to the hearing.

3.     Mailing notice of the hearing by first-class mail at least ten working days prior to the date of the hearing to all owners of real property, as shown on the latest equalized assessment roll, within three hundred feet of the boundaries of the real property that is the subject of the hearing.

4.     For public hearings affecting property on a city-wide level or where more than one thousand notices would have to be mailed, an alternative to the noticing procedures in subsection (C)(3) of this section may be used by publishing a display advertisement of at least one-eighth page in size, published at least ten working days prior to the date of the public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation.

D.    Additional Notices.

1.     Mailing notice of the hearing at least ten working days prior to the hearing date to the owner of the subject real property and his or her duly authorized agent, and the project applicant.

2.     Mailing notice of the hearing at least ten working days prior to the hearing date to each local agency or city department expected to provide water, sewage, streets, roads, schools, or other essential facilities or services to the project and whose ability to provide those facilities and services may be significantly affected.

E.     Posted Notice. Agendas listing all public hearing items are posted in the Waterford city hall and city council chambers at least seventy-two hours prior to the hearing date.

F.     Alternative Notice. If approval is by the planning director without a public hearing, notice may be given only to the owner/applicant and the adjacent property owners (i.e., adjoining or across the street). A newspaper notice is not required. However, the planning director may also determine that any other additional notice will be given because of concerns expressed about a project by other residents or property owners in the area. In addition, notice may not be given to adjacent property owners in applications for minor modifications to permits where there are no significant issues. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.79.030 Conduct of planning commission hearings.
A.    A quorum of the planning commission shall consist of three members.

B.     Actions by the commission shall require a majority vote of the total membership of the commission. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.79.040 Conduct of city council hearings.
Public hearings required under the provisions of this title before the Waterford city council shall be conducted in accordance with state law and the Waterford Municipal Code. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

Chapter 17.80 ENFORCEMENT
17.80.010 Zoning permits.
Zoning permit review shall be required for all buildings, structures hereinafter erected, constructed, altered, repaired or moved within or into any district established by this title, and for the use of vacant land, within any district established by this title. No building permit shall be issued until the zoning review portion of this title has been completed by the building inspector and/or other city official charged with the responsibility of issuing any development or construction entitlement. This includes, but is not limited to, any required architectural review, site plan, conditional use permit variance or administrative permit issued and which has become effective. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.80.020 Conformance with provisions—Enforcement.
All department officials and public employees of the city with the duty or authority to issue permits or licenses shall conform to the provisions of this title, and shall issue no permit or license for uses, buildings, or purposes in conflict with these provisions. It shall be the duty of the building inspector of the city to enforce the provisions of the title pertaining to the erection, construction, reconstruction, moving, conversion, alteration or addition to any building or structure. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.80.030 Revocation of permits and variances.
A.    The purpose of this section is to provide a uniform procedure for the revocation of discretionary permits, licenses or other entitlements issued in accordance with the provisions of this title when the conditions of approval are not being complied with as agreed to in writing, by the applicant and the property owner at the time of approval.

B.     Upon a determination by the planning director that any of the following conditions exist, a revocation hearing shall be set:

1.     Conditions of a discretionary permit, license or other entitlement have not been, or are not being, complied with.

2.     The discretionary permit, license or entitlement was granted on the basis of false or misleading information, written or oral, given either willingly or negligently by the applicant, property owner or their representative.

3.     The use, activity, or the purpose for which the permit, license or entitlement was issued, has been discontinued for a period of six months or more.

C.     A hearing and notice are required prior to the revocation of any permit, license or other entitlement. The revocation hearing is not required to be a public hearing unless state law requires otherwise.

1.     The holder of the permit, license or entitlement and the property owner shall be given full opportunity to present written information and verbal comments at the revocation hearing.

2.     The body or person issuing the original permit shall hold the revocation hearing and shall accept and consider all written information and verbal testimony from the property owner, permit holder and other interested persons for and against the revocation action. The hearing may be continued to a date, time and place certain without any further notice.

3.     Notices for the revocation hearing shall be given in the following manner, unless state law requires otherwise:

a.     Notice of the revocation hearing shall be sent via first class mail to the holder of the permit, license or entitlement and the property owner at least fifteen calendar days prior to the hearing date.

b.     The hearing notice shall include the date, time and place of the hearing and list the violations constituting the basis for the revocation action.

c.     The hearing notice shall be posted at the site of the property involved at least ten days prior to the hearing date.

D.    The hearing body shall render a decision within twenty-one calendar days of the close of the revocation hearing and shall mail notice of the decision via first-class mail to the permit holder and the property owner of the property in question.

E.     The applicant, property owner, or any person aggrieved by the decision of the hearing body may appeal the decision to the appropriate appeal body within ten working days of the date of the final decision.

F.     The above process shall not preclude the building official from ordering the immediate abatement of a violation prior to the holding of a hearing when, in the opinion of the building official, the violation presents a hazard to, or threatens the public health, safety and general welfare.

G.    Nothing in this chapter precludes the city from pursuing other remedies provided by law. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.80.040 Nuisances.
Any building or structure set up, erected, constructed, altered, enlarged, converted, moved, or maintained contrary to the provisions of this title, and any use of any land, building or premises established, conducted, operated or maintained contrary to the provisions of this title, shall be and the same is declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city attorney may, and upon order of the city council shall immediately commence action or proceedings for the abatement and removal and enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law, and shall take such other steps and shall apply to such courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate and remove such building or structure, and restrain and enjoin any person, firm or corporation from setting up, erecting, building, maintaining or using any such buildings, land or premises, contrary to the provisions of this title. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.80.050 Prior regulations to remain in effect.
All existing land use regulations previously adopted or established shall remain in full force and effect until superseded by changes in the official zoning map as adopted pursuant to this title. Any violation that may exist under the provisions of said superseded ordinances shall not be terminated or validated, except only as the provisions of this title and the map, which is made a part hereof, by virtue of redefinition or reclassification specifically permit the uses which may have constituted violations under the provision of the ordinances repealed by the ordinance codified in this title. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.80.060 Violation declared infraction.
Any person, firm or corporation, whether as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, violating or causing the violation of any of the provisions of the title, shall be guilty of an infraction. Such person, firm or corporation shall be deemed to be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of this title is committed or continued by such person, firm, or corporation and shall be punishable as herein provided. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.80.070 Violation—Penalty.
Any property owner, person, firm, or corporation, whether as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, violating any provision of this title shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or by imprisonment in the county jail for a term not exceeding six months, or by both. The city attorney in his or her discretion may reduce any violation of this title to an infraction, punishable by a fine of not more than two hundred fifty dollars. Any property owner, person, firm, or corporation shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of this title is committed, continued or permitted by such person, firm or corporation, and shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of this title is committed, continued or permitted by such person, firm or corporation, and shall be punishable as provided herein. Penalties under the administrative enforcement provisions of Chapter 1.17 of this code may be imposed in lieu of, but not in addition to, penalties imposed by the court for any single violation. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.80.080 Remedies not exclusive.
The remedies provided for in this title shall be cumulative and not exclusive. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.80.090 Limitation of time for challenging decisions.
Except as otherwise provided in Government Code Section 65009, any action or proceeding to attack, review, set aside, void, or annul any decision made pursuant to this title, or concerning any of the proceedings, acts or determinations taken, done or made prior to such decision, or any condition attached thereto, shall not be maintained by any person unless the action or proceeding is commenced within thirty days and the city council is served within sixty days after the date of such decision. Thereafter, all persons shall be barred from any such action or proceeding or any defense of any invalidity or unreasonableness of such decision or of such proceeding, acts or determinations. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

 

17.80.100 Conversion of dwellings.
A.    The conversion of any building into a dwelling, or the conversion of any dwelling so as to accommodate an increased number of living units or households, shall not be permitted except within a zoning district in which a new building for the same occupancy would be permitted in accordance with the provisions of this title.

B.     Furthermore, such a conversion shall comply with the following requirements:

1.     Securing of the appropriate permit (certificate of occupancy, architectural review, conditional use permit), as required by this title.

2.     Compliance with all requirements governing new residential construction in the affected zoning district, including, but not limited to, required lot area, unit density, floor area, property line setbacks, off-street parking, etc. (Ord. 2011-02 §1).

