Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Title 2 ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL
Title 3 REVENUE AND FINANCE
Title 4 CABLE COMMUNICATIONS
Title 5 BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS
Title 6 ANIMALS
Title 7 (RESERVED)
Title 8 HEALTH AND SAFETY
Title 9 PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE
Title 10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Title 11 (RESERVED)
Title 12 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES
Title 13 PUBLIC SERVICES
Title 14 (RESERVED)
Title 15 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
Title 16 SUBDIVISIONS
Title 17 ZONING
Title 18 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
Title 19 NUISANCE ABATEMENT CODE
Title 20 YOLO HABITAT CONSERVATION PLAN/NATURAL COMMUNITIES CONSERVATION PLAN
Appeals Handbook

Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 1.01 CODE ADOPTION
Chapter 1.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 1.08 APPEAL AND HEARING PROCEDURE
Chapter 1.12 GENERAL PENALTY

Chapter 1.01 CODE ADOPTION
1.01.010 Adoption.
    Pursuant to the provisions of Sections 50022.1—50022.8 and 50022.10 of the Government Code, there is adopted the “City of West Sacramento Municipal Code” as published by Quality Code Publishing, LLC, Seattle, Washington, together with those secondary codes adopted by reference as authorized by the California State Legislature, save and except those portions of the secondary codes as are deleted or modified by the provisions of the “City of West Sacramento Municipal Code.” (Ord. 09-17 § 2; Ord. 90-3 § 1)

 

1.01.020 Title—Citation—Reference.
    This code shall be known as the “City of West Sacramento Municipal Code” and it shall be sufficient to refer to said code as the “West Sacramento Municipal Code” in any prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof or in any proceeding at law or equity. It shall be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, correcting or repealing all or any part or portion thereof as an addition to, amendment to, correction or repeal of the “West Sacramento Municipal Code.” Further reference may be had to the titles, chapters, sections and subsections of the “City of West Sacramento Municipal Code” and such references shall apply to that numbered title, chapter, section or subsection as it appears in the code. (Ord. 90-3 § 2)

 

1.01.030 Codification authority.
    This code consists of all the regulatory and penal ordinances and certain of the administrative ordinances of the city codified pursuant to the provisions of Sections 50022.1—50022.8 and 50022.10 of the Government Code. (Ord. 90-3 § 3)

 

1.01.040 Ordinances passed prior to adoption of the code.
    The last ordinance included in this code was Ordinance 89-16, passed August 16, 1989. The following ordinances, passed subsequent to Ordinance 89-16, but prior to adoption of this code, are adopted and made a part of this code: Ordinances 89-17, 89-18, 89-19 passed November 15, 1989 and 90-2 passed February 21, 1990. (Ord. 90-3 § 4)

 

1.01.050 Reference applies to all amendments.
    Whenever a reference is made to this code as the “City of West Sacramento Municipal Code” or to any portion thereof, or to any ordinance of the city the reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions heretofore, now or hereafter made. (Ord. 90-3 § 5)

 

1.01.060 Title chapter and section headings.
    Title, chapter and section headings contained herein shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter or section hereof. (Ord. 90-3 § 6)

 

1.01.070 Reference to specific ordinances.
    The provisions of this code shall not in any manner affect matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with ordinances which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included within the code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this code. (Ord. 90-3 § 7)

 

1.01.080 Effect of code on past actions and obligations.
    Neither the adoption of this code nor the repeal or amendment of any ordinance or part or portion of any ordinance of the city shall in any manner affect the prosecution for violations of ordinances, which violations were committed prior to the effective date, hereof, nor be construed as a waiver of any license, fee or penalty at said effective date due and unpaid under such ordinances, nor as affecting any of the provisions of such ordinances relating to the collection of any such license, fee, or penalty, or the penal validity of any bond or cash deposit in lieu thereof required to be posted, filed or deposited pursuant to any ordinance and all rights and obligations thereunder appertaining shall continue in full force and effect. (Ord. 90-3 § 8)

 

1.01.090 Constitutionality.
    If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. The council declares that it would have passed this code, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases had been declared invalid or unconstitutional, and if for any reason this code should be declared invalid or unconstitutional, then the original ordinance or ordinances shall be in full force and effect. (Ord. 90-3 § 9)

 

1.01.100 Effective date and notice.
    This code shall become effective on the date the ordinance adopting this code as the “City of West Sacramento Municipal Code” shall become effective. The ordinance codified in this chapter shall take effect thirty days after the date of its adoption, and prior to the expiration of fifteen days from its passage shall be published at least once in the city, and thenceforth and then after the same shall be in full force and effect. (Ord. 90-3 § 10)

Chapter 1.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS
1.04.010 Scope.
    Unless the provisions of this code otherwise specifically provide, or the context of this code indicates to the contrary, the general provisions, rules of construction and definitions set forth in this chapter govern the construction of this code. The provisions of this code and all proceedings under it are to be construed with a view to effect its objects and to promote justice. (County code § 1-3.01)

 

1.04.020 Provision continuation.
    The provisions of this code, insofar as they are substantially the same as existing ordinances relating to the same subject matter, shall be construed as restatements and continuations and not as new enactments. (County code § 1-3.02)

 

1.04.030 Tenure of officers.
    All persons who, at the time this code takes effect, hold office under any of the ordinances repealed by this code, which offices are continued under this code, shall continue to hold them according to their former tenure. (County code § 1-3.03)

 

1.04.040 Effect of headings.
    Title, chapter, article and section headings contained in this code shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter, article or section of this code. (County code § 1-3.04)

 

1.04.050 Section and subsection—Defined.
    “Section” means a section of this code, unless some other source is specifically mentioned. “Subsection” means a subsection of the section in which the term occurs, unless some other section is expressly mentioned. (County code § 1-3.05)

 

1.04.060 References to acts or omissions within the city.
    This code shall refer only to the omission or commission of acts within the territorial limits of the city and to that territory outside the city over which the city has jurisdiction or control by virtue of the Constitution of the State of California or any law, or by reason of ownership or control of property. (County code § 1-3.06)

 

1.04.070 Acts by deputies.
    Whenever a power is granted to, or a duty is imposed upon, a public officer or employee, the power may be exercised or the duty may be performed by a deputy of such officer or employee or by a person otherwise duly authorized pursuant to law or ordinance, unless this code expressly provides otherwise. (County code § 1-3.07)

 

1.04.080 Writing.
    Writing includes any form of recorded message capable of comprehension by ordinary visual means. Whenever any notice, report, statement or record is required or authorized by this code, it shall be made in writing in the English language unless it is expressly provided otherwise. (County code § 1-3.08)

 

1.04.090 References to ordinances.
    Whenever any reference is made to an ordinance, the reference shall apply to such ordinance of the city unless otherwise specifically provided. Whenever any reference is made to any portion of this code, or to any ordinances of the city, the reference shall apply to all amendments and additions now or hereafter made. (County code § 1-3.09)

 

1.04.100 Service of notice.
    Whenever a notice is required to be given under this code, unless different provisions are otherwise specifically made in the code, such notice may be given either by personal delivery thereof to the person to be notified or by deposit in the United States mail in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid, addressed to such person to be notified at his or her last known business or residence address as the same appears in the public records of the city or other records pertaining to the matter to which such notice is directed. Service by mail shall be deemed to have been completed at the time of deposit in the post office. (County code § 1-3.10)

 

1.04.110 Notice—Proof of service.
    Proof of giving any notice may be made by the certificate of any officer or employee of the city or by affidavit of any person over the age of eighteen years, which affidavit shows service in conformity with this code or other provisions of law applicable to the subject matter concerned. (County code § 1-3.11)

 

1.04.120 Statute of limitations.
    When a limitation or period of time prescribed in any existing ordinance or statute for acquiring a right or barring a remedy, or for any other purpose, has begun to run before this code goes into effect, the time which has already run shall be deemed a part of the time prescribed as such limitation. (County code § 1-3.12)

 

1.04.130 Definitions—General.
    For the purposes of this code, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this code are defined as follows:

    “Calendar year” means from January 1st through December 31st of any given year.

    “County” means the county of Yolo.

    “Fiscal year” means from July 1st of any given year through June 30th of the following year.

    Gender. The masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter genders.

    “May” is permissive.

    “Month” means a calendar month unless otherwise expressed.

    Number. The singular number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the singular.

    “Oath” includes “affirmation.”

    Office. The use of the title of any officer, employee, office or ordinance means such officer, employee, office or ordinance of this city, unless otherwise specified.

    Official Time Standard. Whenever certain hours are named in this code, they mean standard time or daylight savings time as may be in current use in the city.

    “Owner,” applied to a building or land, means and includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant, tenant in common or joint tenant of the whole or a part of such building or land.

    “Person” means and includes any person, firm, company, corporation, partnership, association, any public corporation, political subdivision, city, county, district in the county, the state of California, or the United States of America, or any department or agency of any thereof, unless this code expressly provides otherwise.

    “Personal property” means and includes money, goods, chattels, things in action and evidences of debt.

    “Property” means and includes both real and personal property.

    “Quarterly,” where used to designate a period of time, means the first three calendar months of any given year or any succeeding period of three calendar months.

    “Real property” means and includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.

    “Road” means and includes all roads, streets, highways, avenues, boulevards, alleys, courts, places, squares or other public ways in the city which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property so designated in any law of the state.

    “Shall” is mandatory.

    “State” means the state of California.

    “Tenant” or “occupant,” applied to a building or land, means and includes any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.

    Tenses. The present tense shall include the past and future tenses, and the future tense shall include the present tense. (County code § 1-3.13)

 

1.04.140 Definitions—Adopted provisions.
    For purposes of applying, implementing and interpreting the portions of the East Yolo Community Services District Code which were adopted and made a part of this code by Ordinance No. 87-18, the following words and phrases, unless otherwise apparent from context, are defined as set out in this section:

    “Board of directors” and “board” mean the city council.

    “Business license officer” means the director of finance.

    “Day” means calendar day unless otherwise specified.

    “District engineer” and “engineer” mean the city engineer.

    “District secretary” and “secretary” mean the city clerk.

    “East Yolo community services district” and “district” mean the city.

    “General manager” and “manager” mean the city manager or designee.

    “Park supervisor” and “park superintendent” mean the director of city recreation department.

    References to county of Yolo, Yolo County and county mean and include the city. (Ord. 95-1 § 1 (part); amended during 1991 supplementation; Ord. 87-18 §§ 4, 6)

Chapter 1.08 APPEAL AND HEARING PROCEDURE
Note
*      Prior ordinance history: Ords. 89-14, 90-14 and 95-1.

 

1.08.010 Generally.
    Except as provided in Article VI of Chapter 2.20, or any other appeals process which has been adopted and not repealed by the city, an appeal from the decision of a board, commission, agency, department or other city body shall conform to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 04-14 § 2)

 

1.08.020 Time for appeal—Filing fee.
    Unless otherwise required by statute or ordinance, an appeal from an action of a board, commission, agency, department or other city body must be appealed within fifteen days of the date of the notice of the decision to the appellant. The filing fee for appeals will be set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 04-14 § 2)

 

1.08.030 Application for appeal.
    A.  An appeal shall be initiated by written application filed with the city clerk within the time required. The application shall set forth specific facts in sufficient detail to notify interested parties, including the city, of the nature of the appeal, and to place all interested parties on notice as to how the proposed action may affect their interests so that they may formulate their defense or opposition without being subject to surprise. The application shall contain the name and address of the applicant and, to the extent known by the applicant, the names and addresses of all interested parties.

    B.   An order, rule, regulation or action adopted or enforced by any of the city boards or commission may be appealed to the city council by action of the mayor or any city councilmember when he or she considers the matter of sufficient general public interest to warrant city council review. The mayor or councilmember desiring such review shall file an appeal with the city clerk pursuant to the procedures set forth above. No filing fee will be required for any such appeal. The mayor or councilmember calling for the appeal is not precluded from participating in the appeal review simply because he or she appealed the matter. (Ord. 04-14 § 2)

 

1.08.040 Appeal hearing.
    Within seven days of the time the application for appeal if filed with the city clerk, the clerk shall inform the applicant if the application is not timely or is insufficient. If it is timely but not sufficient, the applicant shall have five days from the date of the city clerk’s notice to refile a sufficient application or shall have waived the right to appeal. (Ord. 04-14 § 2)

 

1.08.050 Notices.
    A.  Within ten days after the filing of a valid application, the city clerk or designee shall set a subsequent date for a hearing thereon. In most situations the hearing will be no later than forty-five days after the filing of a valid application. Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given to the applicant and all other known interested parties and shall state which city body or officer will hear the applicant’s appeal. The notice shall be mailed at least five days before the hearing date.

    B.   Where a party, after notice has been given, fails to appear, a hearing may proceed in the absence of the party and the city body or officer hearing the appeal may decide the matter. (Ord. 04-14 § 2)

 

1.08.060 Hearing procedure.
    A.  Hearings pursuant to this chapter shall be informal. The formal rules of evidence and discovery shall not apply. All necessary parties shall be offered a reasonable opportunity to present all relevant facts, applicable laws evidence and analysis demonstrating the merits of their claim or appeal. The parties will be given opportunity to present such facts, laws, evidence and analysis in a deliberate, regular and orderly manner. The city council shall adopt an administrative policy which shall set forth the policies and procedures for conducting hearings in accordance with this chapter and applicable law. This policy may be amended from time to time.

    B.   Any member of the city body hearing the appeal and any city officer hearing the appeal who has a financial interest, as defined by Government Code Section 87103, or on whom a decision will have a material financial effect as defined by two California Code of Regulations, Section 18702, shall disqualify him or herself or be disqualified by the other members. An interested member may participate in a decision in which his or her participation is legally required in compliance with two California Code of Regulations, Section 18701. Only members who have heard the whole matter may participate in the decision. Where the city officer who is to hear the appeal is disqualified, the appeal shall be heard by an alternate appointed by the city manager.

    C.   The city clerk or clerk of the city body or officer hearing the appeal shall cause all testimony to be tape-recorded and shall receive and mark all exhibits. Any party may provide and pay the compensation of a certified court reporter.

    D.  The city body or officer hearing the appeal may order the hearing continued from time to time, except that a hearing on an application for a conditional use permit required by Section 17.46.040 may be continued only at the applicant’s request. (Ord. 04-14 § 2)

 

1.08.070 Written evidence and testimony.
    Any appellant or applicant may submit written material or comments on any appeal. Written comments are not required to be read into the record. Persons who wish to submit written comments, testimony or evidence on any agenda item must provide such written material to the city clerk at least ten days prior to the hearing. Material received by the deadline shall be included in the administrative record. Staff may provide responses to the written material.

    Written evidence or testimony submitted after the noticed deadline will only be accepted in the record with the approval of the city body or officer hearing the appeal. If evidence is accepted into the record after the noticed deadline, the city body or officer hearing the appeal may continue the hearing but is not obligated to do so. (Ord. 04-14 § 2)

 

1.08.090 Findings and decision.
    The city body or officer hearing the appeal shall make written findings of fact to support its decision if a request for such findings is submitted in writing to the city clerk prior to the commencement of the hearing. The decision of the city body or officer hearing the appeal may be rendered at the conclusion of the hearing, or the hearing officer may take the matter under submission. In either circumstance the decision shall be provided in writing to the parties, and shall be the final decision of the city. (Ord. 04-14 § 2)

 

1.08.100 Judicial review.
    Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6 shall govern judicial review of all final decisions of the city, whether pursuant to this chapter or otherwise. At the time of making the final decision, the city body or officer making the decision shall notify the claimant that the time for seeking judicial review of the decision is governed by Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6. (Ord. 04-14 § 2)

Chapter 1.12 GENERAL PENALTY
1.12.010 Classification.
    Any person violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of the ordinances of the city shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, unless the ordinance itself makes violation an infraction. (Ord. 89-14 § 2(a))

 

1.12.020 Misdemeanor—Penalty.
    Except in cases where a different punishment is prescribed by an ordinance of the city, any person convicted of a misdemeanor for violation of an ordinance of the city is punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars or by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 89-14 § 2(b))

 

1.12.030 Infraction—Penalty.
    Any person convicted of an infraction for violation of an ordinance of the city is punishable by:

    A.  A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for a first violation;

    B.   A fine not exceeding two hundred dollars for a second violation of the same ordinance within one year; or

    C.   A fine not exceeding five hundred dollars for each additional violation of the same ordinance within one year. (Ord. 89-14 § 2(c))

 

1.12.040 Continuing violations.
    Each person in violation of an ordinance shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which a violation of any provision of the ordinances of the city is committed, continued or permitted by any such person, and he or she shall be punished accordingly. (Ord. 89-14 § 2(d))

Title 2 ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL
Chapter 2.04 CITY COUNCIL
Chapter 2.08 CITY MANAGER
Chapter 2.12 FINANCE DIRECTOR
Chapter 2.13 RELOCATION DIRECTOR
Chapter 2.16 MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS
Chapter 2.18 CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTION LIMITATIONS
Chapter 2.19 ELECTRONIC FILING OF CAMPAIGN DISCLOSURE STATEMENTS
Chapter 2.20 BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Chapter 2.24 REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY
Chapter 2.28 PEACE OFFICER RECRUITMENT AND TRAINING
Chapter 2.32 PERSONNEL SYSTEM
Chapter 2.36 SCHOOL SAFETY ADVISORY COMMITTEE
Chapter 2.40 EMERGENCY ORGANIZATION AND FUNCTIONS

Chapter 2.04 CITY COUNCIL
2.04.010 Meetings.
    A.  All meetings of the city council shall be open and public, and all persons shall be permitted to attend any meeting of the city council, except that closed sessions may be held when permitted by law.

    B.   The place of regular city council meetings shall be in the council chambers located at 1110 West Capitol Ave., 2nd floor, West Sacramento, California 95691.

    C.   The time of regular meetings of the city council shall be fixed by resolution as may be amended from time to time.

    D.  The time, place and manner of calling special and emergency meetings and adjourning or continuing regular meetings shall be in accordance with the Ralph M. Brown Act (Government Code Section 54950 et seq.). (Ord. 05-22; Ord. 87-37 § 1; Ord. 87-2 § 1(1))

 

2.04.020 Presiding officer.
    A.  The mayor shall be the presiding officer. In the absence of the mayor, the mayor pro tempore shall be the presiding officer.

    B.   The presiding officer shall preserve order and decorum, and shall decide questions of order, subject to an appeal to the city council by any member. (Ord. 05-22; Ord. 87-2 § 1(2))

 

2.04.030 Business of the city council.
    The business of the city council conducted at council meetings shall include the following:

    A.  Call to order by presiding officer;

    B.   Acknowledgment of attendance of council members;

    C.   In no specific order, the following may appear on the agenda:

    1.   Pledge of Allegiance,

    2.   Approval of the minutes of the previous meeting or meetings,

    3.   Consent calendar,

    4.   Regular agenda, which may include but not be limited to resolutions and ordinances, and new business,

    5.   Opportunity for members of the audience to address the city council for items not on the agenda but within the jurisdiction of the council, and

    6.   Adjournment (will always appear last). (Ord. 05-22; Ord. 87-2 § 1(3)(a))

 

2.04.040 Consent calendar.
    Matters listed under the consent calendar are to be considered to be routine by the city council and may be adopted by one motion. There will be no discussion of separate consent calendar items, unless a council member, members of the staff or members of the public request specific items to be discussed or removed from the consent calendar. (Ord. 05-22; Ord. 87-2 § 1(3)(b))

 

2.04.050 Opportunity for public to address council.
    A.  Every agenda for regular meetings shall include the following agenda item:

 

      Opportunity for members of the public to address the City Council on items not on the agenda but within the subject matter jurisdiction of the Council. Speakers are requested to keep their comments to no more than three minutes and to avoid duplicating comments made by others.

 

    B.   Members of the public shall be given an opportunity to speak on all items on the agenda. The mayor may request that members of the public complete a request to speak form noting the item or items upon which they wish to comment.

    C.   As provided by Government Code Section 54954.3(b), the following regulations are adopted to limit public comment at regular meetings:

    1.   No individual speaker may address the city council for more than three minutes.

    2.   The total time for public comment shall not exceed thirty minutes.

    3.   These limits are guidelines and may either be strictly enforced or waived by the mayor in his or her discretion, depending upon the nature of the discussion, the total amount of business to be considered at the particular meeting, the hour of day, and other relevant factors. (Ord. 05-22; Ord. 87-2 § 1(3)(c))

 

2.04.060 Agenda.
    A.  An agenda shall be prepared by the city clerk before each meeting of the city council.

    B.   For regular city council meetings, the following shall apply:

    1.   The agenda shall be prepared and posted at least seventy-two hours before the scheduled start of the regular meeting.

    2.   The agenda shall be posted by the city clerk, or designee, in a designated spot at the office of the city clerk. The agenda shall be posted in such a manner that it can be read in its entirety from outside the building. The last page of agenda will include a declaration of posting signed by the city clerk or his or her deputy.

    3.   The agenda shall specify the time and location of the regular meeting and shall contain a brief general description of each item of business to be transacted or discussed at the meeting.

    4.   In order for an item of business to be placed on the agenda for a regular meeting, council members and staff shall follow the procedures outlined in the city’s administrative policy manual and other adopted council policies and procedures. (Ord. 05-22; Ord. 87-37 § 2; Ord. 87-2 § 1(4))

 

2.04.070 Suspension of rules.
    The rules provided in this chapter may be waived, suspended or modified by the city council, in its discretion, provided that the waiver, suspension or modification does not violate the Ralph M. Brown Act or other applicable provisions of law. (Ord. 05-22; Ord. 87-2 § 1(5))

 

2.04.080 Compensation.
    In accordance with the provisions of Section 36516 of the Government Code, the compensation of the members of the city council shall be three hundred dollars per month, each, payable monthly. (Ord. 05-22; Ord. 87-4 § 1)

Chapter 2.08 CITY MANAGER
Note
*      Prior ordinance history: Ord. 87-5.

 

2.08.010 Created.
    The office of the city manager is created and established. The city manager shall be appointed by the city council wholly on the basis of his or her administrative and executive ability and qualifications and shall hold office at the pleasure of the city council. (Ord. 03-11 § 1)

 

2.08.020 Residence.
    Residence in the city at the time of appointment of a city manager shall not be required as a condition of the appointment, but within one hundred eighty days thereafter the city manager must become a resident of the city unless the city council approves his or her residence outside of the city. (Ord. 03-11 § 1)

 

2.08.030 Compensation.
    The city manager shall receive such salary and benefits as set forth in an employment agreement between the city and city manager. (Ord. 03-11 § 1)

 

2.08.050 Powers and duties.
    The city manager shall be the administrative head of the government of the city under the direction and control of the city council, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, by law or by direction of the city council. The city manager shall be responsible for the efficient administration of all the affairs of the city that are under his or her control. In addition to the general powers as administrative head, the city manager shall have the following specific duties, responsibilities and powers.

    A.  To enforce all laws and ordinances of the city and to see that all franchises, contracts, permits and privileges granted by the city council are faithfully observed;

    B.   To control, order and give directions to all heads of departments and to subordinate officers and employees of the city under his or her jurisdiction through their department heads;

    C.   To appoint, promote, demote, remove and grant severance packages in an amount authorized by the city council for all officers and employees of the city, including the city clerk and city treasurer excepting elective officers and the city attorney;

    D.  To establish an organizational structure of offices, departments, positions and units within the city as may be indicated in the interest of efficient, effective and economical conduct of the city’s business;

    E.   To recommend to the city council the adoption of such ordinances and resolutions as deemed necessary or appropriate;

    F.   To attend all meetings of the city council or provide for a designated representative;

    G.  To prepare and submit the proposed annual budget to the city council for its approval;

    H.  To be responsible for purchasing pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 3.04 for all the departments of the city;

    I.    To approve agreements for contractual services as defined in Chapter 3.04 and in accordance with administrative policies adopted by the city council, which shall, among other things, establish the maximum compensation that may be provided for in any such agreement;

    J.    To investigate, when necessary, the affairs of the city and any department or division thereof and any contract obligation of the city; further, it shall be the duty of the city manager to investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of the city government and in regard to the service maintained by public utilities in the city;

    K.  To exercise general supervision over all public buildings, public parks and all other public properties which are under the control and jurisdiction of the city council;

    L.   To perform such other duties and exercise such other powers as may be delegated to the city manager from time to time by ordinance or resolution or other official action of the city council. (Ord. 03-11 § 1)

 

2.08.060 Relations with council.
    The city council and its members shall deal with the administrative services of the city only through the city manager and neither the city council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any subordinates of the city manager, except that this limitation and prohibition does not apply to the council’s relations with the city attorney. No individual councilmember shall give any orders or instructions to the city manager. The city council shall instruct the city manager in matters of policy. Any action, determination or omission of the city manager shall be subject to review by the city council. (Ord. 03-11 § 1)

 

2.08.070 Department cooperation.
    It shall be the duty of all subordinate officers and the city attorney to assist the city manager in administering the affairs of the city efficiently, economically and harmoniously. (Ord. 03-11 § 1)

 

2.08.080 Attendance at commission meetings.
    The city manager may attend any and all meetings of the planning commission, and any other commission, board or committee created by the city council, upon his or her own volition or upon direction of the city council. At such meetings which the city manager attends, he or she shall be heard by such commission, board or committee as to all matters upon which he or she wishes to address the members thereof. The city manager shall inform such members as to the status of any matter being considered by the city council, and he or she shall cooperate to the fullest extent with the members of all commissions, boards or committees appointed by the city council. (Ord. 03-11 § 1)

 

2.08.090 Removal—Method—Notice.
    The city manager may be removed from his or her position in accordance with this section.

    A.  The city manager shall at all times serve at the pleasure of the city council and, subject to the provisions below, may be removed from office at any time, with or without cause;

    B.   The removal of the city manager shall be effected only by the city council and shall be done in accordance with all applicable laws and ordinances and in compliance with the city manager’s employment agreement. (Ord. 03-11 § 1)

 

2.08.100 Agreements with council not limited.
    Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as a limitation on the power or authority of the city council to enter into any agreement with the city manager delineating additional terms and conditions of employment. The terms and conditions of any employment agreement may be inconsistent with, and supersede, this chapter only if expressly provided for in the agreement. (Ord. 03-11 § 1)

Chapter 2.12 FINANCE DIRECTOR
2.12.010 Created.
    The department of director of finance is created and established. The director of finance shall be appointed by the city manager and shall hold office for and during the pleasure of the city manager. (Ord. 87-12 Art. I § 1)

 

2.12.020 Bond.
    Before entering upon the duties of this department, the director of finance shall be bonded to assure the faithful and honest performance of his or her duties. The penal sum of the bond shall be in a reasonable amount as recommended by the city attorney and fixed by the city manager. (Ord. 87-12 Art. I § 2)

 

2.12.030 Powers and duties.
    The director of finance shall have the following powers and duties:

    A.  To act in all cases to promote, secure and preserve the financial and property interests of the city;

    B.   To perform the duties imposed upon the city clerk by Government Code Sections 37200 through 37209 and Sections 40802 through 40805;

    C.   To perform the duties imposed upon the city treasurer by Government Code Sections 41000 through 41007;

    D.  To serve as chief fiscal officer of the city and to assist and advise the city manager and the city council in all matters pertaining to city finances;

    E.   To develop accounting policies, procedures and forms for bookkeeping and processing of claims and demands, expenditures, purchases, budget data, payroll, subventions, taxes and other fiscal matters;

    F.   To supervise all accounting functions, including payrolls, accounts receivable and payable, purchasing, billing and related accounting activities;

    G.  To supervise and control the administration of the approved city budget;

    H.  To advise and consult with the city manager regarding the preparation of revenue and expenditure estimates and the form and organization of the annual budget;

    I.    To coordinate and supervise the various municipal tax and revenue programs, including transient occupancy tax, business licenses, utility user fees and other fees, licenses and revenue;

    J.    To prepare financial statements and make studies and reports as required by law or as directed by the city manager or city council;

    K.  To administer, supervise and maintain a sound investment program for the city in accordance with legal requirements;

    L.   To supervise employees within the department of the director of finance;

    M.  To perform such additional duties as requested by the city manager or the city council and as directed by other city ordinances. (Ord. 87-12 Art. I § 3)

Chapter 2.13 RELOCATION DIRECTOR
2.13.010 Creation—Appointment.
    The office of relocation director is created and established. The city manager is appointed as relocation director, and shall perform the duties, and exercise the authority, set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 94-1 § 3(A))

 

2.13.020 Authority—Duties.
    A.  The relocation director shall:

    1.   Make initial determinations on behalf of the city and redevelopment agency regarding eligibility for, and amount of, relocation and replacement housing benefits, pursuant to the relocation guidelines set forth in Title 25, California Code of Regulations, Sections 6000 et seq., and adopted by the redevelopment agency;

    2.   Prepare and implement written procedures to govern appeals from initial determinations made pursuant to subdivision 1 of this subsection, which implementation procedures shall provide for final appeal of determinations by the relocation director to the relocation appeals board. These procedures shall be consistent with, and in furtherance of, the grievance procedure set forth in Article 5 of the relocation guidelines.

    B.   The relocation director is authorized to delegate the powers and duties of the relocation director.

    C.   Any person aggrieved by a determination of the relocation director may take an appeal to the relocation appeals board pursuant to Sections 2.20.290 through 2.20.320. (Ord. 03-21 § 1 (part); Ord. 94-1 § 3(A))

Chapter 2.16 MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS
2.16.010 Time.
    The time of the general municipal election in and for the city shall be the same day as the statewide general election, the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November in each even-numbered year. (Ord. 95-14 § 1; Ord. 87-38 § 1)

 

2.16.020 Adjustment of prior terms.
    Those city officers whose terms of office would have, prior to the adoption of this code, expired on the Tuesday succeeding the first Tuesday after the first Monday in June of an even-numbered year, shall instead, continue in their offices until no later than the fourth Tuesday after the day of the general municipal election date set forth in Section 2.16.010, and until their successors are elected and qualified. The city council finds that this chapter shall not result in any term of office being increased or decreased by more than twelve months. (Ord. 95-14 § 1; Ord. 87-38 § 2)

Chapter 2.18 CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTION LIMITATIONS
2.18.010 Title.
    This chapter may be cited as the “Campaign Contribution Limits Code” of the city of West Sacramento. (Ord. 14-2 § 2; Ord. 11-5 § 2; Ord. 10-9 § 2; Ord. 04-11 § 2; Ord. 02-5 § 2)

 

2.18.020 Findings.
    The city council of the city of West Sacramento finds and declares as follows:

    A.  The policy of this city is to protect the integrity of the electoral process. Local government should serve the needs and respond to the wishes of all citizens equally, without regard to their wealth.

    B.   Monetary contributions to political campaigns are a legitimate form of participation in the political process, but the financial strength of certain individuals or organizations should not permit them to exercise a disproportionate or controlling influence on the election of candidates for municipal office.

    C.   The increasing amounts of expenditures in political campaigns have forced many candidates for elective office to raise larger and larger sums from individuals or interest groups with a specific financial stake in city matters. This can cause a public perception that the decisions of the mayor and city council members are being improperly influenced by monetary contributions. These perceptions can undermine the credibility of the mayor and city council and the elective and governmental processes.

    D.  The best interests of the citizens of the city are served by reducing direct and indirect campaign contributions.

    E.   The city finds that limitations on contributions of money, services and materials by individuals or groups to municipal election campaigns should be imposed by law to protect the public health, safety and welfare. These limitations, however, should be reasonable so as not to discourage personal expression or participation in the political process.

    F.   Campaign spending for municipal office campaigns is escalating to dangerous and unreasonable levels. The integrity of the legislative process, the competitiveness of campaigns, and public confidence in elected municipal officials are all diminishing because of the perceived effects of large campaign contributions. (Ord. 14-2 § 2; Ord. 11-5 § 2; Ord. 10-9 § 2; Ord. 04-11 § 2; Ord. 02-5 § 2)

 

2.18.030 Purpose and intent.
    The city council of the city enacts the ordinance codified in this chapter to accomplish the following purposes:

    A.  To encourage public trust in the electoral and decision-making processes of the city, and to ensure that individuals and interest groups have a fair and equal opportunity to participate in the elective and legislative process;

    B.   To reduce the potential for influence by large contributors with a specific financial stake in matters before the city, thus countering the perception that decisions of municipal officials are influenced by the size of contributions rather than by the merits of proposals and the best interests of the people of the city;

    C.   To encourage smaller contributions;

    D.  To help ensure public trust in the city’s legislative and electoral institutions;

    E.   To limit the use of loans and credit in the financing of political campaigns for city elective office;

    F.   To provide, in conjunction with the Political Reform Act and the regulations adopted by the California Fair Political Practices Commission implementing the Political Reform Act, a comprehensive system for regulating the conduct of campaigns for city elective office which, for example, prohibits defined officials from receiving or soliciting campaign contributions of more than two hundred fifty dollars from defined persons during proceedings before the city in which such defined persons are interested and for three months thereafter (Government Code Section 84308). (Ord. 14-2 § 2; Ord. 11-5 § 2; Ord. 10-9 § 2; Ord. 04-11 § 2; Ord. 02-5 § 2)

 

2.18.040 Definitions.
    Unless a particular word or phrase is otherwise specifically defined in this chapter, or the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the definitions set forth in the Political Reform Act of 1974 (Government Code Section 81000 et seq.) shall govern the constructions, meaning and application of words and phrases used in this chapter. References to particular sections of the Government Code or other statutes or laws, including references in this section, shall be deemed to include any changes to such sections, statutes or laws, including any amendments, deletions, additions, renumberings or recodifications that may occur subsequent to the enactment of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

    “California Political Reform Act” means the California Political Reform Act, Government Code Section 81000 et seq., and implementing regulations promulgated by the Fair Political Practices Commission set forth in Title 2 of the California Administrative Code Section 18000 et seq., as they may be modified from time to time.

    “Campaign contribution account” means an account established pursuant to California Government Code Section 85201.

    “Candidate” means an individual who has filed a statement pursuant to California Government Code Section 85200 indicating an intent to run for city elective office.

    “City” means the city of West Sacramento.

    “City elective office” means the office of mayor and the office of city council member.

    “Contribution” means contribution as defined in California Government Code Section 82015, and shall include nonmonetary contributions, extensions of credit, and loans (including credit card advances) to the extent that these are considered contributions pursuant to California Government Code Section 84216, subject to the following:

    1.   Unsecured Loans. Except as otherwise provided in subsection 3, if the loan is not secured or guaranteed, it shall be considered a contribution from the lender and shall be subject to the contribution limits of this chapter.

    2.   Secured or Guaranteed Loans. Notwithstanding California Government Code Section 84216, a loan which is secured or guaranteed shall be considered a contribution from the lender and guarantor or person whose property secures the loan, and shall be subject to the contribution limits of this chapter, except as otherwise provided in subsection 3.

    3.   Loans to Candidates from Commercial Lending Institutions. A loan made to a candidate by a commercial lending institution in the regular course of business on the same terms available to members of the public which is either unsecured, personally guaranteed by the candidate, or secured by property owned by the candidate, shall not be considered a contribution from the lender. Such loans shall, however, be considered a contribution of personal funds from the candidate for the purpose of Section 2.18.050(A).

    “Controlled committee” means a controlled committee as defined in California Government Code Section 82016.

    “Election cycle” means:

    1.   For general elections to city elective office, the period from the day after the election until the day of the next election for the same city elective office;

    2.   For special elections to city elective office, the period from the day on which the seat becomes vacant until the day of the special election;

    3.   In the case of a recall, the period from the date of the filing of the notice of intention to circulate a recall petition until the date of the election. This election cycle shall also apply to candidates to fill a vacancy in the city elective office that may be created by such recall.

    “Late contribution” means a late contribution as defined in California Government Code Section 82036, except that for purposes of this chapter, the dollar threshold contained in Section 82036 shall be revised to read the maximum contribution limit as specified in Section 2.18.050(A)(1) or (2) (as applicable) for the period beginning ninety days prior to the election and ending seventeen days prior to the election, and one hundred dollars for the period beginning sixteen days prior to the election.

    “Person” means an individual or any proprietorship, labor union, firm, partnership, joint venture, syndicate, business trust, company, corporation, association, political action committee, committee or any other entity or organization or group of persons, however organized. (Ord. 14-2 § 2; Ord. 11-5 § 2; Ord. 10-9 § 2; Ord. 04-11 § 2; Ord. 02-5 § 2)

 

2.18.050 Contribution limitations.
    A.  Contribution Limits to City Council Elections.

    1.   Limitation on Contribution from Persons to Candidate for City Elective Office. No person shall make, and no candidate for city elective office or a controlled committee of the candidate or person acting by or on behalf of the candidate or the candidate’s controlled committee shall accept, any contribution which would cause the total amount contributed by that person during any election cycle to the candidate, or to the candidate’s controlled committee, to exceed two hundred fifty dollars.

    2.   Contribution of Personal Funds to a Candidate’s Own Campaign. Nothing in this section is intended to limit the amount a candidate may contribute to his or her campaign for city elective office from his or her personal funds; provided, however, that if a candidate contributes more than two thousand five hundred dollars during an election cycle to his or her campaign from his or her personal funds, then the limitation on contributions that may be made to or accepted by all candidates for the same city elective office, and their controlled committees, shall be increased to five hundred dollars. Loans made to a candidate by a commercial lending institution in the regular course of business on the same terms available to members of the public will be considered a contribution of personal funds for purposes of this section.

    A candidate who contributes more than two thousand five hundred dollars during an election cycle to his or her campaign from his or her personal funds shall notify the city clerk in writing within twenty-four hours after making the contribution that causes the total contributed by the candidate to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars, which notification shall be available for review by the public upon receipt by the city clerk. Notification shall be provided by one of the following methods:

    a.   Facsimile transmission;

    b.   Telegram;

    c.   Guaranteed overnight delivery through the United States Postal Service; or

    d.   Personal delivery.

    3.   Written Solicitations by Candidates. Any candidate or his or her controlled committee making a written solicitation for a contribution for the candidate’s campaign for city elective office shall include the following written notice in no less than eight-point type on each such solicitation:

 

NOTICE

 

The West Sacramento Municipal Code limits the amount a contributor may give to a candidate for elective office to an aggregate total of two hundred fifty dollars. This includes contributions to the candidate, and to persons or committees controlled by the candidate.

 

If the maximum contribution amount for a candidate has been increased to five hundred dollars pursuant to Section 2.18.050(A), the dollar amount in that candidate’s written notices may be increased from two hundred fifty dollars to five hundred dollars.

 

    4.   Exception for Campaign Indebtedness. A contribution specifically made to, accepted by and expended by a candidate or incumbent for the purpose of eliminating campaign debts incurred by the candidate or incumbent in the course of a previous campaign for city elective office shall be considered a contribution made and accepted during the election cycle in which the debts were incurred. (Ord. 14-2 § 2; Ord. 11-5 § 2; Ord. 10-9 § 2; Ord. 04-11 § 2; Ord. 02-5 § 2)

 

2.18.070 Making and acceptance of a contribution.
    For purposes of this chapter, a contribution shall be considered to have been “made” and “accepted” as follows:

    A.  Monetary Contributions.

    1.   Making of Monetary Contributions. For purposes of the contribution limitations of this chapter, a monetary contribution is “made” on the date the contribution is mailed, delivered or otherwise transmitted to the candidate or controlled committee. The date of the check or other negotiable instrument by which the contribution is made may be presumed by the candidate, committee, or person receiving the contribution to be the date on which the contribution is mailed, delivered or otherwise transmitted, unless it is known to the candidate, committee, or person receiving the contribution to be later than the date the contribution is mailed, delivered or otherwise transmitted, in which case the earlier date shall be considered the date on which the contribution is “made.”

    2.   Acceptance of Monetary Contributions. For purposes of the contribution limits of this chapter, a monetary contribution shall be deemed “accepted” on the date that it is made; provided that a monetary contribution shall not be considered accepted for purposes of this chapter if it is not cashed, negotiated or deposited and, in addition, is returned to the donor within fourteen days of receipt.

    B.   Nonmonetary Contributions.

    1.   Making of Nonmonetary Contributions. A nonmonetary contribution is “made” by the contributor on the earlier of the following dates:

    a.   The date that funds are expended by the contributor for goods or services if the specific expenditure is made at the request of the candidate or controlled committee;

    b.   The date that the candidate or controlled committee, or agent of the candidate or controlled committee obtains possession or control of the goods or services; or

    c.   The date that the candidate or controlled committee otherwise receives the benefit of the expenditure.

    2.   Acceptance of Nonmonetary Contributions. A nonmonetary contribution is deemed “accepted” on the date that it is “made” by the contributor; provided that a nonmonetary contribution shall be deemed not to have been accepted for purposes of this chapter if it is returned within fourteen days of having been made by returning to the contributor any of the following:

    a.   The nonmonetary contribution;

    b.   Its monetary equivalent; or

    c.   The monetary amount by which the value of the nonmonetary contribution exceeds the contribution limits of this chapter. (Ord. 14-2 § 2; Ord. 11-5 § 2; Ord. 10-9 § 2; Ord. 04-11 § 2; Ord. 02-5 § 2)

 

2.18.080 Aggregation of contributions.
    A.  All contributions made during an election cycle directly to a candidate or to any of the candidate’s controlled committees shall be aggregated for purposes of the two-hundred-fifty-dollar individual contribution limitation established in Section 2.18.050(A).

    B.   The limit established in Section 2.18.050 pertains to the aggregate total of all contributions made during an election cycle for or against a candidate for elective office. This amount includes the total of the contributions to the candidate or to the candidate’s controlled committees for or against the candidate.

    C.   All payments made by a person or organization whose contributions or expenditure activities are financed, maintained or controlled by any corporation, labor organization, association, political party or any other person or committee, including any parent, subsidiary, branch, division, department or local unit of the corporation, labor organization, association, political party or any other person, or by any group of such persons, shall be considered to be made by the person financing, maintaining or controlling the contribution or expenditure.

    D.  Two or more persons shall be treated as one and the same person for purposes of the contribution limitations set forth in Section 2.18.050, and their contributions shall be aggregated and shall not exceed the limitations set forth in Section 2.18.050, in the following situations:

    1.   Related Entities. Two or more entities shall be treated as one person when such entities:

    a.   Share the majority of members of their boards of directors,

    b.   Share two or more corporate officers,

    c.   Are owned or controlled by the same majority shareholder or shareholders, or

    d.   Are in a parent-subsidiary relationship. A parent-subsidiary relationship exists when one corporation directly or indirectly owns shares possessing more than fifty percent of the voting power of another corporation;

    2.   Controlling Interest. A person and any general or limited partnership in which the person is a general partner, or a person and any corporation in which the person owns a controlling interest, shall be treated as one person. For purposes of this subsection, a controlling interest in a corporation means fifty percent or more of the voting power of a corporation.

    E.   Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 2.18.130, candidates and controlled committees shall not be deemed to be in violation of this section if any of them accepts a contribution from a person that was made in violation of the contribution limits of this chapter. It is the intent of this section to make contributors, and not candidates or controlled committees liable for violations occurring as a result of the applicability of this chapter to contribution limits.

    F.   A candidate for city elective office may transfer campaign funds from one controlled committee to another controlled committee of the same candidate. Contributions transferred shall be attributed to specific contributors using methods set forth in the Political Reform Act. Transferred funds, when aggregated with all other contributions from the same contributor, may not exceed the limits set forth in Section 2.18.050. (Ord. 14-2 § 2; Ord. 11-5 § 2; Ord. 10-9 § 2; Ord. 04-11 § 2; Ord. 02-5 § 2)

 

2.18.090 Contributions by spouses and children.
    A.  Contributions by a husband and wife shall be treated as separate contributions and shall not be aggregated.

    B.   Contributions by dependent children shall be treated as contributions by their parents and attributed proportionately to each parent (one-half to each parent or the total amount to a single custodial parent). (Ord. 14-2 § 2; Ord. 11-5 § 2; Ord. 10-9 § 2; Ord. 04-11 § 2; Ord. 02-5 § 2)

 

2.18.100 Contributions by spouse, children or family members of candidate.
    Contributions to a candidate by his or her spouse, children or any other family member shall be subject to the contribution limits of this chapter. (Ord. 14-2 § 2; Ord. 11-5 § 2; Ord. 10-9 § 2; Ord. 04-11 § 2; Ord. 02-5 § 2)

 

2.18.110 Effective date of contribution limitations.
    A.  Notwithstanding the date of adoption and the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, and except as otherwise provided in subsections B and C of this section, the contribution limits of this chapter shall apply to contributions made on or after January 1, 1993, to:

    1.   Any candidate for city elective office, including an incumbent, who sought or who will seek election in any election for city elective office. Contributions made prior to January 1, 1993, shall not be considered for purposes of the individual contribution limits contained in Sections 2.18.050 and 2.18.080; and

    B.   Contributions made prior to the effective date of Ordinance No. 02-5, shall not be considered or aggregated for purposes of the contribution limits contained in Sections 2.18.050(B) and 2.18.080(B).

    C.   No candidate or controlled committee shall be deemed to have violated any provisions of this chapter solely because contributions in excess of the limitations contained in Sections 2.18.050 and 2.18.080 were accepted or made before the date specified in subsection A or B of this section. Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to require the return of any contribution made prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 14-2 § 2; Ord. 11-5 § 2; Ord. 10-9 § 2; Ord. 04-11 § 2; Ord. 02-5 § 2)

 

2.18.120 Application of state laws.
    Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to exempt any person from complying with applicable provisions of any other laws of this state, including, but not limited to, the contribution limitations contained within the California Political Reform Act for special elections. (Ord. 14-2 § 2; Ord. 11-5 § 2; Ord. 10-9 § 2; Ord. 04-11 § 2; Ord. 02-5 § 2)

 

2.18.130 Enforcement.
    A.  Any person who willfully or knowingly violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor.

    B.   If the city clerk discovers through a campaign statement that any provision of this chapter has been violated, the city clerk shall promptly notify the District Attorney. (Ord. 14-2 § 2; Ord. 11-5 § 2; Ord. 10-9 § 2; Ord. 04-11 § 2; Ord. 02-5 § 2)

Chapter 2.19 ELECTRONIC FILING OF CAMPAIGN DISCLOSURE STATEMENTS
2.19.010 General.
    A.  Any elected officer, candidate, or committee required to file statements, reports or other documents (“Statements”) as required by Chapter 4 of the Political Reform Act (California Government Code Section 84100 et seq.) may file such statements using the city clerk’s online system according to procedures established by the city clerk. These procedures shall ensure that the online system complies with the requirements set forth in Section 84615 of the Government Code. From and after February 1, 2017, elected officers, candidates and committees required to file statements must file such statements using the city clerk’s online system, unless exempt from the requirement to file online pursuant to Government Code Section 84615(a) because the officer, candidate or committee receives less than one thousand dollars in contributions and makes less than one thousand dollars in expenditures in a calendar year.

    B.   The online filing system shall ensure the integrity of the data transmitted and shall include safeguards against efforts to tamper with, manipulate, alter, or subvert the data.

    C.   The online filing system shall only accept a filing in the standardized record format that is developed by the California Secretary of State pursuant to Section 84602(a)(2) of the California Government Code and that is compatible with the Secretary of State’s system for receiving an online or electronic filing. (Ord. 14-5 § 3)

 

2.19.020 Procedures for utilizing online filing.
    A.  During the period commencing with the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter and ending January 31, 2017, an elected officer, candidate, or committee may choose to opt-in to the electronic filing system by electronically filing a statement that is required to be filed with the city clerk pursuant to Chapter 4 of the Political Reform Act. Once the elected officer, candidate or committee has opted-in, all subsequent statements shall be filed electronically. An elected officer, candidate, or committee may opt-out of the electronic filing system by filing original statements in paper format with the city clerk. Thereafter the elected officer, candidate or committee shall file all original statements in paper format with the city clerk. From and after February 1, 2017, electronic filing is mandatory unless the officer, candidate or committee is exempt as described in Section 2.19.010(A). An officer, candidate or committee so exempt may continue to opt-in or opt-out as described in this section.

    B.   Any elected officer, candidate, or committee who has electronically filed a statement using the city clerk’s online system is not required to file a copy of that document in paper format with the city clerk.

    C.   The city clerk shall issue an electronic confirmation that notifies the filer that the statement was received, which notification shall include the date and the time that the statement was received and the method by which the filer may view and print the data received by the city clerk. The date of filing for a statement filed online shall be the day that is received by the city clerk.

    D.  If the city clerk’s system is not capable of accepting a statement, an elected officer, candidate, or committee shall file that statement in paper format with the city clerk.

    E.   The online filing system shall enable electronic filers to complete and submit filings free of charge. (Ord. 14-5 § 3)

 

2.19.030 Availability of statements for public review—Record retention.
    A.  The city clerk’s system shall make all the data filed available on the Internet in an easily understood format that provides the greatest public access. The data shall be made available free of charge and as soon as possible after receipt. The data made available on the Internet shall not contain the street name of the persons or entity representatives listed on the electronically filed forms or any bank account number required to be disclosed by the filer. The city clerk’s office shall make a complete, unredacted copy of the statement available to the Fair Political Practices Commission for 87200 filers.

    B.   The city clerk’s office shall maintain, for a period of at least ten years commencing from the date filed, a secured, official version of each online or electronic statement which shall serve as the official version of that record for purpose of audits. (Ord. 14-5 § 3)

Chapter 2.20 BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Note
*      Prior ordinance history: Ords. 03-2, 05-19, 07-23, 08-14, 09-17, 11-4, 11-7.

 

Article I. General Provisions
2.20.010 Establishment.
    There are established the following boards and commissions for the city, with the authorized number of regular members as indicated:

    A.  Planning commission (seven members);

    B.   Parks, recreation, and intergenerational services commission (seven members);

    C.   Economic development and housing commission (seven members);

    D.  Board of appeals (five members);

    E.   Transportation, mobility and infrastructure commission (seven members);

    F.   Environment and utilities commission (seven members); and

    G.  Arts, culture and historic preservation commission (seven members).

    The mayor may appoint a member of the city council to serve as a liaison to any board or commission. A member of the city council, serving as a liaison, is not a member of the board or commission. (Ord. 15-1 § 2)

 

2.20.011 Sacramento-Yolo Port District Commission.
    As set forth in Harbors and Navigation Code Section 6830.1, four commissioners shall be appointed by the city council of the city of West Sacramento, which commissioners may be members of the city council, and notwithstanding Harbors and Navigations Code Section 6835, shall be residents of the city of West Sacramento. The appointments shall be made in the manner set by law for appointments by the city of West Sacramento. (Ord. 15-1 § 2)

 

2.20.012 Alternate members.
    Notwithstanding the provisions of Sections 2.20.010 and 2.20.011, one additional member may be appointed as an alternate member to act in the event that a regular member is unable to attend a scheduled board or commission meeting. (Ord. 15-1 § 2)

 

2.20.020 Qualifications.
    Each candidate for appointment shall meet and retain the following qualifications to qualify, and to remain qualified, for appointment, and shall be subject to the following conditions:

    A.  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, each member shall be a resident of the city.

    B.   With the exception of up to one member of the parks, recreation, and intergenerational services commission, each member shall be at least eighteen years of age at the time of appointment, unless otherwise provided by the city council.

    C.   No person shall be allowed to serve on more than one board or commission at the same time.

    D.  A member shall not be an officer or employee of the city, except that a member appointed pursuant to subsection B of this section may be a part-time, seasonal employee. (Ord. 15-1 § 2)

 

2.20.030 Appointment.
    A.  The mayor shall appoint all members and alternates of boards and commissions, subject to approval by the city council, unless otherwise specifically provided by statute.

    B.   Initial appointments, subsequent appointments and/or reappointments by the mayor shall be made every two years prior to the last meeting in January of each odd-numbered year. The city council shall approve or disapprove any appointments made by the mayor within thirty days. Prior to approving or disapproving any appointment, the city council shall be provided with an application form completed by the individual nominated by the mayor. Any appointment not approved or disapproved within the time specified shall be deemed approved.

    C.   Appointments to the Sacramento-Yolo Port District Commission shall occur every four years based on the original date of appointment of each commissioner to the commission. (Ord. 15-1 § 2)

 

2.20.032 Term.
    A.  There shall be no maximum length of time that an individual may serve on a board or commission. Any member of a board or commission may reapply and seek reappointment. These members may be reappointed at any time subsequent to submission of an application requesting reappointment.

    B.   A member of any board or commission shall hold office, unless and until:

    1.   The board or commission member submits his or her resignation;

    2.   The board or commission member is removed pursuant to Section 2.20.100 of this chapter;

    3.   The death of the board or commission member; or

    4.   The board or commission member’s successor has been appointed by the mayor.

    C.   In the event the mayor leaves office prior to the normal expiration of his or her term, those board or commission members who were appointed by the mayor and approved by the city council pursuant to Section 2.20.030 of this chapter remain in office until new appointments are made by the successor mayor and those appointments are approved by the city council or until removed pursuant to Section 2.20.100 of this chapter. A vacancy on a board or commission shall be filled in the same manner as provided for in Section 2.20.030(A) of this chapter. These members’ terms of office shall be for the remainder of the unexpired term they are appointed to fill. (Ord. 15-1 § 2)

 

2.20.034 Commissioner responsibilities.
    A.  Ethics Training. All appointees to any city board or commission are required to complete a pre-approved ethics training course provided free of charge by the city. All appointees must complete this training within one year of appointment and continuing members will take the training at least once every two years. Appointees and continuing members not fulfilling this requirement will be dismissed from service.

    B.   Form 700 Statement of Economic Interests. Commissioners that are designated in the city’s conflict-of-interest code are required to file a Form 700 within thirty days of assuming office, annually thereafter, and within thirty days of leaving office. The city clerk is responsible for the administration of enforcement measures set forth by the Fair Political Practices Commission. (Ord. 15-1 § 2)

 

2.20.040 Appointment list—Preparation—Contents.
    On or before December 31st of each year, the city clerk shall prepare an appointment list of all boards and commissions that are appointed by the city council. The appointment list shall contain the following information:

    A.  A list of all appointive terms which will expire during the next calendar year, with the name of the incumbent appointee, the date of appointment, the date the term expires and the necessary qualifications for the position; and

    B.   A list of all boards, commissions and committees whose members serve at the pleasure of the city council, and the necessary qualifications of each position. (Ord. 15-1 § 2)

 

2.20.050 Availability—Fee.
    The appointment list shall be made available to members of the public for free or at a reasonable fee that shall not exceed the actual cost of copying. (Ord. 15-1 § 2)

 

2.20.060 Vacancy—Notice—Appointment.
    A.  Whenever an unscheduled vacancy occurs in any board or commission, whether due to resignation, death, termination or other causes, a special vacancy notice shall be posted in the office of the city clerk, the library designated pursuant to Government Code Section 54973, and in other appropriate places as determined by the city clerk. The city clerk may advertise as necessary. Notices shall be posted not earlier than 20 days before or not later than 20 days after the vacancy occurs. Final action on an appointment shall not be taken for at least 10 working days after the posting of the notice in the city clerk’s office.

    B.   Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, the mayor may, if he or she finds that an emergency exists, fill the unscheduled vacancy immediately. A person appointed to fill the vacancy shall serve only on an acting basis until the final appointment is made pursuant to this section and Section 2.20.030(A). (Ord. 15-1 § 2)

 

2.20.080 Application forms.
    Any interested person who qualifies for a board or commission may submit an application to serve on a board or commission to the city clerk on a form provided by the city clerk. Such applications will be provided to the mayor and city council members. All applications shall be kept on file in the city clerk’s office for two years. (Ord. 15-1 § 2)

 

2.20.090 Application processing.
    In order to ensure that appointments and/or reappointments are made in a timely and efficient manner, the mayor shall establish a process to receive input and/or recommendations from the city council prior to making any appointments or reappointments. The process shall include, but not be limited to, having each city council member recommend to the mayor at least one individual for each commission. The mayor may not delegate his or her appointment power. (Ord. 15-1 § 2)

 

2.20.100 Removal from office.
    A.  Each member appointed to a commission or board pursuant to Section 2.20.030(A) of this chapter shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor. Any member of a board or commission may be removed, with or without cause, by the mayor, subject to approval by the city council. Alternatively, the city council may remove a member of a board or commission by a four-fifths vote.

    B.   A member of a board or commission shall be removed from office by the city clerk if such member has three absences in a calendar year. If there are extenuating circumstances that have caused the absence, the board member or commissioner may ask the mayor for special consideration.

    C.   Members of any board or commission may be removed for noncompliance with Section 2.20.034. (Ord. 15-1 § 2)

 

2.20.110 Compensation and expenses.
    A.  Except as provided in subsection B of this section, members of each board or commission shall serve without compensation. The city council may approve payment to a member for necessary and actual expenses incurred by him or her in an official capacity.

    B.   Each member of the planning commission shall receive thirty dollars for each regularly scheduled meeting when such member is actually in attendance, and thirty dollars for each special meeting when such member is actually in attendance; provided, that a member shall not be entitled to compensation for more than four meetings per month. (Ord. 15-1 § 2)

 

2.20.120 Organization and code of conduct.
    In addition to the specific requirements pertaining to each board or commission appearing in subsequent articles, the following general organizational requirements shall apply to each board or commission:

    A.  Each board or commission shall organize and conduct its meetings by generally accepted rules of procedure. Such rules shall be consistent with applicable provisions of state and federal law and city ordinances, and with the customary rules and procedures of the city council;

    B.   At the board or commission’s first meeting of each even numbered year, each board or commission shall elect, by majority vote, one of its members as chair and one as vice-chair, each to serve a one-year term. In odd numbered years, the chair and vice-chair shall be selected at the first meeting following appointment or reappointment of a majority of its members;

    C.   Each board or commission, by resolution, shall provide for the time, place and manner for holding regular and special meetings. Special meetings may be called by the commission chair, city manager or the city council to consider matters referred to the commission by the city council or city manager;

    D.  A majority of the members of a board or commission shall constitute a quorum of that board or commission. An alternate member who is present in lieu of a regular member shall count toward satisfaction of this requirement, but alternate members shall not be included in the quorum denominator. Unless otherwise required by law, a majority of the quorum is required to act on any item;

    E.   All board members and commissioners shall conduct themselves in a respectful and professional manner befitting of the position. In addressing each other, staff and members of the public, they should be courteous, non-confrontational and respectful. All board members and commissioners shall agree to abide by and sign a written code of conduct;

    F.   Individual board or commission members may only speak on behalf of the board or commission if they have been duly authorized to do so by the board or commission to which they belong;

    G.  All boards and commissions shall maintain a public record of transactions of business which shall include recommendations, findings and determinations on matters within their scope and duties. Minutes of meetings shall be provided to the city council; and

    H.  Boards and commissions may form committees as necessary, to the extent that staff support is made available by the city manager. Any such committees shall comply with open meeting laws. (Ord. 15-1 § 2)

 

2.20.121 Scope and duties.
    A.  Each commission shall have the scope and duties prescribed in this chapter, and agenda items for consideration shall be those matters referred by the city council, mayor, or city manager.

    B.   A commission may serve as an advisory commission as required in any particular program or grant at the assignment of the city council, mayor, or city manager. The commission’s role may be temporarily expanded beyond the general scope and duties noted in this chapter for such purposes.

    C.   When the scope and duties of a commission include advice for a designated county or regional agency, the commission’s consideration shall be upon request by the member of the city council who represents the city on that agency’s governing board or by the city manager. (Ord. 15-1 § 2)

 

2.20.130 City staff support.
    A.  Each board and commission shall have a city staff liaison person to provide general staff and administrative assistance. City staff shall be appointed by the city manager.

    B.   City staff, as authorized by the city manager, may serve in an advisory capacity and may have the right to participate in deliberations of the board or commission, except that they shall not have a vote or be counted as members for purposes of a quorum.

    C.   Legal counsel to advise a board or commission may be authorized by the city manager. (Ord. 15-1 § 2)

 

Article II. Planning Commission
2.20.140 Responsibility—Jurisdiction.
    A.  The planning commission shall have all of the powers and duties prescribed by city ordinance and state statute, including, but not necessarily limited to, the Planning and Zoning Law (Government Code Section 65000 et seq.), the Subdivision Map Act (Government Code Section 66410 et seq.), the California Environmental Quality Act (Public Resources Code Section 21000 et seq.), and Title 8 of the Yolo County Code (as adopted by city Ordinance No. 87-18).

    B.   The planning commission is designated as the board of permit appeals pursuant to Government Code Section 65903 for the purpose of hearing and determining appeals from the decisions of the zoning administrator or for reviewing such decisions on its own motion or the motion of the zoning administrator.

    C.   The planning commission is designated as the board of zoning adjustment pursuant to Government Code Section 65900 for the purposes, and with the authority, as set forth in applicable city ordinance, state statute and other law.

    D.  The planning commission is designated as the advisory agency under the Subdivision Map Act pursuant to Government Code Section 66415, and shall be authorized to act in that capacity as specified in the Subdivision Map Act and applicable city ordinance.

    E.   The planning commission is designated as the decision making body under the California Environmental Quality Act (Public Resources Code Section 21000 et seq.) and Guidelines (14 California Administrative Code Section 15000 et seq.) for decisions over which it has jurisdiction and authority pursuant to applicable city ordinance, state statute and other law. For matters where the planning commission merely makes recommendations to the city council, the city council shall be the decision-making body. (Ord. 15-1 § 2)

 

2.20.150 Conduct of business.
    A.  The planning commission shall conduct all business and hearings consistently with requirements of due process. In order to comply with due-process requirements, the planning commission may, on a case-by-case basis, modify procedural provisions of its own rules and regulations and city ordinances, provided that all notice, opportunity to be heard, and other due process procedures satisfy the requirements of law.

    B.   It is the intent of subsection A of this section to authorize and require all planning commission proceedings to be conducted in a manner consistent with applicable legal requirements. In order to further this intent, if any provision of city ordinance or rules or regulations adopted by the planning commission violates or is inconsistent with any superior legal requirement, then the planning commission is authorized and directed to suspend the application of the inferior ordinance, rule or regulation and to apply the superior legal requirement.

    C.   The oral proceedings of the planning commission shall be tape recorded and maintained by the city. Any interested person may request a transcription of such proceedings, provided that, prior to commencing the transcription process, such person deposits with the city clerk a sum of money equal to the estimated costs of preparing the transcript by certified court stenographer. (Ord. 15-1 § 2)

 

2.20.160 Tie votes.
    In the event there is a tie vote on any motion pending before the planning commission, the chair shall call for any further motions of any commissioner on the subject. In the event no further motions are made, or that such further motions also result in a tie vote, the chair shall declare a deadlock. When any provision of city ordinance or state statute requires a recommendation from the planning commission before a matter is heard by the city council, a declaration of a deadlock shall be deemed to be a recommendation of denial by the planning commission for all such purposes. A declaration of a deadlock on any matter for which the planning commission is the decision-making body shall be considered a denial of such matter and shall be appealable to the city council, to the same extent, and in the same manner, as if the planning commission had denied the matter. The city clerk is authorized and instructed to waive the applicable filing fee for any appeal resulting from a declaration of a deadlock. (Ord. 15-1 § 2)

 

2.20.170 Finality of decision—Reconsideration.
    A.  Except as otherwise provided, a decision of the planning commission shall be final upon vote of the commission on the matter.

    B.   In cases where the planning commission renders a statement of intended decision with instructions to staff to draft written findings, then the planning commission’s decision shall be final upon its final vote and adoption of findings.

    C.   In cases where city ordinance or other provisions of law expressly provide for an appeal to the city council on the matter, the decision of the planning commission shall be final upon the expiration of the time to appeal or, if an appeal was timely and properly filed, upon final action by the city council on the appeal.

    D.  The planning commission on its own motion may reconsider any decision provided that:

    1.   A majority of a quorum of the planning commission agrees to reconsider the decision or, if the action to be reconsidered requires a majority vote of the full planning commission, a majority of the full planning commission agrees to reconsider the decision; and

    2.   The person requesting reconsideration makes such a request prior to adjournment of the meeting at which the final decision of the planning commission is made. A request for reconsideration is not a necessary step in the administrative appeals process and the failure to seek reconsideration shall not be deemed a failure to exhaust administrative remedies. (Ord. 15-1 § 2)

 

2.20.180 Finality of permit—Conditional issuance.
    A.  Except as provided in subsection B of this section, any permit or other entitlement for use authorized by action of the planning commission shall not be formally issued by the city until the expiration of the time for appeal to the city council, if any, has expired, or if an appeal has been filed, until the effective date of the city council’s decision on the appeal.

    B.   In its discretion, the planning commission is authorized to conditionally issue a permit or other entitlement for all or part of a requested use prior to expiration of the time for appeal to the city council, provided the following conditions are complied with:

    1.   The applicant files with the director of community development a written statement, in a form acceptable to the city, acknowledging that the permit is not final, and that no rights will vest by the applicant’s expenditures and reliance on a permit or other entitlement for use conditionally issued pursuant to this section;

    2.   The applicant files with the director of community development a written statement, in a form acceptable to the city, acknowledging that, in the event the city council reverses or modifies the planning commission action, the applicant will remove all improvements, structures, facilities and utilities installed, placed or constructed pursuant to the conditional permit, and shall restore the project site to its condition immediately prior to the conditional issuance of the permit, and shall otherwise comply with the terms of the city council’s decision;

    3.   The applicant files a performance bond or other surety with the director of community development, in a form and amount acceptable to the city, to ensure the applicant’s compliance with paragraphs 1 and 2 of this subsection.

    C.   The planning commission shall not conditionally issue a permit or other entitlement for use after an appeal to the city council has been filed. In exercising its discretion under subsection B of this section, the planning commission shall consider the following factors, in addition to other appropriate factors:

    1.   Likelihood of an appeal to the city council, and likelihood of reversal or modification in the event there is an appeal;

    2.   The size and costs of the project; and

    3.   The practical difficulty in restoring the project site to pre-project conditions in the event the city council reverses or modifies the planning commission’s decision. (Ord. 15-1 § 2)

 

2.20.190 Denial—Effect.
    Unless otherwise specified by the planning commission, denial of any permit or other entitlement for use will be deemed to be a denial with prejudice, except that the city council, on appeal, may remand the matter to the planning commission for further consideration. If a denial of the planning commission is with prejudice, no subsequent application for the same or similar permit or entitlement for use may be filed within one year from the date of the planning commission’s decision, or the city council’s affirmance, whichever is later, unless the application has been modified to correct the deficiencies and/or to otherwise address the concerns of the planning commission or city council. Any subsequent application will require a new filing fee. If a denial is expressly made without prejudice, the same or similar application may be resubmitted at any time, and the filing fee will be limited to those fees for additional processing over and above the processing of the original application, as determined by the director of community development. (Ord. 15-1 § 2)

 

2.20.200 Appeals.
    Except as otherwise provided by city ordinance, state statute or other law, any person interested in an action of the planning commission, including the city council or any individual city councilmember, may take an appeal to the city council by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within fifteen days of the date of the final action by the planning commission. Exception: appeals filed pursuant to Chapter 16.20, Tentative Maps, Section 16.20.060, shall be filed within ten days after the planning commission’s decision. Appeals filed pursuant to other city ordinances, state statutes or other laws may be subject to different time lines. The notice of appeal filed with the city clerk, except a notice filed by the city council or a city councilmember, shall be accompanied by the appropriate filing fee as established by the city pursuant to resolution. Upon receipt of the notice of appeal, the city clerk shall cause the record of proceedings before the planning commission to be transmitted to the city council. The record of proceeding shall include all written materials the planning commission considered in taking the action being appealed. The city council may affirm, reverse or modify the decision of the planning commission. (Ord. 15-1 § 2)

 

2.20.210 Adoption of Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6—Exhaustion of remedies.
    A.  Pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6(g), the provisions of Section 1094.6 are made applicable to decisions of the planning commission and city council, as defined by Section 1094.6(e).

    B.   A decision shall be final for purposes of Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6, as set forth in Section 2.20.170.

    C.   Appeal to the city council, when expressly made available by city ordinance or other provisions of law, is a necessary step in the administrative appeals process and the failure to pursue an appeal shall be deemed a failure to exhaust administrative remedies. (Ord. 15-1 § 2)

 

Article III. Parks, Recreation and Intergenerational Services Commission
2.20.220 Scope and duties.
    The parks, recreation and intergenerational services commission shall provide advice and recommendations to the city council and staff on matters within the commission’s scope and duties that have been referred to the commission by the city council, mayor or city manager. The scope and duties of the parks, recreation and intergenerational services commission shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, the following:

    A.  Parks and related facilities and programs;

    B.   Sports and active living programs;

    C.   Recreation and leisure programs;

    D.  Support for civic and community-based organizations;

    E.   Community services, including health and welfare concerns;

    F.   Adaptation of the full range of city plans, projects, programs and services to the needs of seniors and youth;

    G.  Plans for the provision of services targeted to the elderly, including recreation, leisure, housing, financial security, and mobility;

    H.  Plans for the provision of services targeted to youth; and

    I.    Early learning and universal preschool. (Ord. 15-1 § 2)

 

Article IV. Economic Development and Housing Commission
2.20.260 Scope and duties.
    The economic development and housing commission shall provide advice and recommendations to the city council and staff on matters within the commission’s scope and duties that have been referred to the commission by the city council, mayor, or city manager. The scope and duties of the economic development and housing commission shall include:

    A.  Incentives and programs to promote economic development;

    B.   Make recommendations on marketing strategies that have been suggested by staff in anticipation of a report to the city council;

    C.   Business retention and recruitment;

    D.  Community investment and development assistance;

    E.   Housing standards and affordability;

    F.   Homelessness; and

    G.  Community development block grant policies and priorities. (Ord. 15-1 § 2)

 

Article V. Board of Appeals
2.20.290 Jurisdiction.
    A.  The board of appeals shall act as the board of appeals, the relocation appeals board, and the hazardous materials advisory commission (H/M commission).

    B.   The board of appeals shall have jurisdiction over, and shall hear and act upon the following matters:

    1.   Appeals from and determinations by the fire chief and/or building official regarding the suitability of alternative materials and methods of construction, when required, and it shall provide reasonable interpretation and render decisions, pertaining to, and in accordance with, the following:

    a.   The codes promulgated by the California Building Standards Commission, as published in Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations, as adopted and amended by city ordinance, and the International Property Maintenance Code, as adopted and amended by city ordinance.

    b.   City ordinances regarding nuisance abatement, including, but not limited to, the abatement of weeds and vehicles.

    2.   Appeals from and determinations by the relocation director regarding eligibility for, and amount of relocation and replacement housing benefits, when required, and it shall provide reasonable interpretation and render decisions, pertaining to, and in accordance with, California Health and Safety Code Section 33417.5, and California Government Code Section 7266.

    C.   Any decision of the board of appeals pursuant to this section shall be final. (Ord. 15-1 § 2)

 

2.20.300 Powers and duties.
    Notwithstanding the powers and duties set forth in Section 2.20.290, and in addition to the powers and duties set forth therein, the board of appeals shall have the following powers and duties:

    A.  It shall hold at least one regular meeting per calendar year and it shall maintain a public record of its transactions of business, which shall include findings and determinations on matters within the scope of its responsibilities. At each regular meeting, its business shall include, but not be limited to, review of the activities of the fire department’s hazardous materials program, which is established under the Fire Code published in Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations, as adopted and amended by city ordinance. Minutes of all such meetings shall be forwarded to the city council for review. In addition, the board of appeals shall hold special meetings upon the request of the fire chief, building official, relocation director, hazardous materials manager or city manager.

    B.   It shall periodically review the workings and finances of the fire department hazardous materials program. In addition, it may be called upon to evaluate the proposed operations of businesses that desire to locate within the city of West Sacramento, and it shall make recommendations to the community development department on whether the proposed businesses’ use of hazardous material is consistent with the planned location. Any recommendation will indicate whether the business will require a conditional use permit.

    C.   It shall review and comment on response plans and permits prepared pursuant to state law submitted to the board of appeals, in its capacity as the H/M commission, by the fire chief; review and comment on monthly incident reports submitted by the fire chief; request that the fire chief prepare enforcement reports; produce the annual report for the city manager and the city council regarding the status of hazardous materials program; and review and make recommendations to the community development department regarding potential land uses that involve the use, storage, and/or transportation of hazardous material.

    D.  It shall have all the powers and duties set forth in the codes and city ordinances referred to in Section 2.20.290 (Board of appeals—Jurisdiction), and it may recommend to the city council the adoption of new ordinances regarding the subject matter addressed in such codes and ordinances.

    E.   It shall inform the planning commission of any action or decision that may affect the scope of responsibility of the planning commission. During April of each year, a representative of the board of appeals may appear before the city council to report on work accomplished in the past year. Such report, at the discretion of the city council, may be required to be in writing.

    F.   It shall exercise all duties and powers permitted under California Health and Safety Code Section 33417.5, and California Government Code Section 7266 (pertaining to Relocation Appeals). (Ord. 15-1 § 2)

 

2.20.320 Membership.
    The board of appeals shall consist of five public members appointed in the manner set forth in Section 2.20.030 of the Municipal Code. Two of the members shall have backgrounds directly associated with architecture, civil engineering, building trades, or fire protection. In filling the remaining three positions, consideration shall be given to applicants with backgrounds in the following categories:

    A.  Toxicology;

    B.   Epidemiology;

    C.   Health education;

    D.  Commercial business;

    E.   Industry;

    F.   Environmental technology;

    G.  Public interest organizations;

    H.  Local neighborhood organizations; and

    I.    Labor organizations. (Ord. 15-1 § 2)

 

Article VI. Transportation, Mobility and Infrastructure Commission
2.20.340 Scope and duties.
    The transportation, mobility and infrastructure commission shall provide advice and recommendations to the city council and staff on matters within the commission’s scope and duties that have been referred to the commission by the city council, mayor, or city manager. The scope and duties of the transportation, mobility and infrastructure commission shall include:

    A.  Transportation planning;

    B.   Bicycle and pedestrian policies and facility planning;

    C.   Goods movement;

    D.  Charging and fueling infrastructure for electric, hydrogen, and other alternative fuel vehicles;

    E.   Public transit;

    F.   Ridesharing, transportation network services, and taxicabs;

    G.  Plans and standards for roads, bridges, and highways;

    H.  Flood management infrastructure.

    The commission shall be the local advisory body, pursuant to Section 2.20.121(C), for the city’s representative to the Yolo County Transportation District, the governing entity for the streetcar system, the Port Commission, and, as appropriate, the Sacramento Area Council of Governments. (Ord. 15-1 § 2)

 

Article VII. Arts, Culture and Historic Preservation Commission
2.20.370 Scope and duties.
    The arts, culture and historic preservation commission shall provide advice and recommendations to the city council and staff on matters within the commission’s scope and duties and that have been referred to the commission by the city council, mayor or city manager. The scope and duties of the arts, culture and historic preservation commission shall include:

    A.  Cultural enrichment of the city;

    B.   Coordinating and strengthening existing organizations in the cultural arts field;

    C.   Private initiative in the arts and culture;

    D.  Creative activities, as well as public understanding, appreciation and enjoyment of the cultural and art forms and activities;

    E.   Review and make recommendations upon all works of art to be acquired by the city, either by purchase, gift or otherwise, and their proposed locations; and

    F.   The designation and inventory of historic resources and districts. (Ord. 15-1 § 2)

 

Article VIII. Environment and Utilities Commission
2.20.390 Scope and duties.
    The environment and utilities commission shall provide advice and recommendations to the city council and staff on matters within the commission’s scope and duties and that have been referred to the commission by the city council, mayor, or city manager. The scope and duties of the environment and utilities commission shall include:

    A.  Tree preservation;

    B.   Habitat and natural communities conservation;

    C.   Williamson Act easements;

    D.  Agricultural land conservation;

    E.   Open space;

    F.   Energy;

    G.  Water, wastewater, and stormwater services and usage;

    H.  Refuse, recycling, and solid waste services and usage; and

    I.    Telecommunications services and usage.

    The commission shall be the local advisory body pursuant to Section 2.20.121(C), for the city’s representative to the Sacramento Regional Sanitation District, the Yolo-Solano Air Quality Management District, the Yolo Habitat Conservancy, and the Delta Protection Commission. (Ord. 15-1 § 2)

 

Article IX. Sacramento-Yolo Port District Commission
2.20.400 Responsibility—Jurisdiction.
    The Sacramento-Yolo Port Commission shall have all the powers and duties prescribed by state statute. (Ord. 15-1 § 2)

Chapter 2.24 REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY
2.24.010 Purpose.
    It is found, determined and declared that there is a need for a redevelopment agency to function in the city in accordance with the provisions of the Community Redevelopment Law. (Ord. 87-10 § 1)

 

2.24.020 Established—Powers.
    The redevelopment agency is established pursuant to Section 33101 of the Community Redevelopment Law, to be known as the redevelopment agency of the city. The redevelopment agency is authorized to transact business and exercise its powers under provisions of the Community Redevelopment Law. (Ord. 87-10 § 2)

 

2.24.030 Designated—Authority.
    Pursuant to the provisions of Section 33200 of the Community Redevelopment Law, the city council declares itself to be the redevelopment agency of the city. (Ord. 87-10 § 3)

 

2.24.040 Findings.
    The city council finds and determines that the designation of the city council as redevelopment agency of the city will serve the public interest and promote the public health, safety and welfare in an effective manner in that this public body is best able to serve the needs of the community to implement the purposes of the Community Redevelopment Law. (Ord. 87-10 § 4)

Chapter 2.28 PEACE OFFICER RECRUITMENT AND TRAINING
2.28.010 Declaration.
    The city declares that it desires to qualify to receive aid from the state under the provisions of Chapter 1 of Title 4, Part 4 of the California Penal Code. (Ord. 87-15 § 1)

 

2.28.020 Adherence to state standards.
    Pursuant to Section 13522 of Chapter 1 of the Penal Code, the city will adhere to the standards for recruitment and training established by the California Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training. (Ord. 87-15 § 2)

 

2.28.030 Full peace officer power conferred upon specially trained reserve police officers.
    City of West Sacramento reserve police officers who are assigned to the general enforcement of the laws of this state by the city of West Sacramento, and, who have completed the basic course, or possess the reserve officer certificate issued by the commission on peace officer standards and training, and, who meet the criteria established by the Chief of Police, may be appointed by the Chief of Police to receive full peace officer powers as provided in California Penal Code Section 830.1(a) and authorized by California Penal Code Section 830.6(a)(2). (Ord. 98-9 § 2)

Chapter 2.32 PERSONNEL SYSTEM
2.32.010 Adopted.
    In order to establish an equitable and uniform system for dealing with personnel matters, and to comply with applicable laws relating to the administration of personnel, a personnel system is adopted. The personnel system shall be administered in accordance with the personnel rules adopted pursuant to Section 2.32.020. (Ord. 87-24 § 1)

 

2.32.020 Rules—Adoption—Amendment.
    Personnel rules shall be adopted by resolution of the city council and may be amended from time to time by subsequent resolution. The personnel rules shall establish regulations governing the personnel system, including, but not necessarily limited to, the following:

    A.  Employer-employee relations, employee organizations and implementation of the Meyers-Milias-Brown Act (Government Code Section 3500 et seq.);

    B.   Employment practices, procedures, standards and qualifications; employee types, wage classes and classification plan; and separation and reinstatement of employees;

    C.   Terms and conditions of employment, hours and overtime, benefits, leaves of absence, standards of conduct and discipline and grievance procedures. (Ord. 87-24 § 2)

 

2.32.030 Administration.
    The city manager shall administer the personnel system consistent with the personnel rules, and may delegate any of the powers, duties and responsibilities to any other officer or employee as he or she deems appropriate. The city manager, or designee, shall:

    A.  Act as appointing authority for the city;

    B.   Administer the provisions of this chapter and of the personnel rules;

    C.   Prepare and recommend to the city council personnel rules and revisions and amendments to such rules;

    D.  Prepare a position classification plan in accordance with the personnel rules and revisions to the plan;

    E.   Take other action relating to the personnel system as directed by the city council. (Ord. 87-24 § 3)

 

2.32.040 Application.
    A.  The provisions of this chapter and of the personnel rules shall apply to all city employees, except as provided by Sections 31, 32 and 33 of Yolo County Local Agency Formation Commission Resolution No. 85-13 (adopted October 14, 1985), attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter as Exhibit A and incorporated herein, and except as provided by subsections B and C of this section.

    B.   In the case of an irreconcilable conflict between a provision of this chapter or of the personnel rules and a provision of a duly adopted memorandum of understanding, including memoranda of understanding that remain in effect on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter and that were adopted by the former East Yolo Community Services or East Yolo Fire Protection Districts, the provision of the memoranda of understanding shall prevail.

    C.   City employees who were first employed by the city between January 1, 1987 and the date of adoption of the personnel rules authorized by this chapter (not including employees with an express written contract or former East Yolo Community Services or East Yolo Fire Protection Districts employees), were employed subject to terms and conditions of employment as set forth in the Yolo County Code, Title 2, Chapter 6, which was adopted by the city as an interim measure until the city adopted its own personnel system and personnel rules. Consequently, for this group of employees, they shall be entitled to retain the benefits, if any, that were accrued under the Yolo County Code during this interim period (i.e., date of employment after January 1, 1987 to date of adoption of personnel rules).

    D.  Except as provided by subsections A, B and C of this section, after the date of adoption of the personnel rules, all city employees shall be subject to and accrue benefits pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and of the personnel rules. (Ord. 87-24 § 4)

Chapter 2.36 SCHOOL SAFETY ADVISORY COMMITTEE
2.36.010 Established.
    A school safety advisory committee shall be established for each school district in the city consisting of the chief of police or his or her representative, the city traffic engineer and representatives from the school district as determined by the district. (Ord. 88-17 Art. XIX § 1)

 

2.36.020 Policies and responsibilities.
    The policies of the school safety advisory committee and the responsibilities of the committee members shall be in accordance with those contained in the California Department of Transportation Traffic Manual for School Area Pedestrian Safety. (Ord. 88-17 Art. XIX § 2)

Chapter 2.40 EMERGENCY ORGANIZATION AND FUNCTIONS
2.40.010 Purposes.
    The declared purposes of this chapter are to provide for the preparation and carrying out of plans for the protection of persons and property within the city in the event of an emergency; the direction of the emergency organization; and the coordination of the emergency functions of this city with all other public agencies, corporations, organizations and affected private persons. (Ord. 00-8; Ord. 89-8 § 1)

 

2.40.020 Definition.
    As used in this chapter, “emergency” means the actual or threatened existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within this city caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot or earthquake, or other conditions, including conditions resulting from war or imminent threat of war, but other than conditions resulting from a labor controversy, which conditions are or are likely to be beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment and facilities of this city, requiring the combined forces of other political subdivisions to combat. (Ord. 00-8; Ord. 89-8 § 2)

 

2.40.030 Council membership.
    The city disaster council is created and shall consist of the following three groups:

    A.  Officers.

    1.   Chairman: Director of emergency services (city manager);

    2.   Vice-chairman: Assistant director of emergency services (assistant city manager).

    B.   Members.

    1.   Fire chief;

    2.   Police chief;

    3.   Public works director;

    4.   City engineer.

    C.   Advisors.

    One at-large citizen advisor to be appointed by the city council. In addition, such advisors from public agencies, public utilities, local communications groups, and civic, business, labor, veterans, professional or other organizations having official emergency responsibilities, as may be approved by the director with the advice and consent of the city council.

    D.  One member of the disaster council shall be designated by the city council to serve as the city’s representative on the Yolo County communications emergency services agency board. Such representative’s term of service shall be within the discretion of the city council. (Ord. 00-8; Ord. 90-4 § 1; Ord. 89-8 § 3)

 

2.40.040 Council powers and duties.
    It shall be the duty of the city disaster council, and it is empowered, to develop and recommend for adoption by the city council, emergency and mutual aid plans and agreements and such ordinances and resolutions and rules and regulations as are necessary to implement such plans and agreements. The disaster council shall meet upon call of the chairman or, in his or her absence from the city or inability to call such meeting, upon the call of the vice-chairman. The disaster council shall meet at least once each year to review the emergency preparedness status of the city and shall report their findings to the city council. (Ord. 00-8; Ord. 89-8 § 4)

 

2.40.050 Offices created.
    A.  There is created the office of director of emergency services. The city manager shall be the director of emergency services.

    B.   There is created the office of assistant director of emergency services, who shall be appointed by the director. (Ord. 00-8; Ord. 89-8 § 5)

 

2.40.060 Officers’ powers and duties.
    A.  The director is empowered to:

    1.   Request the city council to proclaim the existence or threatened existence of a “local emergency” if the city council is in session, or to issue such proclamation if the city council is not in session. Whenever a local emergency is proclaimed by the director, the city council shall take action to ratify the proclamation within seven days thereafter or the proclamation shall have no further force or effect;

    2.   Request the governor to proclaim a “state of emergency” when, in the opinion of the director, the locally available resources are inadequate to cope with the emergency. This request will be forwarded to the State Office of Emergency Services (OES) through the Yolo County communications emergency service agency (YCCESA) emergency services coordinator who will act as county liaison to State OES;

    3.   Control and direct the effort of the emergency organization of this city for the accomplishment of the purposes of this chapter;

    4.   Direct cooperation between and coordination of services and staff of the emergency organization of the city, and resolve questions of authority and responsibility that may arise between them;

    5.   Represent the city in all dealings with public or private agencies on matters pertaining to emergencies as defined in this chapter;

    6.   In the event of the proclamation of a “local emergency” as provided in this chapter, the proclamation of a “state of emergency” by the governor or the director of the State Office of Emergency Services, or the existence of a “state of war emergency,” the director is empowered to:

    a.   Make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by such emergency; provided, however, such rules and regulations must be confirmed at the earliest practicable time by the city council,

    b.   Obtain vital supplies, equipment and such other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of life and property and to bind the city for the fair value thereof and, if required immediately, to commandeer the same for public use,

    c.   Require emergency services of any city officer or employee and, in the event of the proclamation of a “state of emergency” in the county in which the city is located or the existence of a “state of war emergency,” to command the aid of as many citizens of the community as he or she deems necessary in the execution of his or her duties; such persons shall be entitled to all privileges, benefits and immunities as are provided by state law for registered disaster service workers,

    d.   Requisition necessary personnel or material of any city department or agency, and

    e.   Execute all of his or her ordinary power as city manager, all of the special powers conferred upon him by this chapter or by resolution or emergency plan pursuant hereto adopted by the city council, all powers conferred upon him or her by any statute, by any agreement approved by the city council, and by any other lawful authority.

    B.   The director of emergency services shall designate the order of succession to that office, to take effect in the event the director is unavailable to attend meetings and otherwise perform his or her duties during an emergency. Such order of succession shall be approved by the city council.

    C.   The assistant director shall, under the supervision of the director and with the assistance of emergency service chiefs, develop the city emergency plan and other emergency plans and manage the emergency programs of the city; and shall have such other powers and duties as may be assigned by the director. (Ord. 00-8; Ord. 89-8 § 6)

 

2.40.070 Emergency organization.
    All officers and employees of the city, together with those volunteer forces enrolled to aid them during an emergency, and all groups, organizations and persons who may by agreement or operation of law, including persons impressed into service under the provisions of Section 2.40.060(A)(1)(c), be charged with duties incident to the protection of life and property in this city during such emergency, shall constitute the emergency organization of the city. (Ord. 00-8; Ord. 89-8 § 7)

 

2.40.080 Emergency plan.
    The city disaster council shall be responsible for advising the assistant director with regard to the development of the city emergency plan, which shall provide for the effective mobilization of all of the resources of this city, both public and private, to meet any condition constituting a local emergency, state of emergency or state of war emergency; and shall provide for the organization, powers and duties, services and staff of the emergency organization. The city disaster council must approve the emergency plan by majority vote prior to submission of the emergency plan to the city council. (Ord. 00-8; Ord. 89-8 § 8)

 

2.40.090 Expenditures.
    Any expenditures made in connection with emergency activities, including mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the city. (Ord. 00-8; Ord. 89-8 § 9)

 

2.40.100 Violation—Penalty.
    Any person who willfully obstructs, hinders or delays any member of the emergency organization during an emergency, in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him by virtue of this chapter shall be in violation hereof. (Ord. 03-21 § 1; Ord. 00-8; Ord. 89-8 § 10)

Title 3 REVENUE AND FINANCE
Chapter 3.04 PURCHASING
Chapter 3.08 CLAIMS AND DEMANDS
Chapter 3.12 SPECIAL GAS TAX STREET IMPROVEMENT FUND
Chapter 3.16 SCHOOL IMPACT FEES
Chapter 3.20 REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX
Chapter 3.24 SALES AND USE TAX
Chapter 3.28 TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX
Chapter 3.32 FACILITY FINANCING
Chapter 3.33 TRANSACTIONS AND USE TAX

Chapter 3.04 PURCHASING
Note
*      Prior ordinance history: Ords. 87-13, 87-35 and 02-6.

 

3.04.010 Purpose.
    The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies and procedures for the purchase of supplies and equipment, contractual services agreements and awarding of public project contracts, and to comply with Government Code Sections 54201 through 54205 that require that cities adopt policies and procedures governing the purchase of supplies and equipment. (Ord. 3-11 § 2)

 

3.04.020 Definitions.
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them by this section.

    “Competitive bid” or “competitive bidding” means an offer, or the process leading to an offer, submitted pursuant to a public notice inviting suppliers to provide the city with specified supplies or equipment; and which offers are submitted as sealed bids.

    “Contractual service agreement” means an agreement for any service not performed by city personnel, including the following:

    1.   Telephone, gas, water, electric and other utility services;

    2.   Towel, window washing and cleaning services;

    3.   Banking, loaning, leasing and other financial services;

    4.   The rental of equipment and facilities;

    5.   The services of attorneys, physicians, architects, engineers, consultants or other individuals or organizations possessing a high degree of technical and professional skills;

    6.   Insurance, maintenance agreements and other forms of guarantee;

    7.   Labor and materials provided by individuals acting as independent contractors or by organizations, unless provided as part of a public project;

    8.   Other items not considered supplies, equipment or public projects.

    “Open market purchase” means the purchase of supplies and equipment without the need for soliciting sealed bids or awarding to the lowest bidder.

    “Public project” has the meaning ascribed to it in Section 20161 of the Public Contract Code.

    “Purchase” means all obligations to disburse public funds for the acquisition of supplies and equipment.

    “Responsible bidder” means a bidder who has furnished, when requested, information and data to provide that his or her financial resources, production or service facilities, service reputation and experience are adequate to make satisfactory delivery of the supplies or equipment to satisfy any provision of this chapter. (Ord. 3-11 § 2)

 

3.04.030 Administrative procedures.
    The city council shall approve administrative policies sufficient to carry out the intent of this chapter. (Ord. 3-11 § 2)

 

3.04.040 Purchasing agent.
    A.  The director of finance shall act as purchasing agent and shall be responsible for the proper administration of this chapter and administrative policies adopted pursuant to this chapter. The director of finance may delegate such duties and responsibilities assigned as appropriate and desirable.

    B.   The purchasing agent shall prepare administrative policies to implement the provisions of this chapter. Such policies shall be approved by the city manager, who shall submit them to the city council for final adoption. Thereafter, the director of finance shall take such steps as are necessary and proper to ensure compliance with them. (Ord. 3-11 § 2)

 

3.04.050 Purchase authorization.
    All purchases shall be in keeping with policies adopted by the city council through the general plan, annual budget, ordinances, resolutions, administrative policies and minute orders. Furthermore, except for the following exceptions, all purchases shall be made from unencumbered appropriations. Accordingly, no open market purchases shall be made, no notice of award shall be issued, no contract shall be signed until the purchasing agent has determined that the unexpended balance in the appropriation is sufficient to defray the amount of such purchase or contract, or until provisions for modifying the appropriation are made. (Ord. 3-11 § 2)

 

3.04.060 Unauthorized purchases, orders and commitments.
    It is unlawful for any officer or employee of the city to obligate the city in any way for purchases by methods other than those prescribed in this chapter. Any purchases, orders, commitments or obligations to pay made contrary to the provisions of this chapter, or related administrative policies adopted pursuant to this chapter, shall be null and void. (Ord. 3-11 § 2)

 

3.04.070 Open market purchasing.
    Purchases for supplies and equipment having an estimated value of ten thousand dollars or less may be made in the open market. Procedures governing the open market purchases of supplies and equipment shall be included in the administrative policies adopted pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 3-11 § 2)

 

3.04.080 Purchases requiring prior council approval.
    Purchases of supplies and equipment shall be made in accordance with administrative policies adopted by the city council and Sections 2.08.050, 3.04.090 and 3.04.100 of this code. (Ord. 07-18 § 1)

 

3.04.090 Supplies and equipment.
    Unless an open market purchase is allowed under Section 3.04.070 purchases of supplies and equipment shall be from the lowest responsible bidder whose bid has been solicited, received and approved pursuant to the following procedure:

    A.  Bidding Requirements—Exceptions. The bidding requirements set forth in this chapter do not apply in the following situations:

    1.   When, after advertising for bids as required in this chapter, no responsible bids were received;

    2.   When, upon a majority vote of the council, it is determined that it is in the best interests of the city to suspend competitive bidding;

    3.   When the desired supplies or equipment is produced and/or distributed by only one individual or organization;

    4.   When there is a public calamity, such as an extraordinary fire, flood, storm, epidemic or other disaster, or it is necessary for emergency work, the purchasing agent may declare the existence of such calamity or emergency and in the public interest and necessity demand the immediate expenditure of such money to safeguard life, health or property;

    5.   Where cooperative purchasing agreements permit purchases through legal contracts of other public agencies;

    6.   When purchasing from another public agency;

    7.   When maintaining, exchanging and/or upgrading components of existing equipment.

    B.   Invitation of Bids.

    1.   The notice inviting bids shall include the following statements:

    a.   A general description of the supplies or equipment to be purchased;

    b.   The location where bid forms and specifications may be secured;

    c.   The time and place for opening bids;

    d.   The type and character of the bidder’s security required.

    2.   The notice inviting bids shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city; such notice to be published ten days or more prior to the date set for bid opening.

    C.   Security Required. Whenever, upon the call for bids for any purchase or contract, the purchasing agent or the city council deems it advisable, each bidder shall be required to submit with the bid as security, either in cash, by cashier’s check or by certified check in favor of and payable at sight to the city of West Sacramento, or by surety bond, an amount determined to be sufficient, but not to exceed ten percent of the aggregate amount of the bid. If the bidder to whom the contract is awarded fails or neglects, for ten calendar days after receipt of such award, to enter into the contract or to timely deliver or provide the desired supplies or equipment, the bid security shall be forfeited and the purchasing agent shall draw the money due on such bid security and pay the same, or any cash deposited, into the city treasury. The bid security shall not be returned to the defaulting bidder in such case until the city council approves the return thereof in whole or in part. Unsuccessful bidders will receive their bid security within thirty days unless the city council deems it necessary to keep the bid security beyond the thirty days.

    D.  Opening and Public Record. Written bids shall be submitted to the city clerk in sealed envelopes. Bids shall be opened in public at the time and place stated in the public notice. A tabulation of all bids received shall be opened for public inspection during regular business hours for a period not less than thirty calendar days after the bid opening.

    E.   Rejection of Bids. The city council may reject any and all bids for any reason whatsoever. When all bids are rejected, the council may authorize any of the following:

    1.   Rewrite bids using the same or amended specifications;

    2.   Direct the purchasing agent to negotiate with bidders.

    F.   Award of Bid.

    1.   The award shall be given to the lowest responsible bidder except as otherwise provided in this section. In addition to price in determining the lowest responsible bidder, consideration shall be given to the quality of the supplies or equipment.

    2.   The purchasing agent may waive any informality or immaterial irregularity in any bid.

    3.   The bid of any bidder from within the city shall be computed by subtracting from his or her bid the amount of sales tax that would be received by the city for the project being bid.

    4.   If two or more bids received from responsible bidders are equal in price and quality, the purchasing agent may re-invite bids, choose one bid over the other, or negotiate with the bidders to receive a low bid. (Ord. 3-11 § 2)

 

3.04.100 Public projects.
    The procedure for bidding and awarding construction contracts on public projects shall be in accordance with Public Contract Code Section 20160 and following. (Ord. 3-11 § 2)

 

3.04.110 Contractual services agreements.
    Contractual services agreements shall be made in accordance with administrative policies adopted by the city council and Section 2.08.050 of this code. (Ord. 3-11 § 2)

Chapter 3.08 CLAIMS AND DEMANDS
3.08.010 Intent—Authority.
    This chapter is intended to prescribe an alternative method of drawing checks to that provided by Government Code Sections 37201 through 37210. Section 3.08.040 of this chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority provided by Government Code Section 935. (Ord. 87-14 Art. II § 3)

 

3.08.020 Audit and approval of demands.
    A.  Except for payroll, tort claims and other claims submitted under the Tort Claims Act, all demands and claims on the city treasury shall be presented to the director of finance. Upon receipt of a demand, the director of finance shall cause the demand to be examined and verified as to whether:

    1.   The demand is legally due and owing by the city;

    2.   There are budgeted or otherwise appropriated funds available to pay the demand;

    3.   The demand conforms to a valid requisition or order made by the city; and

    4.   The prices, amounts and/or computations shown on the demand are accurate.

    B.   If the director of finance is satisfied as to the validity and accuracy of the demand, then he or she shall approve payment of the demand. If a demand is approved for payment, the director of finance shall draw and sign a check against the city treasury for the payment of the demand. (Ord. 87-14 Art. I § 1)

 

3.08.030 Payroll checks.
    Employee salaries and wages shall be paid in accordance with a duly adopted memorandum of understanding, resolution, ordinance or other document duly adopted by the city council. Salaries and wages are payable bimonthly in accordance with timesheets completed by the employee and reviewed and approved by the employee’s supervisor. After approval by the supervisor, the timesheet shall be submitted to the director of finance, who shall cause payroll checks to be prepared. After payroll checks are prepared, the director of finance shall examine the checks and verify whether the checks are valid and accurate and in accordance with duly adopted salaries, wage schedules and benefits. After verification by the director of finance, the director shall sign the payroll checks and cause the checks to be distributed to the employees. (Ord. 87-14 Art. I § 2)

 

3.08.040 Nonbudgeted claims for money or damages.
    As a prerequisite to bringing suit against the city or any officer, employee, department, commission or board of the city, any claim for money or damages (including claims which would otherwise be excepted by Government Code Section 905) which is not governed by any other statutes, ordinances or regulations expressly relating thereto, shall be presented and acted upon in accordance with Title 1, Division 3.6, Part 3, Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 900) and Chapter 2 (commencing with Section 910) of the Government Code. This section shall relate only to the bringing of suit upon any claim, and shall not be deemed to apply to the authority of the director of finance, the city council and other officers to process and pay, in the ordinary course of business, the just obligations of the city, such as routine salaries and wages, principal and interest on bonds, payments for purchases, services and other like expenditures for which there is an express budget appropriation, and in connection with which there is no dispute as to the obligation and amount due. (Ord. 87-14 Art. I § 3)

 

3.08.050 Ratification by city council.
    Budgeted payrolls and demands paid by checks shall be presented annually to the city council for ratification and approval in the form of an audited comprehensive annual financial report. The precise form and manner of presenting the report shall be determined by the director of finance. Payment of claims and demands for which there is no budget or other appropriation shall not be made without prior approval by the city council. (Ord. 87-14 Art. I § 4)

 

3.08.060 Check signing authority.
    The director of finance is authorized and empowered to sign payroll and/or other checks upon the city treasury, provided that the payroll, claim or demand is approved as provided by this chapter. It is not necessary or required that checks be countersigned by any other city officer or councilmember. (Ord. 87-14 Art. I § 5)

Chapter 3.12 SPECIAL GAS TAX STREET IMPROVEMENT FUND
3.12.010 Created.
    In accordance with the provisions of Section 2113 of the Streets and Highways Code, there is created in the city treasury a special fund to be known as the “special gas tax street improvement fund.” (Ord. 87-6 § 1)

 

3.12.020 Purpose.
    All moneys received by the city from the state of California under the provisions of the Streets and Highways Code for the acquisition of real property or interest therein, or for engineering, or for the construction, maintenance or improvement of streets or highways by the city shall be paid into said fund. (Ord. 87-6 § 2)

 

3.12.030 Use of funds.
    All moneys in the fund shall be expended exclusively for the purposes authorized by, and subject to the provisions of, Chapter 3 of Division 3 (Section 2100 et seq.) of the Streets and Highways Code. (Ord. 87-6 § 3)

Chapter 3.16 SCHOOL IMPACT FEES
3.16.010 Determination—Authority.
    When any school district within the city presents findings to the city council that conditions of overcrowding exist within the school district, the city council shall follow the procedure set forth in Government Code Section 65970 et seq., as amended, in order to determine whether to concur in the finding of overcrowding and in the adoption of school impact fees by the school district. Government Code Section 65970 et seq., shall also govern adoption of an ordinance by the city council requiring dedication of land or payment of in-lieu fees to ease overcrowding in school facilities. (Ord. 89-14 § 4; county code § 8-5.101)

 

3.16.020 Payment prerequisite to building permit issuance.
    Any school impact fee adopted by either a school district or the city shall be paid before a building permit will be issued. (Ord. 89-14 § 4; county code § 8-5.102)

 

3.16.030 Construction.
    Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to authorize the city council to prevent application of a school impact fee properly adopted by a school district. (Ord. 89-14 § 4; county code § 8-5.103)

Chapter 3.20 REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX
3.20.010 Title—Authority.
    This chapter shall be known as the “real property transfer tax law of the city of West Sacramento.” It is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in Part 6.7 (commencing with Section 11901) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state of California. (Ord. 87-8 § 1(1))

 

3.20.020 Imposed.
    There is imposed on each deed, instrument or writing by which any lands, tenements or other realty sold within the city shall be granted, assigned, transferred or otherwise conveyed to or vested in the purchaser or purchasers or any other person or persons, by his, her or their direction when the consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrances remaining thereon at the time of sale) exceeds one hundred dollars, a tax at the rate of twenty-seven and one-half cents for each five hundred dollars or fractional part thereof. (Ord. 87-8 § 1(2))

 

3.20.030 Paid by whom.
    Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be paid by any person who makes, signs or issues any document or instrument subject to the tax, or for whose use or benefit the same is made, signed or issued. (Ord. 87-8 § 1(3))

 

3.20.040 Securing debt exempt.
    Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to any instrument in writing given to secure a debt. (Ord. 87-8 § 1(4))

 

3.20.050 Statutory exemptions.
    A.  Government Agencies Exempt. Pursuant to Revenue and Taxation Code Section 11922, any deed, instrument or writing to which the United States or any agency or instrumentality thereof, any state or territory or political subdivision thereof, is a party shall be exempt, from any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter when the exempt agency is acquiring title.

    B.   Other Statutory Exemptions. The tax imposed by this chapter shall not apply to any deed, instrument or writing exempted by Revenue and Taxation Code Sections 11926 through 11930. (Ord. 03-21 § 1; Ord. 89-14 § 5: Ord. 87-8 § 1(5))

 

3.20.060 Reorganization or adjustment exempt.
    A.  Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to making, delivering or filing of conveyances to make effective any plan of reorganization or adjustment:

    1.   Confirmed under the Federal Bankruptcy Act, as amended;

    2.   Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a railroad corporation, as defined in subdivision (m) of Section 205 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended;

    3.   Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a corporation, as defined in subdivision (3) of Section 506 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended; or

    4.   Whereby a mere change in identity, form or place of organization is effected.

    B.   The provisions of this section shall only apply if the making, delivery or filing of instruments of transfer or conveyances occurs within five years from the date of such confirmation, approval or change. (Ord. 87-8 § 1(6))

 

3.20.070 Securities and Exchange Commission orders exempt.
    Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making or delivery of conveyances to make effective any order of the Securities and Exchange Commission, as defined in subdivision (a) of Section 1083 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, but only if:

    A.  The order of the Securities and Exchange Commission in obedience to which such conveyance is made recites that such conveyance is necessary or appropriate to effectuate the provisions of Section 79k of Title 15 of the United States Code, relating to the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935;

    B.   Such order specifies the property which is ordered to be conveyed; and

    C.   Such conveyance is made in obedience to such order. (Ord. 87-8 § 1(7))

 

3.20.080 Partnerships exempt.
    A.  In the case of any realty held by a partnership, no levy shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of any transfer of an interest in a partnership or otherwise, if:

    1.   Such partnership (or another partnership) is considered a continuing partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; and

    2.   Such continuing partnership continues to hold the realty concerned.

    B.   If there is a termination of any partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, for the purposes of this chapter, such partnership shall be treated as having executed an instrument whereby there was conveyed, for fair market value (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrance remaining thereon) all realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination.

    C.   Not more than one tax shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of a termination described in subsection B of this section, and any transfer pursuant thereto, with respect to the realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination. (Ord. 87-8 § 1(8))

 

3.20.090 Administration.
    The Yolo County clerk-recorder shall administer this chapter in conformity with the provisions of Part 6.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and the provisions of any county ordinance adopted pursuant thereto. (Ord. 87-8 § 1(9))

 

3.20.100 Claims for refund.
    Claims for refund of taxes imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 5096) of Part 9 of Division 1 of the State Revenue and Taxation Code. (Ord. 87-8 § 1(10))

Chapter 3.24 SALES AND USE TAX
3.24.010 Title.
    The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the “uniform local sales and use tax ordinance.” (Ord. 87-9 § 1)

 

3.24.020 Purpose.
    The city council declares that the ordinance codified in this chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other, purposes, and directs that the provisions of this chapter be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes:

    A.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which complies with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code;

    B.   To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the State of California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code;

    C.   To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which imposes a tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California state sales and use taxes;

    D.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which can be administered in a manner that will, to the degree possible consistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting city sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of recordkeeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 87-9 § 4)

 

3.24.030 Rate.
    The rate of sales tax and use tax imposed by this chapter shall be one percent. (Ord. 87-9 § 2)

 

3.24.040 Operative date.
    This chapter shall be operative on April 1, 1987. (Ord. 87-9 § 3)

 

3.24.050 Sales tax.
    For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail a tax is imposed upon all retailers in the city at the rate stated in Section 3.24.030 of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in the city on and after the operative date. (Ord. 87-9 § 6)

 

3.24.060 Place of sale.
    For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his or her agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization. (Ord. 87-9 § 7)

 

3.24.070 Use tax.
    An excise tax is imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date for storage, use or other consumption in the city at the rate stated in Section 3.24.030 of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. (Ord. 87-9 § 8)

 

3.24.080 Adoption of provisions of state law.
    Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein. (Ord. 87-9 § 9)

 

3.24.090 Limitations on adoption of state law.
    In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, wherever the state of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of the city shall be substituted therefor. The substitution, however, shall not be made when the word “State” is used as part of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of Equalization, the State Treasury, or the Constitution of the State of California; the substitution shall not be made when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the city, or any agency thereof, rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter; the substitution shall not be made in those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state of California, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or to impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the said provisions of that Code; the substitution shall not be made in Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; and the substitution shall not be made for the word “State” in the phrase “retailer engaged in business in this State” in Section 6203 or in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. (Ord. 87-9 § 10)

 

3.24.100 Permit not required.
    If a seller’s permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional seller’s permit shall not be required by this chapter. (Ord. 87-9 § 11)

 

3.24.110 Exclusions and exemptions.
    A.  The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the state of California upon a retailer or consumer.

    B.   The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county or city in this state shall be exempt from the tax due under this chapter.

    C.   There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government.

    D.  In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, the storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax. (Ord. 89-14 § 10; Ord. 87-9 § 12)

 

3.24.120 Amendments.
    All subsequent amendments of the Revenue and Taxation Code which relate to the sales and use tax and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code shall automatically become a part of this chapter. (Ord. 87-9 § 13)

 

3.24.130 Contract with state.
    Prior to the operative date, the city shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this chapter; provided, that if the city has not contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract rather than the first day of the first calendar quarter following the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 87-9 § 5)

 

3.24.140 Enjoining collection forbidden.
    No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or the city, or against any officer of the state or the city, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter, or Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. (Ord. 87-9 § 14)

Chapter 3.28 TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX
3.28.010 Title.
    This chapter shall be known as the “uniform transient occupancy tax law” of the city. (Ord. 87-7 § 1(1))

 

3.28.020 Definitions.
    Solely for the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:

    “Calendar quarter” means a period of three consecutive calendar months commencing on the first day of each January, April, July and October.

    “Hotel” means any structure or any portion of any structure, which is occupied, or intended or designed for occupancy, lodging or sleeping purposes. This definition includes, but is not limited to, any hotel, inn, tourist home or house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodging house, rooming house, apartment house, dormitory, public or private club, mobile home or house trailer at a fixed location, or other similar structure or portion thereof.

    “Occupancy” means the use or possession, or the right to use or possession of any room, or portion thereof, in any hotel for lodging or sleeping purposes.

    “Operator” means the person who is the proprietor of the hotel, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee or any other capacity. Where the operator performs his or her functions through a managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this chapter and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his or her principal. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter by either the principal or the managing agent, however, shall be considered to be compliance by both.

    “Person” means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit.

    “Rent” means the consideration charged, whether or not received, for the occupancy of space in a hotel, valued in money, whether to be received in money, goods, labor or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, property and services of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. Rent shall not include any charge subject to state sale and use tax.

    “Tax administrator” means the city clerk, or designee.

    “Transient” means any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license or other agreement of whatever nature, for a period of thirty consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. Any such person so occupying space in a hotel shall be deemed to be a transient if his or her actual total period of occupancy does not exceed thirty days. Unless days of occupancy or entitlement to occupancy by one person are consecutive without any break, then prior or subsequent periods of such occupancy or entitlement to occupancy shall not be counted when determining whether a period exceeds the stated thirty calendar days. (Ord. 08-12 § 1; Ord. 98-4 § 2; Ord. 87-7 § 1(2))

 

3.28.030 Tax imposed.
    For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, each transient shall be subject to and shall pay a tax in the amount of twelve percent of the rent charged by the operator. Such tax shall constitute a debt owed by the transient to the city, which debt shall be extinguished only by payment to the operator or to the city. The transient shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel at the time the rent is paid. If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid with each installment. The unpaid tax shall be due upon the transient’s ceasing to occupy space in the hotel. If for any reason the tax due is not paid to the operator of the hotel, the tax administrator may require that such tax shall be paid directly to the tax administrator. (Ord. 04-8 § 3: Ord. 87-7 § 1(3))

 

3.28.040 Exemptions.
    A.  No tax shall be imposed upon:

    1.   Any person as to whom, or any occupancy as to which, it is beyond the power of the city to impose the tax provided for in this chapter; or

    2.   Any officer or employee of a foreign government, which officer or employee is exempt by reason of express provisions of federal law or international treaty.

    B.   No exemption shall be granted except upon a claim therefor made at the time the rent is collected and under penalty of perjury upon a form prescribed by the tax administrator. (Ord. 98-4 § 3: Ord. 87-7 § 1(4))

 

3.28.050 Operator’s duties.
    A.  Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by the provisions of this chapter to the same extent and at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient. All rents collected shall be recorded in a sequentially numbered manner such as pre-printed registration forms, or other sequentially numbered forms or logs approved by the tax administrator. Such forms or logs shall state separately the amount of the tax from the amount of the rent charged. Each transient shall receive a copy of the sequentially numbered form, other form of or receipt with the sequential number as a receipt for payment from the operator. The original copies of the sequentially numbered forms or other forms or logs shall be retained by every operator as provided in Section 3.28.120 of this chapter. Any person failing to record all rents collected as provided in this section shall be subject to the penalties set forth in Section 3.28.150 of this chapter.

    B.   No operator of a hotel shall advertise in any manner, whether directly or indirectly, that the tax, or any part thereof, will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, if added, any part will be refunded, except in the manner provided in this chapter. (Ord. 98-4 § 4: Ord. 87-7 § 1(5))

 

3.28.060 Registration.
    A.  Within thirty days after January 1, 1987, or within thirty days after commencing business, and annually thereafter, each operator of any hotel renting an occupancy to transients shall register such hotel with the tax administrator and obtain from him or her a “Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate” which shall at all times be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. Such certificate, among other things, shall set forth the following information:

    1.   The name of the operator;

    2.   The address of the hotel;

    3.   The date upon which the certificate was issued; and

    4.   A statement as follows:

 

    This Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax Law by registering with the Tax Administrator for the purpose of collecting from transients the Transient Occupancy Tax and remitting such tax to the Tax Administrator. This certificate shall not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful business in an unlawful manner, nor to operate a hotel without strictly complying with all local applicable laws, including, but not limited to, those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department, or office of this City. This certificate shall not constitute a permit.

 

    B.   Such certificate shall be nonassignable and nontransferable and shall be surrendered immediately to the tax administrator upon the cessation of business at the location named in the certificate, or upon the sale or transfer of the business. (Ord. 05-15 § 2(B) (part); Ord. 87-7 § 1(6))

 

3.28.070 Reporting and remitting.
    Each reporter shall, on or before either:

    A.  The last day of the month following the close of each calendar quarter; or

    B.   The last day of the month following the close of each calendar month, as determined by the tax administrator, make a return to the tax administrator, on forms provided by the administrator, of the total rents charged and received and the amount of tax collected for transient occupancies. At the time the return is filed, the full amount of tax collected shall be remitted to the tax administrator. Returns and payments are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. All taxes collected by operators pursuant to this chapter shall be held in trust for the account of the city until payment thereof is made to the tax administrator. (Ord. 91-8 § 3(A): Ord. 87-7 § 1(7))

 

3.28.080 Penalties and interest.
    A.  Original Delinquencies. Any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by the provisions of this chapter within the time required shall pay a penalty in the amount of ten percent of the tax, in addition to the amount of the tax.

    B.   Continued Delinquencies. Any operator who fails to remit any delinquent remittance on or before a period of thirty days following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency penalty in the amount of ten percent of the tax, in addition to the amount of the tax and the ten-percent penalty first imposed.

    C.   Fraud. If the tax administrator determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due pursuant to the provisions of this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty in the amount of twenty-five percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto, in addition to the penalties set forth in subsections A and B of this section.

    D.  Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by the provisions of this chapter shall pay interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid.

    E.   Penalties and Interest Merged with Tax. Every penalty imposed, and such interest as accrues, pursuant to the provisions of this section shall become a part of the tax required to be paid by the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 87-7 § 1(8))

 

3.28.090 Failure to collect and report tax—Determination by tax administrator.
    If any operator fails or refuses to collect such tax and to make, within the time provided in this chapter, any report and remittance of such tax, or any portion thereof, required by the provisions of this chapter, then the tax administrator shall proceed in such manner as he or she may deem best to obtain the facts and information on which to base his or her estimate of the tax due. As soon as the tax administrator procures such facts and information as he or she is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any such tax imposed by the provisions of this chapter and payable by any operator who has failed or refused to collect the tax and to make such report and remittance, the tax administrator shall proceed to determine and assess against such operator the tax, interest and penalties provided for by the provisions of this chapter. In the event such determination is made, the tax administrator shall give notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the operator so assessed at his or her last known place of address. Such operator, within ten days after the service or mailing of such notice, may make an application in writing to the tax administrator for a hearing on the amount assessed. If an application by the operator for a hearing is not made within the time prescribed, the tax, interest and penalties, if any, determined by the tax administrator shall become final and conclusive and immediately due and payable. If such an application is made, the tax administrator shall give not less than five days’ written notice in the manner prescribed in this section to the operator to show cause at a time and place fixed in such notice of why the amount specified therein should not be fixed for such tax, interest and penalties. At such hearing the operator may appear and offer evidence why such specified tax, interest and penalties should not be so fixed. After such hearing the tax administrator shall determine the proper tax to be remitted and shall thereafter give written notice to the person in the manner prescribed in this section of such determination and the amount of such tax, interest and penalties. The amount determined to be due shall be payable after fifteen days, unless an appeal is filed as provided in Section 3.28.110. (Ord. 87-7 § 1(9))

 

3.28.100 Cessation of business.
    Each operator shall notify the tax administrator at least ten days prior to the sale, transfer or cessation of business for any reason, and returns and remittances shall be due immediately upon the sale or cessation of business. (Ord. 87-7 § 1(10))

 

3.28.110 Appeals.
    Any operator aggrieved by any decision of the tax administrator with respect to the amount of such tax, interest and penalties, if any, may appeal to the city council by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within fifteen days after the service or mailing of the determination of the tax due. The council shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal, and the city clerk shall give notice in writing to such operator at his or her last known place of address. The findings of the council shall be final and conclusive and shall be served upon the appellant in the manner prescribed in this chapter for the service of a notice of hearing. Any amount found to be due shall be immediately due and payable upon the service of notice. (Ord. 87-7 § 1(11))

 

3.28.120 Operator to retain records for three years.
    A.  It shall be the duty of every operator liable for the collection and payment to the city of any tax imposed by the provisions of this chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of four years after the date any such tax is due and payable, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he or she may have been liable for the collection of and payment to the city. Except as provided below, the tax administrator shall have the right to inspect such records at all reasonable times during regular business hours.

    B.   The tax administrator shall, whenever practicable, contact the operator prior to inspection and inform the operator of the reasons for the inspection.

    C.   Where required by state or federal law, a subpoena shall be obtained prior to an inspection conducted pursuant to this article, unless written consent to conduct such inspection is granted by the operator.

    D.  If the inspection is interfered with by the operator or a third party, the tax administrator shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to perform the inspection authorized by this section. (Ord. 05-15 § 2(B) (part); Ord. 98-4 § 5: Ord. 87-7 § 1(12))

 

3.28.130 Refunds.
    A.  Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid, or paid more than once, or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, such amount may be refunded, as provided in subsections B and C of this section, provided a claim in writing therefor, stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the tax administrator within three years after the date of payment. The claim shall be on forms furnished by the tax administrator.

    B.   Any operator may claim a refund or take as credit against taxes collected and remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once, or erroneously or illegally collected or received when it is established in a manner prescribed by the tax administrator that the person from whom the tax has been collected was not a transient; provided, however, neither a refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has either been refunded to the transient or credited to rent subsequently payable by the transient to the operator.

    C.   A transient may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid, paid more than once, or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city, by filing a claim in the manner provided in subsection A of this section, but only when the tax was paid by the transient directly to the tax administrator, or when the transient, having paid the tax to the operator, establishes to the satisfaction of the tax administrator that the transient has been unable to obtain a refund from the operator who collected the tax.

    D.  No refund shall be paid pursuant to the provisions of this section unless the claimant establishes his or her right to a refund by written records showing entitlement thereto. (Ord. 87-7 § 1(13))

 

3.28.140 Actions to collect.
    A.  Any tax required to be paid by any transient under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the transient to the city. Any such tax collected by an operator which has not been paid to the city, and any amount determined to be due to the city pursuant to Section 3.28.090 of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the operator to the city.

    B.   All taxes, penalties and interest which are collected by operators pursuant to this chapter and held in trust for the account of the city, or determined to be due to the city pursuant to Section 3.28.090 of this chapter, and which remain delinquent as of June 30th of each year may be collected in the same manner as the general taxes for the city for the forthcoming fiscal year, as follows:

    1.   The city shall prepare a written report, which shall be filed with the city clerk. The report shall describe each parcel of real property for which there are any delinquencies in any taxes, penalties and interest held in trust for the city or determined to be due to the city pursuant to Section 3.28.090 of this chapter during the preceding year, and the amount of the delinquency.

    2.   The city clerk shall publish notice of the report’s filing and of the time and place of hearing on the report, prior to the date set for the hearing. The notice shall be published at least once a week for two weeks. The city clerk shall also mail written notice of the report’s filing to each property owner whose property or parcel is identified in the report setting forth individually each property and each of the taxes, penalties and interest due for that property.

    3.   At the time stated in the notice, the city council shall hear and consider all objections or protests, if any, to the report concerning the delinquencies. Thereafter, the city council may adopt, revise, change, reduce or modify any delinquency or overrule any or all objections thereto. The city council shall then make its determination on each delinquency identified in the report. The city council’s determination shall be final.

    4.   Following the city council’s hearing, on or before August 10th of each year, the city clerk shall file with the county auditor a copy of the report, signed by the city clerk, stating the city council has adopted the report. The city clerk shall request the county auditor to include the amount of the delinquencies on the bills for taxes levied against the properties identified in the report. (Ord. 05-15 § 2(B) (part); Ord. 91-8 § 3(B): Ord. 87-7 § 1(14))

 

3.28.145 Liens.
    Delinquent taxes, penalties and interest may be immediately recorded as a lien with the county recorder and, after recordation, shall constitute a lien upon all real property owned or thereafter acquired by the hotel property owner and operator. The city may from time to time compile lists of such delinquent charges and record them with the county recorder as liens. The city shall include a statement to this effect on all certificates issued pursuant to Section 3.28.060. The failure to so state shall not invalidate the lien. (Ord. 91-8 § 2)

Chapter 3.32 FACILITY FINANCING
3.32.010 Authority.
    The city council enacts this chapter in accordance with, among other powers, Government Code Section 37100.5, which authorizes the legislative body of any city to levy any tax that may be levied by any charter city, subject to the voters’ approval pursuant to Article XIII A of the California Constitution.

    Because the levy of taxes for city purposes is a municipal affair and the subject of financing the acquisition, construction, and maintenance of public infrastructure does not qualify as a matter of statewide concern, charter cities may levy taxes that are not identical to those provided for in general state statutes, such as the Mello-Roos Community Facilities Act of 1982 (the “Mello-Roos Act”). (Ord. 98-11 § 1)

 

3.32.020 Purpose and intent.
    The city council enacts this chapter to accomplish the following purposes:

    A.  The Mello-Roos Act provides authority to levy taxes to fund maintenance of facilities that includes parks, parkways, and open space. The Mello-Roos Act may not include street landscaping, street lights, and other facilities, the maintenance of which may be provided for from special benefit assessments under the Landscaping and Lighting Act of 1972 (the “1972 act”);

    B.   Special benefit assessments levied under the 1972 act are limited to financing maintenance of facilities that are of special benefit (within the meaning of Article XIII D of the California Constitution) to assessed properties. These may not include all the costs of maintaining the facilities required as a result of development;

    C.   The city requires developers of property to form financing districts to fund maintenance of all of the public infrastructure and facilities required as a result of their developments, including those facilities described in both subsections A and B of this section;

    D.  The city council finds that the city needs a single, flexible and broad method of funding maintenance of public infrastructure required for new development so that all the costs of such maintenance are borne by the new development and that Government Code Section 37100.5 provides a means for providing that single method. (Ord. 98-11 § 1)

 

3.32.030 Use of Mello-Roos Act.
    Whenever the city council undertakes proceedings pursuant to the Mello-Roos Act, as amended (Sections 53311 and following, of the California Government Code), it may levy special taxes in addition to the special taxes authorized in the Mello-Roos Act to finance the maintenance and servicing of any of the improvements authorized by the 1972 act, as amended (Sections 22500 and following, of the California Streets and Highways Code), and any other governmental facilities that the city is authorized by law to contribute revenue to or to construct, own, or operate. (Ord. 98-11 § 1)

 

3.32.040 Protest rights—Qualified electors.
    Whenever the city council undertakes proceedings to establish a community facilities district and proposes to levy a special tax therein for the purpose of funding construction, maintenance, and/or operation of public improvements that have been required as a condition of approval of a land use entitlement, which condition by its terms is binding on the owners of the property within the community facilities district, a majority protest shall exist under Government Code Section 53324 only if sufficient written protests are received from owners of land and the qualified electors of the community facilities district shall be the landowners of the district. (Ord. 01-6 § 1)

 

3.32.060 Qualified elector—Voter qualifications subject to tax levy.
    When the city council undertakes proceedings for the purpose of funding services pursuant to Mello-Roos Community Facilities Act of 1982, as amended (Sections 53311 and following, of the California Government Code), a qualified elector as referred to in Section 53326(a) shall mean a person or landowner who is a resident or owner of land in the area that will be subject to the proposed tax levy and only such persons shall be counted for purposes of determining whether or not there are twelve persons registered to vote in the territory referred to in Section 53325(b). (Ord. 06-16 § 3)

Chapter 3.33 TRANSACTIONS AND USE TAX
3.33.010 Title, city and territory.
    This chapter shall be known as the Transactions and Use Tax Ordinance. The city of West Sacramento hereinafter shall be called “city.” This chapter shall be applicable in all territory within the city boundaries. (Ord. 02-12 § 1)

 

3.33.020 Operative date.
    “Operative date” means the first day of the first calendar quarter commencing more than one hundred ten days after the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter and chapter, the date of such adoption being as set forth below, and the approval of the voters of the city of a measure approving the imposition of the transactions and use tax set forth herein; provided that if the city shall not have entered into a contract with the State Board as required herein prior to such date, the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following execution of such a contract. (Ord. 02-12 § 1)

 

3.33.030 Purpose.
    The purpose of this chapter is to achieve the following, among other purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes:

    A.  To impose a retail transactions and use tax in accordance with the provisions of Part 1.6 (commencing with Section 7251) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and Section 7286.75 of Part 1.7 of Division 2 which authorizes the city to adopt this tax ordinance which shall be operative if a majority of the qualified voters of the city voting on the measure vote to approve the imposition of the tax at an election called for that purpose.

    B.   To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the state of California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code.

    C.   To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that imposes a tax and provides a measure therefore that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California State Sales and Use Taxes.

    D.  To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that can be administered in a manner that will be, to the greatest degree possible, consistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting the transactions and use taxes, and at the same time, minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this ordinance. (Ord. 02-12 § 1)

 

3.33.040 Contract with state.
    Prior to the operative date, the city shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this transactions and use tax ordinance; provided, that if the city shall not have contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract. (Ord. 02-12 § 1)

 

3.33.050 Transactions tax rate.
    For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is hereby imposed upon all retailers in the city at the rate of one half of one percent until March 31, 2033 and thereafter at the rate of one-quarter of one percent of the gross receipts of any retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in the city on and after the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 08-13 § 2; Ord. 02-12 § 1)

 

3.33.060 Place of sale.
    For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his or her agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization. (Ord. 02-12 § 1)

 

3.33.070 Use tax rate.
    An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter for storage, use or other consumption in the city at the rate of one-half of one percent until March 31, 2033 and thereafter at the rate of one-quarter of one percent of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. (Ord. 08-13 § 2; Ord. 02-12 § 1)

 

3.33.080 Adoption of provisions of state law.
    Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 (commencing with Section 6001) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are hereby adopted and made a part of the ordinance codified in this chapter as though fully set forth herein. (Ord. 02-12 § 1)

 

3.33.090 Limitations on adoption of state law and collection of use taxes.
    In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code:

    A.  Wherever the state of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this city shall be substituted therefore. However, the substitution shall not be made when:

    1.   The word “state” is used as a part of the title of the State Controller, State Treasurer, State Board of Control, State Board of Equalization, State Treasury, or the Constitution of the state of California;

    2.   The result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against this city or any agency, officer, or employee thereof rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this ordinance.

    3.   In those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state of California, where the result of the substitution would be to:

    a.   Provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or;

    b.   Impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the said provision of that code.

    4.   In Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code.

    B.   The word “city” shall be substituted for the word “state” in the phrase “retailer engaged in business in this state” in Section 6203 and in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. (Ord. 02-12 § 1)

 

3.33.100 Permit not required.
    If a seller’s permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional transactor’s permit shall not be required by this chapter. (Ord. 02-12 § 1)

 

3.33.110 Exemptions and exclusions.
    A.  There shall be excluded from the measure of the transactions tax and the use tax the amount of any sales tax or use tax imposed by the state of California or by any city, city and county, or county pursuant to the Bradley-Burns Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law or the amount of any state-administered transactions or use tax.

    B.   There are exempted from the computation of the amount of transactions tax the gross receipts from:

    1.   Sales of tangible personal property, other than fuel or petroleum products, to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the county in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government.

    2.   Sales of property to be used outside the city which is shipped to a point outside the city, pursuant to the contract of sale, by delivery to such point by the retailer or his or her agent, or by delivery by the retailer to a carrier for shipment to a consignee at such point. For the purposes of this paragraph, delivery to a point outside the city shall be satisfied:

    a.   With respect to vehicles (other than commercial vehicles) subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, and undocumented vessels registered under Chapter 2 of Division 3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code by registration to an out-of-city address and by a declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, stating that such address is, in fact, his or her principal place of residence; and

    b.   With respect to commercial vehicles, by registration to a place of business out-of-city and declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, that the vehicle will be operated from that address.

    3.   The sale of tangible personal property if the seller is obligated to furnish the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter and chapter.

    4.   A lease of tangible personal property which is a continuing sale of such property, for any period of time for which the lessor is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by the lease prior to the operative date of this ordinance.

    5.   For the purposes of subsections (3) and (4) of this section, the sale or lease of tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised.

    C.   There are exempted from the use tax imposed by this ordinance, the storage, use or other consumption in this city of tangible personal property:

    1.   The gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to a transactions tax under any state-administered transactions and use tax ordinance.

    2.   Other than fuel or petroleum products purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. This exemption is in addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state of California.

    3.   If the purchaser is obligated to purchase the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of this ordinance.

    4.   If the possession of, or the exercise of any right or power over, the tangible personal property arises under a lease which is a continuing purchase of such property for any period of time for which the lessee is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by a lease prior to the operative date of this ordinance.

    5.   For the purposes of subsections (3) and (4) of this section, storage, use, or other consumption, or possession of, or exercise of any right or power over, tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised.

    6.   Except as provided in subsection (7), a retailer engaged in business in the city shall not be required to collect use tax from the purchaser of tangible personal property, unless the retailer ships or delivers the property into the city or participates within the city in making the sale of the property, including, but not limited to, soliciting or receiving the order, either directly or indirectly, at a place of business of the retailer in the city or through any representative, agent, canvasser, solicitor, subsidiary, or person in the city under the authority of the retailer.

    7.   “A retailer engaged in business in the city” shall also include any retailer of any of the following: vehicles subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, or undocumented vessels registered under Chapter 2 of Division 3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code. That retailer shall be required to collect use tax from any purchaser who registers or licenses the vehicle, vessel, or aircraft at an address in the city.

    D.  Any person subject to use tax under this ordinance may credit against that tax any transactions tax or reimbursement for transactions tax paid to a district imposing, or retailer liable for a transactions tax pursuant to Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code with respect to the sale to the person of the property the storage, use or other consumption of which is subject to the use tax. (Ord. 02-12 § 1)

 

3.33.120 Amendments.
    All amendments subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter to Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code relating to sales and use taxes and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, and all amendments to Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, shall automatically become a part of this chapter, provided however, that no such amendment shall operate so as to affect the rate of tax imposed by this chapter. (Ord. 02-12 § 1)

 

3.33.130 Enjoining collection forbidden.
    No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or the city, or against any officer of the state or the city, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter, or Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. (Ord. 02-12 § 1)

 

3.33.140 Severability.
    If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the chapter and the application of such provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby. (Ord. 02-12 § 1)

 

3.33.150 Effective date.
    This chapter relates to the levying and collecting of the city transactions and use taxes and shall take effect immediately and shall be published within fifteen days after adoption in a paper of general circulation published and circulated within the city of West Sacramento. (Ord. 02-12 § 1)

Title 4 CABLE COMMUNICATIONS
Chapter 4.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 4.08 FRANCHISES
Chapter 4.12 STREET WORK—PERMITS—CONSTRUCTION
Chapter 4.16 OPERATION AND SERVICE
Chapter 4.20 FRANCHISE SERVICE AND EMPLOYMENT STANDARDS
Chapter 4.24 RATES AND CHARGES
Chapter 4.28 COMPENSATION AND GUARANTEES
Chapter 4.32 CABLE COMMUNICATIONS ADVISORY COMMITTEES
Chapter 4.36 PURCHASE OF SYSTEMS
Chapter 4.40 ASSIGNMENTS AND TRANSFERS OF SYSTEMS
Chapter 4.44 REMEDIES

Chapter 4.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article I. Generally
4.04.010 Title.
    This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “West Sacramento cable communications law.” (County code § 11-1.101)

 

4.04.020 Purposes.
    A.  The purposes of this chapter include, but are not limited to, the promotion of the general welfare of the citizens of the city by:

    1.   Establishing a master plan for the franchising of cable communication services within the city;

    2.   Establishing a regulatory framework for the administration of franchises in order to ensure that the potential recreational, educational, social, economic and other advantages of cable communications will in fact inure to the benefit of the community and the citizens thereof;

    3.   Regulating the operations of grantees for the purpose of protecting and promoting the public health, peace, safety and welfare; and

    4.   Encouraging the adoption of goals for systems of cable communications within the city which recognize the advantages of cable services and the benefits of resources of the University of California, the California State University and neighboring cable communications systems which may be made available to inhabitants of the city.

    B.   The provisions of this section shall not confer any right upon a grantee which is not otherwise conferred by another express provision of this chapter. (County code § 11-1.201)

 

4.04.030 Operation.
    Territory in the city shall not fall within the operation of this title unless the city council by ordinance declares this title operative within the territory. Such territory shall be known as the “franchise area.” Any such ordinance shall describe the territory in which this title shall become operative. The ordinance may specify any modifications to the provisions of this title which shall apply only to the territory described in the ordinance. (County code § 11-1.202)

 

Article II. Definitions
4.04.040 Generally.
    Unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this title are defined as set forth in this article. Words not defined in this article shall be given their common and ordinary meanings, consistent with the context in which such words are used and the purpose of this title. (County code § 11-1.301)

 

4.04.050 Act.
    “Act” means the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984 (Title VI of the Communications Act of 1934). (Ord. 03-21 § 1; county code § 11-1.302.1)

 

4.04.060 Applicant.
    “Applicant” means any person or corporation submitting an application for a cable communications franchise. (County code § 11-1.302)

 

4.04.070 Basic cable service.
    “Basic cable service” shall be defined as provided in subsection (2) of Section 602 of the Act. (County code § 11-1.303)

 

4.04.080 Broad categories of video programming and other services.
    “Broad categories of video programming and other services” means broad categories of video programming (for example, children’s programming; local origination programming; community use programming; programming in a particular foreign language; programming which is of primary interest to a particular minority group; news and public affairs programming; and sports programming and related categories) and other services offered by the grantee in its application and incorporated in the franchise ordinance as a commitment of the grantee. “Broad categories of video programming and other services” shall not include any purported commitment to provide specific programming (for example, a particular news service or particular program) or any item of value not utilized in the operation of the cable system. (County code § 11-1.302.2)

 

4.04.090 Cable communications system—CATV system—Cable system.
    “Cable communications system,” “CATV system” or “cable system” shall be defined as provided in subsection (6) of Section 602 of the Act. (County code § 11-1.304)

 

4.04.100 Channel—Cable channel.
    “Channel” or “cable channel” shall be defined as provided in subsection (3) of Section 602 of the Act. (County code § 11-1.305)

 

4.04.110 Community use—Community use programming—Community use channels.
    “Community use,” “community use programming” and “community use channels” mean broad categories of video programming and other services provided by the grantee, other than PEG facilities, PEG funding and PEG programming, for the purposes of noncommercial cablecasts presented by or on behalf of a grantee, the city, individuals and local community nonprofit organizations, which programming and services consist of topics of special interest to the city or elements thereof, including matters of a political, governmental, sociological, religious, educational, cultural, artistic, health-oriented, ethnic, economic, recreational, charitable and philanthropic nature, a significant part of such programming having been locally produced. For the purposes of this section, “noncommercial” means:

    A.  That the contents of such programming shall not be for the purpose of directly selling any product or service for private gain; and

    B.   That the programming shall not be associated with or interrupted during presentation by commercial advertising or announcements specifically presented for the purpose of selling products or services for private gain. (County code § 11-1.306)

 

4.04.120 Converter.
    “Converter” means an electronic device which converts signals to a frequency not susceptible to interference within the television receiver of a subscriber and, by an appropriate channel selector, also permits a subscriber to view all signals authorized to be received at a designated location. (County code § 11-1.307)

 

4.04.130 County—Yolo County.
    “County” or “Yolo County” mean the county of Yolo, a political subdivision of the state. (County code § 11-1.308)

 

4.04.140 Dwelling unit.
    “Dwelling unit” means a residential living unit as distinguished from temporary lodging facilities, such as hotel and motel rooms and dormitories, and shall include single-family residential units and individual apartments, condominium units, mobile homes within mobile home parks and other multiple-family residential units. (County code § 11-1.311)

 

4.04.150 Educational channel.
    “Educational channel” means any channel or portion of a channel on which school, library or governmental educational institutions are the only designated programmers. (County code § 11-1.312)

 

4.04.160 Entertainment services.
    “Entertainment services” means “cable service” as defined by subsection (5) of Section 602 of the Act. (County code § 11-1.313)

 

4.04.170 Federal Communications Commission.
    “Federal Communications Commission” or “FCC” means the present federal agency of that name as constituted by the Communications Act of 1934, or any successor agency created by the United States Congress and any legally appointed, designated or elected agent or successor thereof. (County code § 11-1.314)

 

4.04.180 Franchise—Franchise agreement.
    “Franchise” or “franchise agreement” means any authorization granted under this title in terms of a franchise, privilege, permit or license to construct, operate and maintain a cable communications system within the city limits. Any such authorization, in whatever form granted, shall not mean and include any license or permit required for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within the city as required by other laws of the city. (County code § 11-1.315)

 

4.04.190 Franchise documents.
    “Franchise documents,” with respect to a franchise for a cable communications system issued pursuant to the provisions of this title, means the provisions of this title, the map defining any imposed service area for the franchise as adopted, the provisions of any request for proposals issued pursuant to the provisions of this title in connection with such franchise, the provisions of the application for the franchise submitted by the grantee, the provisions of the ordinance offering the franchise, and the provisions of the certificate of acceptance by the grantee of the franchise. (County code § 11-1.316)

 

4.04.200 Franchise property.
    “Franchise property” means all property retained by the grantee in, along and across streets under the authority of a franchise or business license. (County code § 11-1.317)

 

4.04.210 Government channel.
    “Government channel” means any channel or portion thereof dedicated to the use of the city or public agencies designated by the city. (County code § 11-1.318)

 

4.04.220 Grantee.
    “Grantee” means a person or corporation to whom or which a franchise is granted pursuant to this title or any person or corporation to whom or which such franchise thereafter may be lawfully transferred. (County code § 11-1.319)

 

4.04.230 Grantor.
    “Grantor” means the city of West Sacramento. (County code § 11-1.320)

 

4.04.240 Gross revenue.
    A.  “Gross revenue” means all cash, credits, property of any kind or nature, or other consideration derived directly or indirectly by a grantee and its affiliates, subsidiaries, parent and any other person or entity in which the grantee has a financial interest or which has a financial interest in the grantee, arising from or attributable to the operation of the cable communications system, including, but not limited to:

    1.   Revenue from all charges for those services provided on the subscriber network and institutional network (including leased access fees);

    2.   Revenue from all charges for the insertion of commercial advertisements upon the system;

    3.   Revenue from all charges for the leased use of studios;

    4.   Revenue from all charges for the installation, connection and reinstatement of the equipment necessary for the utilization of the system and the provision of subscriber and other services; and

    5.   The sale, exchange or cablecast of any programming developed for community use or institutional users.

    B.   “Gross revenue” shall include, valued at retail price levels, the value of any goods, services or other remuneration in nonmonetary form received by the grantee for others described in this section in consideration for the performance by a grantee or others described in this section of any advertising or other service in connection with the cable communications system.

    C.   “Gross revenue” shall not include:

    1.   Any taxes on services furnished by the grantee which taxes are imposed directly upon any subscriber or user by the United States, the state or a local agency and collected by the grantee on behalf of the government;

    2.   Revenue received directly from the grantee by an affiliate, subsidiary or parent, or any other person or entity in which the grantee has a financial interest or which has a financial interest in the grantee, when the revenue received has already been included in reported gross revenue as received by the grantee; and

    3.   Revenue received by such an affiliate, subsidiary, parent, person or entity when the revenue received is from the sale of national advertising shown on programs distributed on a national basis by the affiliate, subsidiary, parent, person or entity and, but for this exception, that portion of the revenue attributable to broadcasts through the cable communications system would be treated as gross revenue. (County code § 11-1.321)

 

4.04.250 Institutional network—Institutional user network.
    “Institutional network” or “institutional user network” means a cable communications network or a specified number of channels on a subscriber network used exclusively for the provision of services to businesses, schools, public agencies or other nonprofit agencies in connection with the ongoing operations of such enterprises. (County code § 11-1.322)

 

4.04.260 Institutional services.
    “Institutional services” means services delivered on the institutional network. (County code § 11-1.323)

 

4.04.270 Institutional user.
    “Institutional user” means a business, public agency, school or nonprofit corporation receiving the institutional services on the institutional user network. (County code § 11-1.324)

 

4.04.280 Interactive services.
    “Interactive services” means services provided to subscribers or users where the subscriber either:

    A.  Both receives information consisting of either television or other signals and transmits signals generated by the subscriber or user on equipment under his or her control for the purpose of selecting what information shall be transmitted to the subscriber or user for any other purpose; or

    B.   Transmits signals to any other location for any purpose. (County code § 11-1.325)

 

4.04.290 Leased access.
    “Leased access” means use on a fee-for-service basis of the subscriber network or institutional network by business enterprises (whether profit, nonprofit or governmental) unaffiliated with the grantee to render services or deliver programming within the city. (County code § 11-1.326)

 

4.04.300 Local origination channel.
    “Local origination channel” means any channel or portion of a channel where the grantee is the only designated programmer and which channel is utilized to provide television programs to subscribers. (County code § 11-1.327)

 

4.04.310 Monitoring.
    “Monitoring” means observing a communications signal, or the absence of a signal, where the observer is not the subscriber, whether the signal is observed by visual or electronic means, for any purpose whatsoever; provided, however, “monitoring” shall not include systemwide, nonindividually addressed sweeps of the cable communications system for the purposes of verifying system integrity, controlling return path transmissions or billing for pay services. (County code § 11-1.328)

 

4.04.320 Nonbasic service.
    “Nonbasic service” means any communications service in addition to the basic service. (County code § 11-1.329)

 

4.04.330 Pay channel—Premium channel.
    “Pay channel” or “premium channel” means a channel on which television signals are delivered to subscribers for a special fee or charge to subscribers over and above the regular charges for subscriber service, on a per-program, per-channel or other subscription basis. (County code § 11-1.330)

 

4.04.340 Premium service.
    “Premium service” means a pay-per-program, pay-per-channel or subscription service, that is, delivered to the subscribers for a fee or charge over and above the regular charges for basic service other than those services provided as a part of a tier of service. (County code § 11-1.331)

 

4.04.350 Public access channel.
    “Public access channel” means any channel or portion of a channel where any member of the general public may be a programmer on a first-come, first-served basis, subject to the appropriate rules formulated by the grantee or its delegate, subject to approval by the grantor. (County code § 11-1.332)

 

4.04.360 Public, educational or governmental access facilities or PEG facilities.
    “Public, educational or governmental access facilities or PEG facilities” means:

    A.  The channel capacity designated for public, educational or governmental use; and

    B.   The facilities and equipment for the use of such channel capacity. (County code § 11-1.332.1)

 

4.04.370 Public, educational or governmental access funding or PEG funding.
    “Public, educational or governmental access funding or PEG funding” means payments, other than payments for capital costs, which are required by this title to be made by the grantee during the term of the franchise for, or in support of the use of, public, educational or governmental access facilities. (County code § 11-1.332.2)

 

4.04.380 Public, educational or governmental access programming or PEG programming.
    “Public, educational or governmental access programming or PEG programming” means public, educational or governmental programming specifically identified in this title as being produced by the use of public, educational or governmental access facilities or public, educational or governmental access funding. (County code § 11-1.332.3)

 

4.04.390 Street.
    “Street” means the surface of and the space above and below any street, road, highway, freeway, utility right-of-way or any other easement which now or hereafter exists for the provision of public and quasipublic services to residential or other properties and in which the city is expressly or impliedly authorized or empowered to permit use for the installation and operation of a cable communications system. (County code § 11-1.333)

 

4.04.400 Subscriber.
    “Subscriber” means a lawful recipient of service from a cable communications system. (County code § 11-1.334)

 

4.04.410 Subscriber network.
    “Subscriber network” means a cable communications network which carries television entertainment channels and community use channels (including basic service) and which may carry channels providing commercial or other nonentertainment services and leased access channels. (County code § 11-1.335)

 

4.04.420 Tapping.
    “Tapping” means the observing of a communications signal exchange where the observer is neither of the communicating parties, whether the exchange is observed by visual or electronic means, for any purpose whatsoever. (County code § 11-1.336)

 

4.04.430 Tier of service.
    “Tier of service” means a grouping of two or more channels of program services on the subscriber network which is marketed by a grantee to subscribers for a single monthly or other charge. “Basic cable service,” as defined by Section 4.04.070, shall constitute a single tier of service. (County code § 11-1.337)

 

4.04.440 User.
    “User” means a party utilizing a cable communications system channel for the purposes of production or the transmission of material to subscribers, as contrasted with the receipt thereof in a subscriber capacity. (County code § 11-1.338)

Chapter 4.08 FRANCHISES
Article I. Grant
4.08.010 Authority to grant.
    It is unlawful to commence or engage in the construction, operation or maintenance of a cable communications system without a franchise issued under this chapter. The city council, by ordinance, may award a franchise to construct, operate and maintain a cable communications system within all or any portion of the city to any person, whether operating under an existing franchise or not, who makes an application for authority to furnish a cable communications system which complies with the terms and conditions of this chapter; provided, however, this section shall not require the grant of a franchise to any particular person or to prohibit the city council from restricting the number of grantees should the city council determine such a restriction would be in the public interests. Any franchise for the construction, maintenance and operation of cable communications systems using the public streets, utility easements, other public rights-of-way or places shall conform to the provisions of this chapter. (County code § 11-1.401)

 

4.08.020 Incorporation by reference.
    A.  The provisions of this chapter shall be incorporated by reference in any franchise agreement or license approved pursuant to this title.

    B.   The provisions of any proposal submitted and accepted by the city shall be incorporated by reference in any applicable franchise or license. (County code § 11-1.402)

 

4.08.030 General characteristics of franchises issued.
    A.  Any franchise issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall:

    1.   Authorize utilization of the streets for the public or quasi-public purpose of installing cables, wires, lines and other facilities, in order to operate a cable communications system; and

    2.   Be nonexclusive and neither expressly nor impliedly preclude the issuance of subsequent franchises to operate cable communications systems within the city.

    B.   Such a franchise shall not authorize or either expressly or impliedly permit the grantee, except with the consent of the owners, or as otherwise provided by law, to provide cable communications system service to, or install antennas, cables, wires, lines, towers, waveguides, other conductors, converters or any other equipment or facilities upon private property, including, but not limited to, apartment complexes, condominiums, mobile home parks and residential subdivision developments with private roads. The purpose of this subsection is to require consent by the owner or as otherwise provided by law for the provision of service. This subsection shall not be construed to prohibit a grantee from entering or utilizing private property as an incident to its use of the streets to the extent entry or use is expressly or impliedly authorized by the right conferred by this section to occupy the streets. (County code § 11-1.403)

 

4.08.040 Franchises as contracts.
    A.  A franchise issued pursuant to the provisions of this title shall constitute a contract between the grantee and the city. Each grantee shall have contractually committed itself to comply with the terms, conditions and provisions of the franchise documents, and with all rules, orders, regulations and determinations applicable to the franchise which are issued, promulgated or made pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. The regulatory authority conferred by the provisions of this title, including the power to amend the provisions of this title, as reserved under Section 4.08.100, shall constitute as reserved authority under the contract.

    B.   All terms, conditions and provisions of the contract shall be embodied in the franchise documents, and conflicts in the terms, conditions or provisions of the franchise documents shall be resolved as follows:

    1.   The express terms of this title shall prevail over conflicting or inconsistent provisions in any other franchise document;

    2.   The express terms of the ordinance offering the franchise shall prevail over conflicting or inconsistent provisions in any other franchise document, except the express terms of this title;

    3.   The express terms of the request for proposals shall prevail over conflicting or inconsistent provisions in either the application for the franchise or the certificate of acceptance of the franchise;

    4.   The express terms of the application for the franchise shall prevail over the inconsistent or conflicting provisions in the certificate of acceptance of the franchise.

    C.   The provisions of the franchise documents shall be liberally construed in order to effectuate the purposes and objects thereof. Prior to the initial enactment of this title, the provisions of this title were developed pursuant to public hearings conducted for the purpose of receiving comments from the citizenry, operators interested in applying for a franchise in meetings with staff and through the submission by the operators of public oral and written comments, and the submission of independent staff recommendations. Operators interested in applying for a franchise have either directly or indirectly made it clear that any ordinance must contain minimum terms satisfactory to the operators in order to induce their interest in applying for a franchise. The franchise documents shall not be construed to constitute a contract of adhesion. (County code § 11-1.404)

 

4.08.050 Utility poles.
    No provision of this title or any franchise issued pursuant to the provisions of this title shall expressly or impliedly authorize the grantee to utilize poles owned by the Pacific Gas and Electric Company, Pacific Telephone or any other public or private utility which is located within streets without the express consent of the utility. (County code § 11-1.405)

 

4.08.060 Notices.
    A.  All notices and other writings authorized or prescribed by this chapter to be “mailed” shall be given and served when deposited in the United States mail, postage prepaid and addressed, with respect to a grantee, to any office maintained by the grantee within the city, and with respect to other parties, to the last known address of such party.

    B.   Any notice or other writing authorized or required by this chapter to be “filed” shall be filed when received in the business office of the party with whom such notice of writing is authorized or required to be filed.

    C.   Whenever a provision of this chapter requires a public hearing to be conducted by the city council, notice of the time, date, place and purpose of the hearing shall be published at least once not later than ten calendar days in advance of the date of the commencement of the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation which is published within the city. (County code § 11-1.406)

 

4.08.070 Leases.
    Any grantee, or parent, subsidiary or affiliated company or agent thereof, who leases either real property situated within the city or personal property to be located within the city for use in connection with the provision of services under a franchise issued pursuant to the provisions of this title shall ensure that each such lease contains a clause which either:

    A.  Authorizes such lessee to assign the lease to the city or its assignee without the consent of the lessor or the payment of additional compensation by virtue of the assignment; or

    B.   Authorizes such lessee to so assign such lease without the payment of additional compensation by virtue of the assignment and prohibits the lessor from unreasonably withholding consent to such assignment. (County code § 11-1.407)

 

4.08.080 Authority.
    It is declared that this chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority conferred by Section 53066, et seq., of the Government Code of the state. It is also enacted pursuant to the police powers conferred by Section 7 of Article XI of the Constitution of the state for the promotion and protection of the peace, health, safety and general welfare. (County code § 11-1.408)

 

4.08.090 Ordinances—Police powers.
    All zoning and other land use laws, building, electrical, plumbing and mechanical codes, business license laws and all other laws of general application now in existence or hereafter enacted by the city shall be fully applicable to the exercise of any franchise issued pursuant to the provisions of this title, and the grantee shall comply therewith. In the event of a conflict between the provisions of this title and those of such a law of general application, the provisions of such law of general application shall prevail. (County code § 11-1.409)

 

4.08.100 Amendments.
    The city expressly reserves the right to amend any section or part of this title so as to require additional or greater standards of construction, operation, maintenance or otherwise on the part of a grantee for any reason determined to be desirable or necessary by the city council, including, but not limited to, new developments in the state of the technology of the cable communications industry and changes in federal or state laws, rules or regulations. The provisions of 47 CFR Part 76 shall be incorporated in this chapter by reference, and any amendments thereto or revisions thereof shall be incorporated into this title by operation of law. (County code § 11-1.410)

 

4.08.110 Rights reserved.
    There is provided and reserved to the city every right and power which is required to be by this title reserved or provided by any provision of any law of the city in its exercise of any such right or power.

    A.  Neither the granting of a franchise nor any provision of this title shall constitute a waiver or bar to the exercise of any governmental right or power of the city, including the regulation of subscription rates as permitted by law.

    B.   Nothing in this title and/or in the franchise shall be construed to impair or affect, in any way, to any extent, the right of the city to acquire the property of the grantee, either by purchase or through the exercise of the right to eminent domain, at a fair and just value, which shall not include any amount for the franchise itself or for any of the rights or privileges granted thereby, and nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to contract away or to modify or abridge, whether for a term or in perpetuity, the city’s right of eminent domain.

    C.   There shall be reserved to the city every right and power which is required to be reserved or provided by law, and the grantee, by its acceptance of the franchise, agrees to be bound thereby and to comply with any action or agreement of the city in its exercise of such rights or powers theretofore or thereafter enacted or established.

    D.  The city reserves to itself the right to intervene in any suit, action or proceeding involving any provision of this title and/or the grantee’s franchise. The city council may do all things which are necessary and convenient in the exercise of its jurisdiction under this title and/or the grantee’s franchise and may determine any question of fact which may arise during the existence of any franchise granted. The city manager and the city attorney, with the approval of the city council, are authorized and empowered to adjust, settle or compromise any controversy or charge arising from the operations of any grantee under a franchise, either on behalf of the city, the grantee or any subscriber, in the best interests of the public.

    E.   The city, at its option, when for sufficient cause as deemed by the city manager, may require that the annual proof-of-performance test, addressed in Chapter 4.16, be conducted or observed by a qualified member of the city’s staff or its designated representatives, associated with city-observed performance tests conducted at city selected test points, and to a greater number of test points than the minimum required by Section 76.601 of the FCC Rules.

    F.   Any delegable right, power or duty of the city council, the city or any official of the city may be transferred or delegated to an appropriate officer, employee, department or body designated by the city.

    G.  The city reserves the right to negotiate other reasonable technical and operational performance standards for system franchises granted pursuant to this title. The grantee shall have the duty to negotiate in good faith with the city.

    H.  The city reserves the right to enact reasonable regulations pertaining to franchises granted pursuant to this title which may include, but are not limited to:

    1.   The construction and use of poles;

    2.   The use of poles and conduits by the city;

    3.   Common users;

    4.   Filing of pole user agreements;

    5.   The reservation of street rights;

    6.   The restoration of streets;

    7.   The movement of facilities; and

    8.   The trimming of trees.

    I.    The city reserves the right to further regulate the conduct of the grantee in regard to the privacy and property rights of private citizens. Such regulations may include, but are not limited to, the security of all records by the grantee containing privacy sensitive information, personnel practices relating to such records, and any other matters related to privacy and individual rights.

    J.    The city reserves the right to establish a cable communications advisory committee and cable communications area advisory commissions to assist the city council in regulating cable activity in the city. The members and duties of any such committee or commissions, if any, shall be established by the city council.

    K.  Should the state or any agency thereof, or the federal government or agency thereof, subsequently require the grantee to act in a manner which is inconsistent with any provision of this title, the franchise ordinance, or associated resolutions and orders, the grantee shall so notify the city. Upon the receipt of such notification, the city shall determine whether a material provision of the franchise is affected. Upon such determination, the city shall have the right to modify or amend any of the sections of the franchise to such reasonable extent as may be necessary to carry out the full intent and purpose of this title or the franchise ordinance. In the event the original proposed terms of the franchise have been frustrated by such state or federal requirement, the grantee shall renegotiate in good faith with the city a new franchise agreement. The city may terminate the franchise in the event it determines that no satisfactory new franchise agreement can be reached.

    L.   No grantee nor any major stockholder of the grantee shall directly or indirectly with the city use the position as cable grantee to gain a competitive advantage in the business of selling, leasing, renting, servicing or repairing radio or television sets, or other receivers or parts thereof, or data access and transfer equipment which make use of entertainment and information signals; provided, however, nothing set forth in this subsection shall prevent the grantee from making modifications to the tuner input circuit of the subscribers’ communications transmitters and/or receivers, and the fine tuning of the customers’ operating controls only, to ensure proper operation under conditions of cable connection at the time of installation, or in repairing receivers and other equipment belonging to other cable system operators for use in the conduct of their businesses.

    M.  The city shall have the right, free of charge, of installing, maintaining and operating upon antenna towers and poles, or in underground ducts of the grantee, the antennas, amplifiers, coaxial cable, wire, fixtures and appurtenances necessary for a city communications system provided such equipment is installed, maintained and operated so as not to interfere with the property or operations of the grantee, and that the grantee shall not be responsible for any damage without his or her fault resulting to the signs, wires, cables, or property of the city from such use by the city.

    N.  The grantee shall manage all of its operations in accordance with a policy of totally open books and records. The city shall have the right to inspect at any time during normal business hours, at the local parent corporation offices of the grantee, all books, records, maps, plans, income tax returns, financial statements, service complaint logs, performance test results and other like materials of the grantee which relate to the operation of the grantee. Access to such records shall not be denied by the grantee on the basis that such records contain “proprietary” information.

    O.  Copies of all petitions. applications, communications and reports submitted by the grantee to the Federal Communications Commission, Securities and Exchange Commission or any other federal or state regulatory commission or agency having jurisdiction in respect to any matters affecting cable communications operations authorized pursuant to the franchise shall also be submitted simultaneously to the grantor. Copies of responses or any other communications from the regulatory agencies to the grantee shall likewise be furnished simultaneously to the grantor.

    P.   Any intrastate intercommunication of interactive services between the system operated by the grantee and any other system shall be subject to the regulatory authority of the city.

    Q.  The reservation of any particular right shall not be construed to limit the promulgation of other reasonable rules and regulations. (County code § 11-1.411)

 

4.08.120 Limitations of actions.
    A.  Except as otherwise expressly provided by this title, any judicial proceeding, whether for the recovery of damages or otherwise, brought for the purpose of adjudicating the validity of any provision of this title or amendment thereof or any provision of the other franchise documents shall be commenced not later than thirty calendar days following the latter of: (1) the effective date of the provisions; or (2) the accrual of the cause of action. Any such judicial proceeding brought for the purpose of adjudicating the validity of any rule, order, regulation, determination or arbitration award which purports to have been made pursuant to the provisions of this title or of any of the other franchise documents shall be commenced not later than thirty calendar days following the date of the adoption, issuance, or making of such rule, order, regulation, determination or arbitration award or, as to the franchisee, not later than thirty calendar days following the giving and serving of notice of such adoption, issuance, or making of such rule, regulation, determination or arbitration award pursuant to the provisions of Section 4.08.060. No judicial proceeding shall be commenced in violation of the limitations prescribed by this section.

    B.   The provisions of this section shall not be applicable to any judicial proceeding, whether for the recovery of damages or otherwise, commenced by the city for breach or enforcement of the provisions of this title or any regulation, determination or arbitration award purporting to have been issued thereunder. (County code § 11-1.412)

 

4.08.130 Illegal tapping.
    A.  It is unlawful for any person to make or use any unauthorized connection, whether physically, electrically, acoustically, inductively or otherwise, with any part of a cable communications system for which a franchise has been issued pursuant to the provisions of this title for the purpose of taking or receiving or enabling him or herself or others to receive or use any television signal, radio signal, picture, program, or sound without payment to the owner of such system.

    B.   It is unlawful for any person, without the consent of the owner, to willfully tamper with, remove, injure or vandalize any part of such a cable communications system, including any cable, wire or equipment used for the distribution of television signals, radio signals, pictures, programs or sound. (County code § 11-1.413)

 

Article II. Procedures
4.08.140 Initiation.
    A.  This title itself grants no authority to operate a cable communications system to any person. Such grants are only made by the adoption of a separate ordinance awarding a specific franchise to an applicant who has complied with the provisions of this title.

    B.   Any person, corporation or other legal entity may apply to the city for a cable communications franchise by submitting an application pursuant to Section 4.08.150 and by otherwise complying with the terms of this title. Such application may be made at any time, either in response to a request for proposals or any other time. (Ord. 88-18 §§ 1, 2; county code § 11-1.601)

 

4.08.150 Applications.
    A.  The city council, by advertisement or otherwise, may solicit for any other applications for cable communications system franchises and may determine and fix the date upon or after which the applications shall be received by the city or the date before which the applications shall not be received, and may make any other determinations and specify any other times, terms, conditions, or limitations respecting the soliciting, calling for, making and receiving of such applications.

    B.   Each application for a franchise to construct, operate or maintain any cable communications system in the city shall be filed with the city clerk and shall contain or be accompanied by the following minimum information:

    1.   The name, address and telephone number of the applicant;

    2.   A detailed statement of the corporate or other business entity organization of the applicant, including, but not limited to, the following and to whatever extent required by the city:

    a.   The names and residence and business addresses of all officers, directors, and associates of the applicant,

    b.   The names and residence and business addresses of all officers, persons and entities having control of one percent or more of the ownership of the applicant and the respective ownership share of each such person or entity,

    c.   The names and addresses of any parent or subsidiary of the applicant, namely, any other business entity owning or controlling the applicant in whole or in part and controlled in whole or in part by the applicant, and a statement describing the nature of any such parent or subsidiary business entity, including, but not limited to, cable communications systems owned or controlled by the applicant and its parent and subsidiary and the areas served thereby,

    d.   A detailed description of all previous experience of the applicant in providing cable communications system services in related or similar fields,

    e.   A detailed and complete financial statement of the applicant, and

    f.    A statement identifying, by place and date, any and all cable communication franchises awarded to the applicant, or its parent or subsidiary; the status of such franchises with respect to the completion thereof; the total cost of completion to such systems; and the amount of the applicant’s, and its parent’s or subsidiary’s, resources committed to the completion thereof;

    3.   A thorough, detailed description of the proposed cable communications system and a plan of operation of the applicant which shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

    a.   A detailed map indicating all areas proposed to be served and a proposed time schedule for the installation of all equipment necessary to become operational throughout the entire area to be served,

    b.   A detailed, informative and referenced statement describing the actual equipment and operational standards proposed by the applicant. In no event shall such operational and performance standards be less than those adopted by the rules and regulations of the Federal Communications Commission (contained in Title 47, Subpart K, Sections 76.601, et seq., and as augmented by this chapter and modified by the franchise awarded,

    c.   A detailed estimate of the cost of constructing the applicant’s proposed system,

    d.   A copy of the form of any agreement, undertaking or other instrument proposed to be entered into between the applicant and any subscriber,

    e.   A detailed statement setting forth in its entirety any and all agreements and undertakings, whether formal or informal, written, oral or implied, existing or proposed to exist between the applicant and any person, firm or corporation which materially relate or pertain to or depend upon the application and the granting of the franchise, and

    f.    A statement or schedule setting forth all proposed classifications of rates and charges to be made against subscribers and all rates and charges as to each of such classifications, including installation charges and service charges;

    4.   A copy of any agreement existing between the applicant and any public utility subject to regulation by the Public Utilities Commission of the state providing for the use of any facilities of the public utility, including, but not limited to, poles, lines, or conduits, within the city’s incorporated area and/or adjacent area;

    5.   Any other details, statements, information or references pertinent to the subject matter of such application which shall be required or requested by the city council or by any provision of any other law of the city; and

    6.   An initial application fee in the amount of ten thousand dollars which shall be in the form of cash, certified or cashier’s check, or money order, to pay the initial cost of studying, investigating and otherwise processing such application, and which shall be in consideration thereof and not returnable or refundable in whole, or in part, except to the extent such fee exceeds the actual costs incurred by the city in studying, investigating and otherwise processing the application. Applicant shall pay such further funds as may be necessary if the city’s costs exceed the initial application fee.

    C.   Upon the receipt of any application for a franchise, the city council shall refer the application to the city manager or expert or cable communications advisory committee, if such exists, who shall prepare a report and make recommendations respecting such application and cause such report and recommendations to be completed and filed with the city council within one hundred twenty days.

    D.  In making the determinations hereunder as to any application, the city council shall give due consideration to the character and quality of the service proposed, rates to subscribers, income to the city, experience, character, background and financial responsibility of any applicant and its management and owners, technical and performance quality of equipment, willingness and ability to meet construction and physical requirements and to abide by policy conditions, franchise limitations and requirements, and any other considerations deemed pertinent by the city council for safeguarding the interests of the city and the public. The city council, in its sole discretion, shall determine the award of any franchise on the basis of such considerations and without competitive bidding.

    E.   If the city council, after public hearings, determines to reject an application, such determination shall be final and conclusive, and the application shall be rejected.

    F.   If the city council determines to further consider an application, the following shall be done:

    1.   The city council shall identify a tentative grantee and decide and specify the terms and conditions of any franchise to be granted pursuant to this title and as provided in this chapter;

    2.   The city council shall give notice of its intention to consider the granting of such a franchise, stating the name of the tentative grantee, that copies of the proposed franchise may be obtained at the office of the city clerk, fixing and setting forth a time and public place certain when and where interested parties may inspect all the bona fide applications, fixing and setting forth a day, hour and place certain when and where any persons having any interest therein or objection to the granting thereof may file written protests and appear before the city council and be heard, and directing the city clerk to publish notice of the resolution’s adoption at least once within ten days after the passage thereof in a newspaper of general circulation within the city.

    G.  At the time set for the hearing, or at any adjournment thereof, the city council shall proceed to hear all written protests. Thereafter the city council shall make one of the following determinations:

    1.   That the franchise be denied; or

    2.   That the franchise be granted upon such conditions as the city council deems appropriate, which conditions may include, on a not-to-exceed basis, where in accordance with the Act, applicable FCC regulations, and state laws:

    a.   Charges for installations,

    b.   Subscriber rates, and

    c.   Service rates for separate classifications of service, such as additional connections.

    H.  If the city council determines that a franchise be denied, such determination shall be expressed by resolution; if the city council determines that a franchise be granted, such determination shall be expressed by ordinance granting a franchise to the applicant. The action of the city council shall be final and conclusive.

    I.    The grantee shall pay to the city a sum of money sufficient to reimburse it for all expenses incurred by the provisions of this title beyond those defrayed by application fees. Such payment shall be made within thirty days after the city furnishes the grantee with a written statement of such expenses. (Ord. 01-01 § 1; County code § 11-1.602)

 

4.08.160 Privacy of proposals.
    Applications for a franchise submitted in response to a request for proposals shall be sealed at the time of submission by an applicant. Prior to the deadline for the submission of an application, it is unlawful for any applicant, and any officer, agent or employee thereof, whether directly or indirectly, to exchange information concerning proposals, enter into any agreement or understanding or take any other action for the purpose of reducing or eliminating competition among applicants in the selection process. (County code § 11-1.603)

 

4.08.170 Environmental analyses.
    For each franchise issued pursuant to the provisions of this title, one or more environmental analyses shall be undertaken pursuant to the provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act commencing at Section 21000 of the Public Resources Code of the state. The provisions of this title, requests for proposals and an ordinance offering the franchise shall be subject to amendment for the purpose of implementing any change dictated by the environmental analyses. (County code § 11-1.604)

 

4.08.180 Acceptance.
    A.  Each franchise issued pursuant to the provisions of this title shall be issued by the city council and in the name of the city as the issuing authority. A franchise shall be offered to the successful applicant by ordinance duly adopted by the city council. The ordinance may prescribe terms, conditions or requirements respecting the franchise which are in addition to those set forth in this title but which are not inconsistent with the express terms of this title. The ordinance may also prescribe terms, conditions or requirements respecting the franchise which are in addition to or in conflict with the provisions of the request for proposals and application by the party to whom the resolution offers the franchise.

    B.   The ordinance offering the franchise shall be repealed thirty calendar days after its adoption, unless not later than the thirtieth day following the adoption of the ordinance the party to whom the franchise is offered files a certificate in writing which expressly and unconditionally accepts the franchise in compliance with the terms, conditions, and requirements of such ordinance, the application, the request for proposals and this title. The certification shall be signed by a person duly authorized to act in behalf of the franchise, shall be acknowledged, shall have attached thereto a certified copy of an order by the board of directors of the grantee directing the execution and filing of the certification, and shall be accompanied by any fee required by the request for proposals, the performance bond, the security deposit and the policy or policies of insurance prescribed by Sections 4.28.080, 4.28.090 and 4.28.110, respectively. A certification which constitutes a qualified acceptance, or places other limits or conditions thereon, shall be repealed. The thirty-day period for acceptance prescribed by this section may be extended either prior or subsequent to its expiration by the city council through express action which prescribes the period of extension. (County code § 11-1.605)

 

4.08.190 Duration of grant.
    A.  A franchise shall be effective on the thirty-first day after the offer of the franchise agreement, provided the grantee has filed, within thirty days after such effective date, a written instrument, in accordance with Section 4.08.180(B), addressed to the city council accepting the franchise and agreeing to comply with all of the provisions thereof. If an extension is granted as set forth in Section 4.08.180(B), the franchise will be effective the first day after the date of acceptance.

    B.   A franchise or license shall expire twenty years after the acceptance thereof, unless sooner terminated by ordinance. (County code § 11-1.606)

 

4.08.200 Replacement franchises.
    A.  The service provided by the grantee under a franchise may be required to continue uninterrupted beyond the expiration or cancellation of a franchise. The procedures for the renewal of a franchise shall be those provided in Section 626 of the Act as supplemented by the provisions of this section.

    B.   Any franchise may be renewed for a term not to exceed twenty years at any time prior to the expiration of the franchise. An application therefor shall be submitted to the city manager containing such material as the city council may require, including, but not limited to, proposals for an upgrade of the cable communications system.

    C.   In the event the city council decides to offer renewal to the grantee, the city council shall adopt an ordinance offering the renewal of the franchise to the grantee. The franchise agreement may prescribe terms, conditions or requirements respecting the franchise which are in addition to those set forth in this chapter, the request for renewal, or the original franchise agreement. In the event of a conflict between the provisions of the request for renewal and the provisions of the franchise agreement adopted pursuant to this section, the provisions of the franchise agreement shall prevail. In the event of a conflict between the provisions of the original franchise agreement and the franchise renewal agreement adopted pursuant to this section, the provisions of the latter shall prevail.

    D.  The ordinance offering renewal shall be repealed and the request for renewal rejected thirty calendar days after its adoption unless, not later than the thirtieth day following the adoption, the grantee files a certification in writing which expressly and unconditionally accepts the renewal of the franchise in compliance with the terms, conditions and requirements of such ordinance, the request for renewal and this title. The certification shall be signed by a person duly authorized to act in behalf of the grantee, shall be notarized, shall have attached thereto a certified copy of an order by the board of directors of the grantee directing the execution of and filing of the certification, and shall be accompanied by the performance bond, the security deposit and the policy or policies of insurance prescribed by Sections 4.28.080, 4.28.090 and 4.28.110, respectively. The certification and accompaniments shall be filed with the city clerk. A certification which constitutes a qualified acceptance, or places other limits or conditions thereon, shall be a nullity, and the franchise agreement shall be repealed and the request for renewal denied. The thirty-day period for acceptance prescribed by this section may be extended either prior or subsequent to its expiration by the city council by resolution which prescribes the period of extension.

    E.   The filing of the certification in the manner and within the time prescribed in this section shall renew the franchise. (County code § 11-1.607)

Chapter 4.12 STREET WORK—PERMITS—CONSTRUCTION
Article I. Generally
4.12.010 Permits.
    A.  Within thirty days after the acceptance of a franchise, the grantee shall proceed with due diligence to obtain all necessary permits and authorizations which are required in the conduct of its business, including, but not limited to, any utility joint use attachment agreements, encroachment permits, microwave carrier licenses and any other permits, licenses and authorizations to be granted by duly constituted regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over the operation of cable television/communications systems or associated microwave transmission facilities.

    B.   In connection with subsection A of this section, copies of all petitions, applications and communications submitted by the grantee to the Federal Communications Commission, Securities and Exchange Commission or any other federal or state regulatory commission or agency having jurisdiction in respect to any matters affecting the grantee’s cable communications operations, and any and all actions taken thereon by each commission or agency, shall also be submitted simultaneously to the city manager. Upon determining that the grantee has obtained all necessary permits, licenses and authorizations, including rights of access to poles and conduits, the city manager shall issue the notice to proceed.

    C.   The city shall be authorized to establish special fees payable by a grantee to defray the costs incurred by the city public works department in supervising and regulating the installation of a cable communications system within the streets of the respective agencies. The public works director shall be authorized to formulate reasonable schedules for the installation of a cable communications system within the streets of the city for the purpose of promoting safety, reducing inconvenience to the public and ensuring adequate restoration and repair of the streets, and a grantee and its officers, agents, contractors and subcontractors shall comply with any and all such schedules. (County code § 11-1.1001)

 

4.12.020 Construction—Progress—City right to use facilities.
    A.  Within thirty days after the issuance of a notice to proceed the grantee shall commence the construction and installation of the cable communications system.

    B.   Within one hundred eighty days after the commencement of the construction and installation of the system, the grantee shall proceed to render service to subscribers, and the completion of the installation and construction shall be pursued with reasonable diligence thereafter so that service to all of the areas designated and scheduled on the map and plan of construction made a part of the franchise shall be provided as set forth in this chapter.

    C.   The construction and installation of the cable communications system shall be complete and ready for the issuance of a final order of completion in accordance with Section 4.12.010 at the time set forth in the ordinance offering a franchise.

    D.  Failure on the part of the grantee to commence and diligently pursue each of the requirements of this section and to complete each of the matters set forth in this section shall be grounds for the termination of such franchise. By resolution, the city council, in its discretion may extend the time for the commencement and completion of the installation and construction for additional periods in the event the grantee, acting in good faith, experiences delays by reason of circumstances beyond his or her control.

    E.   The city shall have the right, free of charge, to make additional use for any public or municipal purpose, whether governmental or proprietary, of any poles, conduits or other similar facilities erected, controlled or maintained exclusively by or for the grantee in any street provided such use by the city does not interfere with the use by the grantee. (County code § 11-1.1002)

 

4.12.030 Erection of poles.
    A.  No franchise shall expressly or impliedly authorize the grantee to construct or install poles or wire-holding structures within streets for the purpose of placing cables, wires, lines or otherwise without the written consent of the city. Such consent shall be given or withheld in the sole discretion of the city and may be given upon such terms and conditions as the city, in its sole discretion, may prescribe, which shall include a requirement that the grantee perform, at its sole expense, all tree trimming required to maintain the poles clear of obstructions.

    B.   With respect to any poles or wire-holding structures which a grantee is authorized to construct and install within streets, the city reserves the privilege of utilizing such poles or wire-holding structures, if such use would enhance the public convenience and would not unduly interfere with the grantee’s operations, with the condition that the city, public utility or public utility district pay to the grantee any or all actual and necessary costs incurred by the grantee in permitting such use. (County code § 11-1.1003)

 

4.12.040 Underground facilities.
    A.  Unless otherwise authorized by the city council, in those areas and portions of the city where transmission and/or distribution facilities of the public utility providing telephone service, and those of the utility providing electric service, are underground or hereafter may be placed underground or are to be placed underground by a builder, developer or subdivider as a part of a development or subdivision, then the grantee shall likewise construct, operate and maintain all of its transmission and distribution facilities underground to the maximum extent that existing technology reasonably permits the grantee to do so.

    B.   In new developments or subdivisions, the builder, developer or subdivider shall be responsible for the performance of all necessary trenching and backfilling of main line and service trenches, including the furnishing of any imported backfill material required. The grantee shall be responsible for the conduct of the engineering and labor to put the cable conduit in the trench. Prewiring of new dwellings to franchise specifications while under construction shall be mandatory. The grantee shall be responsible for pulling in the cable and providing the plant electronics and drops to individual homes after occupancy.

    C.   In those areas and portions of the city where utility service facilities are currently located underground, the grantee shall be responsible for the undergrounding of cable facilities, including the performance of all necessary trenching, and the furnishing of any imported backfill material required.

    D.  Previously installed aerial cable shall be undergrounded in concert, and on a cost-sharing basis, with other utilities pursuant to the general laws of the city or applicable state laws or in the event such action shall be taken by all other utilities on a voluntary basis.

    E.   Subject to approval by the city council, incidental appurtenances, such as amplifier boxes and pedestal-mounted terminal boxes, may be placed aboveground but shall be of such size and design and shall be so located as not to be unsightly or hazardous to the public. (County code § 11-1.1004)

 

4.12.050 System extensions.
    A.  The grantee shall be required to extend the subscriber network and, upon an order by the city, the institutional network to any new developments or general areas within the imposed service area and is authorized to do so within the remainder of the franchise area pursuant to the following requirements:

    1.   The grantee shall extend and make cable communications service available to every dwelling unit within any area reaching the minimum density of at least forty dwelling units per street mile or five dwelling units within six hundred sixty feet, as measured from existing feeder cable;

    2.   The grantee shall extend and make cable communications service available to every dwelling unit in all unserved, developing areas having at least forty dwelling units planned per street mile, as measured from the existing system, and shall extend its system simultaneously with the installation of utility lines;

    3.   The grantee shall extend and make cable communications service available to any isolated resident requesting a connection at the standard connection charge if the connection to the isolated resident would require no more than a standard one hundred fifty foot aerial drop line;

    4.   With respect to requests for connections requiring an aerial drop line in excess of one hundred fifty feet, the grantee shall extend and make available cable television service to such residents at a connection charge not to exceed the actual installation costs incurred by the grantee for the distance exceeding one hundred fifty feet;

    5.   Whenever the grantee shall have received written requests for services from at least fifteen assured subscribers within one thousand three hundred cable feet of its aerial trunk cable, the grantee shall extend its system to such subscribers solely for the usual connection and service fees for all subscribers, provided such extension is technically and economically feasible. The one thousand three hundred cable feet shall be measured in extension length of the grantee’s cable required for service located within a public way or easement and shall not include the length of necessary drop to the subscriber’s house or premises.

    B.   Nothing set forth in this section shall be construed to prevent the grantee from serving areas not covered by this section upon an agreement with developers, property owners or residents.

    C.   Any violation of this section shall be considered a breach of the terms of this title. (County code § 11-1.1005)

 

4.12.060 Use of streets—Interference.
    A.  Each cable communications system, including wires and appurtenances, shall be located and installed and maintained so that none of the facilities endanger or interfere with the lives or safety of persons or interfere with any improvements the city or state may deem proper to make or unnecessarily hinder or obstruct the free use of the streets or other public property.

    B.   All transmission and distribution structures, lines and equipment erected or installed by a grantee within the city shall be so located as to cause minimum interference with the proper use of streets and other public property and to cause minimum interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin any of the streets or other public property. (County code § 11-1.1006)

 

4.12.070 Restoration of streets and private property.
    A.  All disturbances by the grantee of pavement, sidewalks, driveways, landscaping or other surfacing of streets shall be restored, repaired or replaced by the grantee at its sole cost in a manner approved by the public works director and in compliance with generally applicable standards of the agency vested with jurisdiction thereover, and in as good condition as before the disturbance occurred.

    B.   To the extent practicable and reasonable, each grantee shall accommodate the desires of any property owner respecting location within easements or rights-of-way traversing private appurtenances constituting a part of the cable communications system. Any disturbance of landscaping, fencing or other improvements upon private property, including private property traversed by easements or rights-of-way utilized by a grantee, at the sole expense of the grantee, shall be promptly repaired or restored (including the replacement of such valuables as shrubbery and fencing) to the reasonable satisfaction of the property owner as soon as possible. Each grantee, through authorized representatives, shall make a reasonable attempt to personally contact the occupants of all private property in advance of entering such property for the purpose of commencing any installation of elements of the system within the easements or rights-of-way traversing such property. As used in this subsection, the terms “easements” and “rights-of-way” shall not include easements or rights-of-way for roadway purposes. (County code § 11-1.1007)

 

4.12.080 Street work.
    A.  Upon any failure of the grantee to commence, pursue or complete any work required by it by law or by the provisions of a franchise to be done in any street, the city council, at its option and according to law, may cause such work to be done, and the grantee shall pay to the city the cost thereof in the itemized amounts reported by the city council to the grantee within thirty days after the receipt of such itemized report.

    B.   In the event that:

    1.   Any part of such system has been installed in any street or other area without complying with the requirements of this title and/or the franchise ordinance; or

    2.   The use of any part of the system of the grantee is discontinued for any reason for a continuous period of thirty days without prior written notice to and approval by the city; then the grantee, at the option of the city, and at the expense of the grantee and at no expense to the city, and upon the demand of the city, shall promptly remove from any street or other area all property of the grantee, and the grantee shall promptly restore the street or other area from which such property has been removed to such condition as the public works director shall approve. (County code § 11-1.1008)

 

4.12.090 Relocation.
    If during the term of a franchise the city, a community services district, a city service area, a reclamation district, a public drainage district or any other special public district elects to alter, repair, realign, abandon, improve, vacate, reroute or change the grade of any street or to replace, repair, install, maintain or otherwise alter any aboveground to underground cable, wire, conduit, pipe, line, pole, wire-holding structure, structure or other facility utilized for the provision of utility or other services or the transportation of drainage, sewage or other liquids, the grantee, except as otherwise provided in this section, at its sole expense, shall remove or relocate as necessary its poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and any other facilities which the grantee has installed. If such removal or relocation is required within a subdivision in which all utility lines, including those for the cable communications system, were installed at the same time, the entities may decide among themselves who is to bear the cost of relocation; provided, however, the city shall not be liable to a grantee for such costs. Regardless of who bears the costs, a grantee shall take action to remove or relocate at such time or times as are directed by the agency or company undertaking the work. Reasonable advance written notice shall be mailed to the grantee advising the grantee of the date or dates removal or relocation is to be undertaken. (County code § 11-1.1009)

 

4.12.100 Tree trimming.
    The grantee shall not remove or trim, and shall prohibit any officer, agent, employee, contractor or subcontractor which it retains from removing or trimming any tree or portion thereof (either above, at or below ground levels) which is located within a street, unless the removal or trimming is done in accordance with a specific tree trimming plan or general tree trimming policy which has the prior written approval of the city public works director. Such approval may be given or withheld upon such terms and conditions as the city public works director deems appropriate. Any such plan or policy shall set forth standards governing tree trimming/removal and shall provide for regulating in special circumstances, including actions taken in violation of the plan or policy. Each grantee shall be responsible for and shall indemnify, defend and hold harmless the city and its officers, agents and employees, from and against any and all damages arising out of or resulting from the removal, trimming, mutilation of or any injury to any tree proximately caused by the grantee or its officers, agents, employees, contractors or subcontractors. (County code § 11-1.1010)

 

4.12.110 Movement of buildings.
    Each grantee, upon a request by any person holding a building moving permit, license or other approval issued by the city or state, shall temporarily remove, raise or lower its wires to permit the movement of buildings. The expense of such removal, raising or lowering shall be paid by the person requesting the same, and a grantee shall be authorized to require such payment in advance. A grantee shall be given not less than forty-eight hours’ oral or written notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes. (County code § 11-1.1011)

 

4.12.120 Removal.
    A.  Upon the expiration or termination of a franchise, if the franchise is not renewed and if neither the city nor an assignee purchases the cable communications system, the grantee may remove any underground cable from the streets without trenching or other opening of the streets along the extension of cable to be removed. The grantee shall not remove any underground cable or conduit which requires trenching or other opening of the streets along the extension of cable to be removed, except as provided in this section. The grantee shall remove, at its sole cost and expense, any undergrounded cable or conduit by trenching or opening the streets along the extension thereof or otherwise which is ordered to be removed by the city council based upon a determination, in the sole discretion of the city council, that removal is required in order to eliminate or prevent a hazardous condition or promote future utilization of the streets for public purposes. Any order by the city council to remove cable or conduit shall be mailed to the grantee not later than ninety calendar days following the date of the expiration of the franchise. A grantee shall file written notice with the city clerk not later than sixty calendar days following the date of the expiration or termination of the franchise of its intention to remove cable authorized by this section to be removed. The notice shall specify the location of all cable intended to be removed and a schedule for removal by location. The schedule and timing of removal shall be subject to approval and regulation by the city public works director. Removal shall be completed not later than twelve months following the date of the expiration or termination of the franchise. Underground cable and conduit in the streets which are not removed shall be deemed abandoned, and title thereto shall be vested in the city.

    B.   Upon the expiration or termination of a franchise, if the franchise is not renewed and if neither the city nor an assignee purchases the system, the grantee, at its sole expense, unless relieved of the obligation by the city, shall remove from the streets all aboveground elements of the cable communications system, including, but not limited to, amplifier boxes, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes and cable attached to or suspended from poles which are not purchased by the city or its assignee.

    C.   The grantee shall apply for and obtain such encroachment permits, licenses, authorizations or other approvals and pay such fees and deposit such security as required by applicable general laws of the city, shall conduct and complete the work of removal in compliance with all such applicable laws, and shall restore the streets to the same condition they were in before the work of removal commenced. The work of removal shall be completed not later than one year following the date of the expiration of the franchise. (County code § 11-1.1012)

 

4.12.130 Abandonment.
    A.  In the event the use of any franchise property is permanently discontinued or no franchise has been obtained therefor, upon the expiration of or within twelve months after any termination of a franchise, the grantee shall promptly remove from the streets all property involved, other than any the city council, at its sole option, may permit to be abandoned in place.

    B.   A permit to abandon in place shall first be obtained from the city public works director. Nothing set forth in this section shall be deemed a taking of the property of the grantee, and the grantee shall be entitled to no surcharge by reason of anything set forth in this section.

    C.   Franchise property to be abandoned in place shall be abandoned in such manner as the city council shall prescribe. Upon the abandonment of any franchise property in place, the grantee shall submit to the city council an instrument, satisfactory to the city attorney, transferring to the city the ownership of such property. (County code § 11-1.1013)

 

4.12.140 System maintenance.
    Throughout the life of a grantee’s franchise, and in addition to other service regulations adopted by the city council, and excepting circumstances beyond the grantee’s control, such as acts of God, riots and civil disturbances, and in providing such services, a grantee shall:

    A.  Maintain all parts of its system in good condition and in accordance with standards generally observed by the cable television industry. The system shall serve individual residents, but also serve as a broad based communications source for city government, other public facilities, including hospitals, public libraries and schools, and industrial and commercial business users;

    B.   Retain sufficient employees to provide safe, adequate and prompt service for all such residential subscribers, institutional facilities and business users; and

    C.   List system failures to minimum time duration by locating and correcting malfunctioning as promptly as is reasonably possible, irrespective of holidays or other nonbusiness hours. (County code § 11-1.1014)

 

Article II. Completion
4.12.150 Completion.
    A.  A final order of completion shall be issued by the city council when:

    1.   The construction of the cable communications system has been completed within the entirety of the service area in compliance with the construction standards set forth in Article I of this chapter and the design and other requirements of the franchise documents;

    2.   Basic service and other services identified pursuant to the provisions of Section 4.20.030 have been made available to one hundred percent of the dwelling units within the service area;

    3.   Any and all studio facilities, equipment, channels and other services, resources or benefits required by the franchise documents have been completed and made available;

    4.   Any community use programming which the grantee has proposed pursuant to the provisions of Sections 4.20.290 through 4.20.330 shall be ready for commencement in compliance with the franchise documents; and

    5.   A notice of completion has been filed by the grantee as provided in this section.

    B.   For the purposes of Section 4.12.020 and this section, basic service and other services identified pursuant to the provisions of Section 4.20.030 shall be made available when the basic service (at rates and charges in amounts proposed within the application for the franchise and as permissibly adjusted pursuant to this title or, if none are included in the application, at rates and charges in amounts customarily offered by the grantee) and other services identified pursuant to the provisions of Section 4.20.030 (at rates and charges in amounts customarily offered by the grantee) are offered for immediate provision to the owner or legal representative of the owner empowered to consent to the use of the property of such individual dwelling units.

    C.   For the purpose of determining completion under this section, the total number of dwelling units within the service area shall be the actual number of units available for occupancy as of a date forty-five calendar days in advance of the date of the filing by the grantee of the notice of completion; provided, the grantee files the notice of completion with a good faith belief that it has in fact achieved completion as of the date of filing. Otherwise, the total number shall be determined as of the date on which the city council makes a final decision as to whether a final order of completion will be adopted.

    D.  A grantee who asserts completion shall file a written notice of completion with the city clerk. The notice of completion shall state the total number of dwelling units available for occupancy within the service area forty-five calendar days in advance of the filing of the notice, the total number of dwelling units to which basic service and other services have been made available within the service area as of the date of filing, and shall otherwise certify completion as set forth in subsection A of this section. Neither the notice of completion nor the statements, assertions or certifications contained therein shall be binding upon the city council.

    E.   During the period of construction of the cable communications system or during the sixty-day period following the filing of the notice of completion, all elements and components thereof, and all equipment and studio facilities required by the franchise documents, shall be subject to inspection by the city or employees or authorized agents or representatives thereof, for the purpose of determining whether the system and related facilities comply with the franchise documents. The grantee shall authorize such inspection and provide such information and cooperation if required in order to permit an adequate investigation to determine the existence or nonexistence of such compliance. (County code § 11-1.1101)

 

4.12.160 Hearings and determinations.
    A.  No later than forty-five calendar days following the filing of the notice of completion, the city council shall commence a public hearing with respect to the notice of completion. Written notice of the time, date and place of the hearing shall be mailed to the concerned grantee. Notice of the time, date, place and purpose of the hearing shall be publicized in the manner prescribed by Section 4.08.060.

    B.   During the hearing, any interested person may appear and comment upon the question of whether completion has occurred and a final order of completion should be issued. The public hearing may be continued from time to time. While the hearing is pending, the city council may direct such investigations of issues or questions raised during the hearing as it deems appropriate.

    C.   During the public hearing, the city council, by resolution, may identify specific deficiencies respecting completion and decline to adopt a final order of completion pending the correction or elimination of the deficiencies so identified. If, at the conclusion of the public hearing, a final order of completion is not issued, the city council, by resolution, shall identify specific deficiencies respecting completion which shall be corrected in advance of the issuance of a final order of completion.

    D.  The final order of completion shall certify completion in compliance with the terms and conditions of the franchise documents. The order shall also designate the actual date when all elements set forth in Section 4.12.150 (A) have been completed. The issuance of such a final order of completion shall constitute a determination of completion which shall be conclusive for all purposes of this chapter. (County code § 11-1.1102)

 

4.12.170 Requests for arbitration.
    A.  At any time on or after one hundred twenty calendar days following the date of the filing by a grantee of the notice of completion, the grantee, if a final order of completion has not been adopted by the city council, may make a written request for arbitration. If a final order of completion has been issued, and the grantee disagrees with the actual date of completion stated therein, the grantee, within thirty calendar days following the mailing to the grantee of the order, may make a written request for arbitration. The request shall be in writing, shall state the grounds therefor, and shall be filed with the city clerk.

    B.   If arbitration is requested, the arbitration panel shall be selected, the hearing scheduled within the time prescribed, notice given, the hearing conducted, a decision made and the costs divided in the manner prescribed by Sections 4.44.140 through 4.44.190. The discovery provisions of the California Arbitration Act (Sections 1280, et seq., of the Code of Civil Procedure of the state) shall be applicable to the arbitration proceedings under this section. The questions which may be submitted to the arbitration panel and the jurisdiction of the arbitration panel shall be limited to the following:

    1.   The interpretation of the provisions of the franchise documents solely in relation to the decision required by subparagraph 2 of this subsection; and

    2.   Whether a final order of completion should be issued and, if so, the actual date of completion, or if an order has been issued, the actual date of completion. The jurisdiction of the arbitration panel shall not include questions of enforcement, breach or remedies, and any such determination concerning enforcement, breach or remedies shall be inadmissible in and without force or effect in relation to the proceedings conducted pursuant to Sections 4.12.210 through 4.12.240.

    C.   If ordered by the arbitration panel, the city council shall issue a final order of completion not later than ten calendar days following the receipt of the arbitration award. The arbitration award may be judicially enforced, shall be final, binding and conclusive upon the parties, and shall not be subject to judicial review or vacation except on the grounds set forth in Section 1286.2 of the Code of Civil Procedure of the state. (County code § 11-1.1103)

 

4.12.180 Complaints.
    Any citizen who asserts there has been a violation of any of the provisions of Sections 4.12.020 through 4.12.140 may file a written complaint asserting such violation with the city clerk. (County code § 11-1.1104)

 

4.12.190 Excuses for violations.
    A.  Except as provided in this section, the violation by a grantee of any of the provisions set forth in Sections 4.12.020 through 4.12.150 caused by circumstances beyond the control of the grantee shall constitute good and sufficient excuse and justification for such violations precluding the grantee from being in breach of the sections. The following are examples of acts or omissions by a grantee or circumstances which shall be deemed not to be beyond the control of the grantee and which shall not constitute excuses or justifications for violations:

    1.   The failure at any time by a grantee or its officers, agents or employees to exercise diligence in planning, organizing, arranging for or prosecuting the work of construction and installation or in taking any other action necessary to permit or facilitate the work of construction and installation;

    2.   Unanticipated cost increases or insufficiency of capital with which to take the actions necessary to comply or facilitate compliance with any of the provisions of Sections 4.12.020 through 4.12.150;

    3.   Considerations relating to economy or cost efficiency as respects acts or omissions by a grantee;

    4.   Delays occasioned by the failure of the grantee to diligently apply for and prosecute any request for a required certificate, approval or consent from the FCC;

    5.   Delays occasioned by seasonal changes in weather or climatic conditions, such as rain (exclusive of catastrophic conditions in the nature of “acts of God”) (rain delays shall not constitute an excuse or justification for violations except with respect to measurable precipitation occurring on more than fifty-nine days during any period commencing July 1st and ending the next following June 30th; and only if such is the proximate cause of the violation);

    6.   Delays occasioned by failure to obtain approval to attach lines to poles owned by private or public utilities or in the attachment of cable to the poles provided such failure is the result of an act or omission of the grantee; and

    7.   Delays occasioned by the customary and usual time required to process and secure approvals under the zoning laws of the city for the location of components of the cable communications system and other installations associated therewith, given the nature of the approval required and magnitude of the project; provided, however, if a grantee submits specific sites and plans for all headends, towers and transmitters to the city and analyses upon all such facilities as the lead agency, any time consumed by such environmental analyses which is longer than one hundred twenty calendar days during a period subsequent to the filing of the certificate of acceptance of the franchise pursuant to Section 4.08.180 shall excuse the grantee from any violations which are proximately caused by such delay in excess of one hundred twenty calendar days.

    B.   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A(1) through (6) of this section, a grantee shall not be excused from any violation of the provisions of Sections 4.12.020 through 4.12.150, except for causes which are beyond the control of the grantee, and except with respect to violations which have not been contributed to or aggravated by acts or omissions by the grantee.

    C.   Except as otherwise provided in this section, violations caused exclusively by acts or omissions by the city or its officers, agents or employees, shall constitute an excuse and justification for the failure of a grantee to comply with the provisions of Sections 4.12.020 through 4.12.150 precluding a determination that the grantee is in breach. However, violations as a result of such exclusive causes shall not excuse the grantee from other violations, shield the grantee from a determination that it is in breach for violations or bar any relief for damages or otherwise as a result of such breach. (County code § 11-1.1105)

 

4.12.200 Examples of excuses for violations.
    Examples of circumstances beyond the control of a grantee which excuse a grantee from violation and being in breach of the provisions of Sections 4.12.020 through 4.12.150, when such violations are caused thereby, include the following: strikes, acts of public enemies, orders by military authority, insurrections, riots, epidemics, landslides, lightning, earthquakes, fires, floods, civil disturbances, explosions and the partial or entire failure of utilities. (County code § 11-1.1106)

 

4.12.210 Enforcement proceedings.
    A.  At any time and from time to time, proceedings may be commenced by the city council.

    B.   The purpose of such proceedings shall be, and the powers of the city council shall include, the following:

    1.   Determination of whether there has been a violation of any of the terms, conditions or requirements set forth in Sections 4.12.020 through 4.12.150 or any requirements in relation thereto established pursuant to previously conducted enforcement proceedings;

    2.   Establishment of new or revised schedules for compliance with any of the terms, conditions or requirements which are determined to have been violated;

    3.   Determination of whether the grantee is in breach of any of the terms, conditions or requirements set forth in Sections 4.12.020 through 4.12.150 or of the franchise documents with respect to the violation of any such terms, conditions or requirements and, if so, the nature and extent of any such breach; and

    4.   With respect to any finding of breach, determination of the remedy therefor authorized by Sections 4.44.030 and 4.44.040.

    C.   In connection with determinations by the city council that there has been a violation of any time limit prescribed by Sections 4.12.020 through 4.12.150, the city council shall be authorized to establish new time schedules and time limitations based upon the circumstances, which shall supersede those set forth in those sections. Future enforcement proceedings pursuant to this section and Sections 4.12.220 and 4.12.230 may be undertaken in relation to time schedules and time limitations established pursuant to prior enforcement proceedings. In the event the city council finds that a grantee has breached any of the time limitations set forth in Sections 4.12.020 through 4.12.150, or established pursuant to prior enforcement proceedings, the city council shall determine and assess the amount of liquidated damages, if any, which the grantee shall be required to pay as a result of such breach, and whether and if so, the extent to which the term of the grantee should be reduced with respect to any such breach. Such determinations, without an appeal to arbitration or as affirmed by arbitration, shall be self-executing.

    D.  In the event the city council determines that the cable communications system fails to comply with any of the requirements of the franchise documents or that the grantee has failed to provide any of the facilities or services (including those relating to community use) required by the franchise documents, the city council may determine the specific deficiencies and order the correction thereof. Such determinations, without an appeal to arbitration or as affirmed by arbitration, shall be self-executing. (County code § 11-1.1107)

 

4.12.220 Commencement of enforcement proceedings.
    A.  The city council shall commence enforcement proceedings by scheduling a hearing for the purpose of inquiring into the matters specified in Section 4.12.210. Written notice of the time, date and place of the hearing shall be mailed to the grantee and to the grantee’s surety on the performance bond filed pursuant to Section 4.28.080 not later than thirty calendar days in advance of the date of the commencement of the hearing. The notice shall state the reasons for the hearing, identify the terms, conditions or requirements alleged to be violated, and generally describe the areas or subject matter with respect to which the violations are alleged to have been committed.

    B.   The hearing may be conducted either by the city council or, at the sole discretion of the city council, by a hearing officer appointed by the city council to conduct the hearing. Any such hearing officer shall be an attorney licensed to practice under the laws of the state who shall not be an officer or employee either of a grantee or the city.

    C.   The cost of providing quarters for the hearing, the compensation for the hearing officer, if any, and the per diem cost of any reporter retained to record the proceedings shall be borne by the city. The cost of preparing a transcript and record of the hearing shall be borne by the grantee. All costs incurred by the parties for attorneys’ fees, expert witness fees or other expenses shall be borne solely by the party incurring the costs. (County code § 11-1.1108)

 

4.12.230 Conduct of hearings.
    A.  All witnesses testifying at the enforcement hearing shall be sworn. Witnesses shall be subject to direct and cross examination. However, formal rules of evidence applicable to the trial of civil or criminal proceedings in the trial courts of the state shall not be applicable to the hearing. The provisions of the Administrative Procedure Act, commencing at Section 11500 of the Government Code of the state or any successor legislative enactment, shall not be applicable to any such hearing. The burden of proving violations by the grantee of the franchise documents shall be borne by the party presenting the charges, and the burden of proving excuses from performance shall be borne by the grantee. The hearing may be continued from time to time.

    B.   If the hearing is conducted by a hearing officer, the officer, upon the conclusion of the hearing, shall prepare a recommended decision which includes findings of fact, conclusions and all determinations authorized by Section 4.12.210. The recommended decision shall be filed with the city clerk and mailed to the parties not later than thirty calendar days after the conclusion of the hearing. Upon the receipt of such a recommended decision, the city council, without a hearing except as otherwise required as follows, may either:

    1.   Adopt the findings of fact, conclusions and determinations contained in the recommended decision;

    2.   Adopt the findings of fact and conclusions contained in the recommended decision, modify the determinations and adopt the recommended decision as so revised;

    3.   Based upon the record of the hearing, modify the findings of fact, conclusions or determinations and adopt the recommended decision as so revised; or

    4.   Reject the recommended decision and conduct a new hearing.

    C.   If the hearing is conducted by the city council, upon the conclusion of the hearing the city council shall adopt a decision which includes the findings of fact, conclusions and determinations authorized by Section 4.12.210. Copies of the decision adopted by the city council shall be mailed to the parties. (County code § 11-1.1109)

 

4.12.240 Arbitration of enforcement proceedings.
    A.  Not later than thirty calendar days following the date of the mailing to the grantee of the decision by the city council, the grantee shall be authorized to appeal the decision or any portion thereof to arbitration by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk. The notice of appeal shall specifically identify the determination or determinations from which the appeal is taken, and the grounds therefor, and shall be accompanied by a fee equal to the estimate by the city clerk of the cost of preparing the transcript and record of the hearing or hearings. In the event the grantee fails to file the notice of appeal within the time and in compliance with the requirements prescribed in this section, the determinations by the city council shall become final, binding and conclusive and not subject to review or reversal by any authority. Judicial enforcement of such determinations may be sought.

    B.   Except as otherwise provided in this section, the arbitration panel shall be selected, the hearing scheduled within the time prescribed, notice given, the hearing conducted, a decision made and the costs divided in the manner prescribed by Sections 4.44.140 through 4.44.180.

    C.   The questions which may be submitted to the arbitration panel and the jurisdiction of the panel shall be limited to a decision as to whether the findings of fact by the city council are supported by substantial evidence in the record and whether the conclusions by the city council are consistent with the provisions of the franchise documents as interpreted by the arbitration panel. The powers of the arbitration panel shall be limited to a conclusion as to whether the decision by the city council from which the appeal is taken should be affirmed or reversed and remanded to the city council for further determination and interpretation of the provisions of the franchise documents solely in relation to the review of the decision by the city council.

    D.  The hearing by the arbitration panel shall not be a trial de novo, and the sole function of the panel shall be to review the record of the hearing preceding the decision by the city council to decide whether there was substantial evidence in the light of the whole record to support the findings and to interpret the franchise documents in relation to the decision by the city council. No new evidence shall be introduced, received or considered by the arbitration panel; provided, that where the panel finds there is relevant evidence which, in the exercise of reasonable diligence, could not have been produced or which was improperly excluded at the hearing preceding the arbitration, the panel may remand the matter to the city council to be reconsidered in the light of such evidence. The determination by the city council shall be sustained by the arbitration panel if it finds that there is substantial evidence in the record to sustain the determination and that the conclusions are consistent with the provisions of the franchise documents. The panel shall not substitute its discretion for that of the city council with respect to the determinations made by the city council or reweigh or otherwise judge the credibility of the evidence presented during the hearing preceding the city council’s decision. If the panel decides that the determinations by the city council violate the provisions of the franchise documents, the panel shall remand the matter to the city council for further determinations, reserving jurisdiction to review the determinations. Objections by the grantee to the determinations by the city council which were not presented during the hearing preceding the city council’s decision shall be deemed to have been waived.

    E.   The decision by the city council as affirmed by an arbitration award may be judicially enforced and shall not be subject to judicial review or vacation, except on the grounds set forth in Section 1286.2 of the Code of Civil Procedure of the state to the extent such grounds are consistent with the express terms of this title. (County code § 11-1.1110)

Chapter 4.16 OPERATION AND SERVICE
4.16.010 Service area.
    The grantee’s system design and construction shall be such that service shall be made available for the normal installation fee to all residential units within the grantee’s service area, as defined in the franchise and this title, including the system extensions required by Section 4.12.050. (County code § 11-1.801)

 

4.16.020 Establishment of service.
    A.  Subject to such regulations as may be adopted by the city council, the grantee shall install cable television service to all persons making a timely and bona fide request for such service at any location within the service area.

    B.   After the grantee has established service pursuant to a franchise in any area of the city, such service shall not be suspended or abandoned, unless such suspension or abandonment has been authorized or ordered by the city council. (County code § 11-1.802)

 

4.16.030 General capabilities.
    A cable communications system, to be installed and operated pursuant to this chapter and a franchise granted pursuant to this title, unless otherwise provided, shall:

    A.  Be capable of relaying to subscriber terminals video and audio signals the grantee is now or hereafter authorized to carry by the Federal Communications Commission or the city:

    B.   Distribute in color television signals which it receives in color;

    C.   Provide, as a minimum, channel capacity and basic equipment for program production in cablecasting for educational, public and governmental access uses;

    D.  If the system is to serve an aggregate of five thousand or more dwellings, have a minimum capacity of fifty downstream video channels;

    E.   If the system is to serve an aggregate of five thousand or more dwellings, have a two-way (bidirectional) capacity upon the initial activation of the system or at such time as may be extended by the city council;

    F.   Make available upon request by any subscriber receiving channels showing premium services or pay-per-view events, a lockout device which prevents the unauthorized viewing of such channels; and

    G.  Make available to subscribers, upon request, an RF switch permitting conversion between cable and direct off-air reception. (County code § 11-1.803)

 

4.16.040 Other capabilities.
    The cable communications system permitted to be installed and operated pursuant to this title may also engage in the business of:

    A.  Transmitting original cablecast programming not received through television broadcast signals;

    B.   Transmitting any additional broadcast signals permitted by the Federal Communications Commission;

    C.   Transmitting television pictures, films and videotape programs not received through broadcast television signals, whether or not encoded or processed to permit reception by only selected receivers or subscribers;

    D.  Transmitting and receiving all other signals, digital, voice, audio-visual and the like; and

    E.   Transmitting on a nondiscriminatory basis, and for a reasonable rate, burglar, fire and other nonbroadcast services which customers request from persons supplying such services. (County code § 11-1.804)

 

4.16.050 Standby power.
    Each cable communications system shall include equipment capable of providing standby power for headend facilities and trunk amplifiers for a minimum of two hours. The equipment shall be so constructed as to automatically notify the cable office when it is in operation and to automatically revert to the standby mode when the AC power returns. The system shall incorporate all safeguards necessary to prevent injury to a lineman resulting from a standby generator powering a “dead” utility line. (County code § 11-1.805)

 

4.16.060 Override capability.
    A.  Each cable communications system shall include an emergency alert capability which will permit the city, in times of emergency, to override by remote control alternatively the audio and visual of all channels simultaneously.

    B.   Each cable communications system shall include the capability to broadcast from the city’s headquarters for civil defense, disaster and emergency services. (County code § 11-1.806)

 

4.16.070 Interconnections.
    The grantee will be required to provide interconnections to other nearby cable communications systems, at the time and to the extent and in the manner specified by the city council, as set forth in any request for franchise proposals issued by the city council. (County code § 11-1.807)

 

4.16.080 Plans and specifications.
    Each application for a franchise shall include plans and detailed specifications for the cable communications system which is proposed by the applicant. The system shall be constructed and installed by a grantee in compliance with the plans and specifications contained in the application, except as modified by other franchise documents. (County code § 11-1.808)

 

4.16.090 Technical standards.
    Each grantee shall construct, install and maintain its cable communications system in a manner consistent and in compliance with all applicable laws, ordinances, construction standards, governmental requirements, FCC technical standards and detailed standards set forth in the franchise documents. Each grantee shall provide to the city, upon request, written reports of the grantee’s annual proof-of-performance tests conducted pursuant to FCC standards and requirements. Standards of cable communications system construction, safety and operation shall meet, but not be limited to, the following referenced specifications, unless exceptions are agreed upon between the city and the grantee. Each grantee shall at all times comply with:

    A.  The National Electrical Safety Code (National Bureau of Standards);

    B.   The National Electrical Code (National Bureau of Fire Underwriters);

    C.   California Public Utility Commission General Orders 95, 112-d and 128;

    D.  Applicable FCC and other federal, state and local regulations; and

    E.   The codes and other laws of the city. (County code § 11-1.809)

 

4.16.100 Installation procedures.
    The construction, installation and maintenance of the cable communications system shall be performed in an orderly and workmanlike manner and in close coordination with the public and private utilities serving the city following accepted construction procedures and practices and working through existing committees and organizations. (County code § 11-1.810)

 

4.16.110 Overall system.
    The overall system shall be designed and constructed to meet all FCC technical performance specifications and standards over a temperature range of plus or minus fifty degrees Fahrenheit from the mean temperature of the city area and to function throughout all environmental extremes expected. (County code § 11-1.811)

 

4.16.120 Forward portion.
    The forward portion of any cable communications system to serve an aggregate of five thousand or more dwellings shall be capable of an initial activation of a minimum carriage of fifty Class I television channels, the full FM broadcast band and pilot carriers or other such auxiliary signals as required for system control. (County code § 11-1.812)

 

4.16.130 Combined forward trunk and distribution system.
    The combined forward trunk and distribution system shall deliver signals to each and every subscriber’s receiver which will meet or exceed the franchise ordinance specifications at the mean system temperature of plus or minus fifty degrees Fahrenheit, unless otherwise indicated. This shall include the effects of drop cable, interior splits and any terminal equipment, such as descramblers and set top converters. (County code § 11-1.813)

 

4.16.140 Reverse portion.
    A.  The reverse portion of the cable communications system shall be capable of initial activation of a minimum of twenty-five MHz band width, with return signals from each subscriber and institutional (including all schools) signal source to the extreme end of any area in compliance with the specifications set forth in the franchise ordinance.

    B.   Where applicable, the end of the system specifications shall include the effects of any signal reprocessing equipment necessary to achieve forward transmission.

    C.   Any signal at the subscriber’s television receiver, after being transmitted to the headend, processed and retransmitted down a forward channel, shall meet the specifications of the franchise ordinance. (County code § 11-1.814)

 

4.16.150 Compatibility for signal exchanges.
    All cable communications systems authorized to be constructed and operated pursuant to this title shall be compatible with respect to signal exchanges between the systems, insofar as financially and technically feasible. One interconnection point shall be specified by the grantees for signal exchanges between any two systems. The interconnection point shall be selected on the most reasonable direct path between the party providing the signal and the party receiving the signal. Signals delivered to an interconnection point by each party shall utilize such electronic parameters as required to be usable by the receiving party. The technical standards set forth in any request for a proposal issued pursuant to Section 4.08.140 shall apply to all signals delivered by any party to such interconnection point. (County code § 11-1.815)

 

4.16.160 Preventive maintenance.
    A comprehensive routine preventive maintenance program shall be developed, effected and maintained for each system by the respective grantees to ensure continued top quality cable communications operating standards in consonance with FCC Part 76 and the technical specifications stipulated in the franchise ordinance. (County code § 11-1.816)

 

4.16.170 Testing.
    A.  No newly constructed system services shall be offered for sale prior to proof-of-performance testing in accordance with FCC Part 76.601 and the technical specifications and standards listed in the franchise agreement. This initial proof-of-performance testing and annual proof-of-performance testing may be conducted by the city or its designated representative at the city’s option, when for sufficient cause as deemed by the city council or its designated representative. The city reserves the right to have the measurements conducted at city selected test points and to a greater number of test points than the minimum required by Section 76.601, FCC Rules. Additionally, the grantee shall reimburse the city for all expenses by it in connection with the city conducting or observing the annual performance tests when the results of those tests are deemed by the city to fall below a ninety percent level of compliance with the technical standards as set forth in FCC Part 76 and in the franchise agreement.

    B.   If after a public hearing, notice of which has been given in the manner prescribed by Section 4.08.050, the city council finds that a grantee has failed to comply with or maintain the technical standards or quality of service set forth in the franchise documents for such franchise, the city council may order the grantee to make specifically enumerated repairs or improvements in the system or changes in the maintenance, repair or operation of the system. The grantee shall complete such repairs or improvements within a reasonable time and, in any event, not later than six months following the date on which the order requiring repairs or improvements is mailed to the grantee. (County code § 11-1.817)

 

4.16.180 Testing procedures.
    The grantee’s proof-of-performance testing procedures shall be approved by the city for implementation prior to the initial proof-of-performance testing addressed in Section 4.16.170. The results of the proof-of-performance tests shall be retained for at least five years and shall be available for inspection by the city. (County code § 11-1.818)

 

4.16.190 Antenna structures.
    Any antenna structure used in the cable communications system shall comply with the construction, marking and lighting of antenna structures required by the United States Department of Transportation. All system antennas and mounts shall be designed, installed and constructed to withstand one hundred mile per hour winds. (County code § 11-1.819)

 

4.16.200 RF leakage.
    RF leakage shall be measured adjacent to any proposed or existing aeronautical navigation or communications radio site to prove no interference to such services. (County code § 11-1.820)

 

4.16.210 Cable installations.
    All cables and wires shall be installed, where possible, parallel with electric and telephone lines, and multiple cable configurations shall be arranged in parallel and bundled with due respect for engineering consideration. (County code § 11-1.821)

 

4.16.220 Underground cable.
    All underground cable should be flooded and armorclad cable and/or installed in conduit, unless specifically exempted by the city public works department on a case-by-case basis. (County code § 11-1.822)

 

4.16.230 Drop cables.
    Residential and institutional drop cables should be a double shielded type and fitted with sealed hex crimp ring high integrity connectors. (County code § 11-1.823)

 

4.16.240 Jacketed cable.
    Jacketed cable should be used in any and all areas of the plant where airborne heavy chemical particles can be expected. (County code § 11-1.824)

 

4.16.250 Corrective measures.
    A grantee’s corrective maintenance program shall render efficient corrective service, make repairs promptly and interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible. Such interruption shall be preceded by notice and shall occur during a period of minimum use of the system. A written log shall reflect the date, time, duration and reason for each service interruption. The record of the log shall be kept on file for a minimum of three years. (County code § 11-1.825)

 

4.16.260 Safety requirements.
    A grantee at all times shall:

    A.  Install and maintain its wires, cables, fixtures and other equipment in accordance with the requirements of the Building Codes and in such manner that such equipment will not interfere with any installation of the city;

    B.   Keep and maintain in a safe, suitable and substantial condition, and in good order and repair, all its structures, lines, equipment and connections in, over, under and upon the streets, sidewalks, alleys and public ways or places of the city wherever situated or located; and

    C.   All working facilities, conditions, and procedures used or occurring during the construction of the cable communications system shall comply with the standards of the Occupational Safety and Health Administration. (County code § 11-1.826)

Chapter 4.20 FRANCHISE SERVICE AND EMPLOYMENT STANDARDS
Article I. Generally
4.20.010 Purposes.
    A.  Whereas cable communications services have traditionally been limited to television programming primarily for the purposes of entertainment, advancing technology permits the delivery of a new generation of interactive services which invade nonentertainment commercial fields and may extend from the provision of burglar alarm services to services which permit the subscriber to shop or bank from his or her home and receive a vast array of professional, technical, educational and other information, to medical, fire protection and other emergency services, and to types of services which are yet unidentified.

    B.   Such services promise significant benefit to the city. They also potentially generate regulatory needs, the exact nature and scope of which are impossible to predict, and the enforceability of which could be time consuming and expensive should a grantee refuse to comply. The need to regulate could extend to:

    1.   Potentially unfair and unlawful competitive practices by a grantee in operating and utilizing the cable communications system to provide services;

    2.   Inadequate maintenance or repair by the grantee of the cable communications system;

    3.   Invasion of the privacy of subscribers;

    4.   Unethical or unfair business practices in relation to subscribers or others; and

    5.   A variety of other regulatory measures which are necessary to protect the health, safety or welfare of inhabitants of the city.

    C.   The provisions of this chapter address such issues by, with few exceptions, placing no limit upon the services which a grantee may provide, mandating few services, prescribing general duties and responsibilities in relation to future public interest issues, and making no attempt, with few exceptions, to limit the services which a grantee may provide to those which may be listed in the grantee’s proposal, and reserving broad authority to amend the provisions of Section 4.08.100.

    D.  The purposes of this chapter and this article are to:

    1.   Reserve and vest broad regulatory authority in the city in order to enable it to enact future regulations which are tailored to address the problems requiring regulation and to avoid sensitive constitutional issues which may arise in attempts to regulate the operation of a cable communications system; and

    2.   Establish general regulatory guidelines defining the rights, duties and responsibilities of a grantee and the city which may be made more specific, expanded or otherwise modified to meet future regulatory needs by regulations enacted by the city or the amendment of this chapter. (County code § 11-1.1301)

 

4.20.020 System ownership.
    Legal and equitable title to the cable communications system, including any and all studio facilities and production equipment provided for community use, the institutional network, and all channels of whatever kind or nature, shall be vested in the grantee. (County code § 11-1.1302)

 

4.20.030 Services.
    A.  Within a service area, the services provided by the grantee through its cable communications system upon both the subscriber and institutional networks shall be offered uniformly upon nondiscriminatory terms to subscribers and users and shall not differ based upon geographical location.

    B.   Each application and renewal application for a franchise shall contain schedules of all home educational and entertainment programming proposed to be shown on either the subscriber network or institutional network. The applications shall show for each service area:

    1.   All tiers of service;

    2.   The number of activated and the number of programmed channels within each tier of service offered at the subscription rate applicable to the tier, together with an identification of the tier placement of any channels allocated pursuant to Sections 4.20.310, 4.20.320, 4.20.340 and 4.20.350;

    3.   A description of all programming from satellite and other sources to be offered on each such channel within each tier of service (including program descriptions) within the times prescribed by Section 4.12.020;

    4.   A statement of the minimum number of hours per day and week programs or types of programming described in subparagraph 3 of this subsection will be shown within the times prescribed by Section 4.12.020;

    5.   A statement of the minimum number of hours per day and week each channel within each tier of service will contain home educational and entertainment programming which has not previously been broadcast within the city; and

    6.   A statement of all premium services to be offered within each tier of service, together with program descriptions of each such service, and the minimum number of hours per day and week each such service will be available within each tier of service within the times prescribed by Section 4.12.020.

    C.   The provisions of subparagraphs 3, 4, 5 and 6 of this subsection shall not be applicable to channels described by Section 4.04.035.

    D.  Each application for a franchise shall also contain a description of such nonentertainment services (whether or not of an interactive nature) as the applicant offers to provide on either the subscriber network or institutional network throughout the term of the franchise. For each such service, applications shall show:

    1.   The nature, scope and extent of each service;

    2.   For each service, any restrictions relating to the geographical location of delivery and the class of customer or recipient of service;

    3.   Schedules of all rates and charges under which each service will be offered to customers or recipients;

    4.   The names and addresses for each service of the proposed provider of the service. If the city expressly requests, either in the request for proposals or during the review period, the applicant shall provide the city with a copy of the contract or other legal instrument between the grantee and the provider; and

    5.   Such other information by amendment to the application as may be required during the public hearing referred to in subsection E of this section.

    E.   During the public hearings prior to the tentative selection of a grantee conducted pursuant to Section 4.08.150 the city council, in its sole discretion, may determine which, if any, such nonentertainment services shown in the application of the applicant, if selected as the grantee, would be vested with a contractual right and duty to perform throughout the term of the franchise. Any such identification may be accompanied by such conditions as are determined to be appropriate, including, but not limited to, conditions relating to the nature and extent of the service provided, the terms and conditions of the provision, and opportunities for the use of the cable communications system by others, including the circumstances under which leased access for such purposes will be provided. Any services so identified, together with the conditions thereof, shall be prescribed in the ordinance offering the franchise to the extent they appear in the application filed by the grantee. (County code § 11-1.1303)

 

4.20.040 Nonentertainment service rights and duties.
    A.  A grantee’s rights and duties respecting the provision of nonentertainment services (whether or not of an interactive nature) on either the subscriber or institutional networks during the term of the franchise shall be as follows:

    1.   A grantee shall be authorized, but not vested with a contractual right or duty, to provide services which either:

    a.   Have been identified in its application but have not been prescribed by the ordinance offering the franchise; or

    b.   Have not been described, specified or identified either in the application or ordinance offering the franchise. The authorization shall be subject to modification through regulation or revocation (by prohibiting the service) pursuant to Section 4.20.050.

    2.   A grantee shall be vested with a contractual right and duty to provide the services prescribed by the ordinance offering the franchise during the entire term of the franchise. Such services shall be provided in compliance with all conditions prescribed by the ordinance. Pursuant to Section 4.20.050, such services may be regulated, and the conditions applicable thereto set forth in the resolution may be modified or expanded; provided, however, no such service shall be prohibited.

    B.   A grantee providing a nonentertainment service or desiring to offer or provide such a nonentertainment service which has not been identified in the ordinance offering the franchise (whether or not the service has been described in the grantees application), at any time during the term of the franchise, may file with the city clerk a written request for the approval of the vesting thereof. The written request shall contain such information as is required by the city council. Not later than thirty calendar days following the date of the filing of the request for approval, the city council shall commence a public hearing thereon, notice of which shall be given in the manner prescribed by Section 4.08.060. At the conclusion of the public hearing, the city council, in its sole discretion, may either approve or disapprove the proposed service. If the service is approved, the approval may be granted upon such conditions as are described by Section 4.20.030(E). A grantee, from and after the date of such approval shall be vested with a contractual right and duty to provide such a service subject to the following limitations. The service shall be provided in compliance with all conditions prescribed by the approval. Pursuant to Section 4.20.050, such service may be regulated and the conditions set forth in the approval may be modified or expanded, but no such service may be prohibited. (County code § 11-1.1304)

 

4.20.050 Regulation of nonentertainment services.
    A.  No nonentertainment service (whether or not of an interactive nature) provided through the cable communications system shall be provided or operated in a manner which is detrimental to the public peace, health, safety or welfare.

    B.   The city council, from time to time during the term of a franchise, after public hearings, notice of which is given in the manner prescribed by Section 4.08.060, and subject to the Act, may exercise the following powers:

    1.   Prohibit or adopt rules or regulations governing the provision of the manner of operation or the provision of a nonentertainment service which either has been described by the application for the franchise but not identified in the ordinance offering the franchise or which has not been described, identified or specified either in the application or ordinance offering the franchise, and which has not been approved pursuant to Section 4.20.040 (B); or

    2.   Adopt rules or regulations governing or modifying or adding conditions relating to the provision or manner of operation or provision of a nonentertainment service which has either been identified by the franchise agreement or approved pursuant to Section 4.20.040(B).

    C.   A grantee shall comply with any such conditions, rules or regulations; provided, however, with respect to any service identified by the ordinance offering the franchise or approved pursuant to Section 4.20.040(B), a grantee shall be authorized to terminate the service in lieu of complying with the conditions, rules or regulations applicable thereto adopted pursuant to this section.

    D.  The powers of the city council under this section are coextensive with those which are authorized by laws of the state or United States and with those defined by the police power expressed by Section 7 of Article XI of the Constitution of the state. A grantee shall not, in relation to this section, have contractually or otherwise waived any constitutional right which would otherwise be applicable to a franchised cable communications operator. (County code § 11-1.1305)

 

4.20.060 Educational and entertainment services.
    A.  Subject to the provisions of this section and the authority reserved by Section 4.20.070, a grantee shall be vested with a contractual right and duty to provide those home educational and entertainment services identified in its application.

    B.   It is understood that with respect to home educational and entertainment programming on either the subscriber or institutional networks, the broad categories of video programming which a grantee has elected to propose in its application are among the material factors which are considered in selecting the grantee.

    C.   It is also understood that changing circumstances, including marketing strategy, program availability and other factors may require that particular cable services identified in the grantee’s application pursuant to Section 4.20.030 will be rearranged, replaced or removed from time to time during the term of the franchise.

    D.  Therefore, a grantee shall be authorized to alter the particular cable services from time to time during the term of a franchise but may not, in so doing, materially reduce or eliminate the broad categories of video programming which have been identified in the grantee’s application and the franchise ordinance without the prior consent of the city council obtained in accordance with subsection (a) of Section 625 of the Act. (County code § 11-1.1306)

 

4.20.070 Regulation of educational and entertainment services.
    A.  No home educational or entertainment service provided through a cable communications system shall be provided or operated in a manner which is detrimental to the public peace, health, safety or welfare. The provisions of this section shall not be self-executing, shall not authorize the city or any other public authority to establish bans upon services in advance of the offering thereof, and may be invoked solely pursuant to the procedure set forth in this section.

    B.   If the city council determines that there is reason to believe that a particular service provided through a cable communications system is of a type or is otherwise provided in a manner which is detrimental to the public peace, health, safety or welfare, the city council shall schedule a public hearing. Written notice identifying the service or services or method or provision subject to the determination shall be mailed to the grantee not later than thirty days in advance of the hearing. Notice of the hearing shall be given in the manner prescribed by Section 4.08.060. If, at the conclusion of the public hearing, the city council determines that a service is being provided of a type or in a manner which is detrimental to the public peace, health, safety or welfare, the city council may enact regulations which prohibit the services or otherwise regulate the manner of the provision thereof, as the case may be, and may enforce the regulation by appropriate action in the courts of the state.

    C.   The powers of the city council under this section shall be coextensive with those which are authorized by laws of the state or United States and with those defined by the police power expressed by Section 7 of Article XI of the Constitution of the state. A grantee shall not, in relation to this section, have contractually or otherwise waived any constitutional right or right provided by the Act which would otherwise be applicable to a franchised cable communications operator. (County code § 11-1.1307)

 

4.20.080 Subscriber antennas.
    A.  No grantee shall remove or offer to remove any potential or existing subscriber antenna or provide any inducement for removal as a condition respecting the provision of service.

    B.   It is not necessarily the city’s intention to prohibit the erection or controlled use of individual television antennas, and no one is or will be required to receive cable communications service or connect with a cable communications system.

    C.   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit any person from constructing or operating any private noncommercial satellite receiving station to the extent permitted by city, state and federal laws. (County code § 11-1.1308)

 

4.20.090 Anticompetitive practices.
    A.  No franchise issued pursuant to the provisions of this title shall expressly or impliedly authorize the grantee to utilize its cable communications system to provide any service in such a manner as to unlawfully damage any business competitor or other third party or violate any statutes or regulations of the United States or the state; nor shall any grantee, by act or omission, engage in any anticompetitive practice in violation of any statutes or regulations of the United States or the state. The provisions of this section shall be enforceable in courts of competent jurisdiction against a grantee by any party who alleges injury as a result of an alleged violation thereof.

    B.   Each grantee shall hold harmless, indemnify and defend the city and its officers, agents and employees, from and against any and all suits, claims and liability for damages, penalties, fines or other relief arising out of, resulting from or in any manner relating to any act or omission by the grantee, the allegation of which could constitute a violation of the provisions of this section. (County code § 11-1.1309)

 

4.20.100 Post-franchise services.
    A.  In the event the city fails to renew a franchise, a franchise is canceled in advance of the expiration of its terms or a new operator succeeds to the grantee by assignment or otherwise, the preceding grantee, without compensation, shall cooperate with the city, new operator or new grantee in maintaining continuity of service to all subscribers and users. Such cooperation shall include, but not be limited to, making records available for inspection and review, the provision of advice, and other assistance as requested.

    B.   Upon written notice mailed by the city to the grantee for the purpose of ensuring the continuity of service to subscribers and users, a grantee, without compensation or other special consideration, shall operate the cable communications system during the period subsequent to the termination of the franchise and shall repair and maintain the system, conduct the business associated with the operation of the system, and provide uninterrupted services during the post-franchise period during such time as is requested by the city pursuant to the terms and conditions of the franchise documents for the franchise which has expired or terminated. During such period, the grantee shall be entitled to revenues and profits and shall be solely responsible for any operating losses; provided, however, the franchise fees prescribed pursuant to Chapter 4.28 shall be payable during such period. (County code § 11-1.1310)

 

4.20.110 Continuity of quality.
    Each grantee shall continue throughout the term of the franchise to maintain the technical standards and quality of service set forth in the franchise documents for such franchise. (County code § 11-1.1311)

 

4.20.120 Maintenance and repair.
    During the term of each franchise, the grantee shall maintain its cable communications system in good condition and repair, render efficient service, make repairs promptly and interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible. (County code § 11-1.1312)

 

4.20.130 Subscriber services.
    It shall be the right of all subscribers to receive all available services insofar as their financial and other obligations to the grantee are honored. Neither the city nor the grantee, as to rates, charges, service, service facilities, rules, regulations or in any other respect, shall make or grant any preference or advantage to any person nor subject any person to prejudice or disadvantage. Subject to such regulations as may be adopted by the city council pursuant to this title, the grantee shall:

    A.  Maintain a high standard of courtesy in customer relations at all times;

    B.   Maintain a log showing the date, approximate time and duration, type and probable cause of all headend, trunk or distribution line service interruptions and/or failures due to causes other than routine testing or maintenance; such log shall be subject to review by the city council;

    C.   Maintain a conveniently located business office and service center within the service area with toll free telephone numbers so that subscribers may report service outages or deficiencies at any time. The office shall maintain an adequate staff such that subscribers may transact all necessary business, including the payment of bills, during regular business hours;

    D.  Keep a written record of all complaints showing at a minimum the date, subscriber’s name and address, nature of the complaint and the action taken by the grantee;

    E.   Restore any interruption in service as expeditiously as possible and in accordance with the franchise agreement. Corrective maintenance for institutional services shall be in accord with the contract terms between the grantee and the subscriber;

    F.   Before providing cable communications service to any subscriber, the grantee shall provide a written notice to the subscriber substantially as follows:

 

    Subscriber is hereby notified that in providing cable television/communications service the grantee is making use of public rights-of-way within the city and that the continued use of such rights-of-way is in no way guaranteed. In the event the continued use of such rights-of-way is denied to the grantee for any reason, the grantee will make every reasonable effort to provide service over alternate routes. By accepting cable television/communications service, subscriber agrees he or she will make no claim nor undertake any action against the city or its officers or its employees, if the service to be provided hereunder is interrupted or discontinued.

    G.  There shall be no charge for service calls to subscribers’ homes, except as provided by agreement;

    H.  In the event the grantee elects to rebuild, modify or sell the system or the city revokes or fails to renew the franchise, the grantee shall do everything in its power to ensure that all subscribers receive continuous, uninterrupted service, regardless of the circumstances, during the lifetime of the franchise. In the event of a system purchase by the city or change of grantee, the current grantee shall cooperate with the city to operate the system for a temporary period in maintaining continuity of service to all subscribers; and

    I.    Upon the termination of service to any subscriber, a grantee shall promptly remove all its facilities and equipment from the premises of such subscriber upon his or her request. (County code § 11-1.1313)

 

4.20.140 Privacy.
    Each grantee and its officers, agents, employees, contractors and subcontractors shall respect, refrain from invading and take affirmative action to prevent the violation of the privacy of subscribers served by the cable communications system and others.

    A.  Neither the grantee nor any other person, agency or entity shall tap or arrange for the tapping or monitoring of any cable, line, signal input device or subscriber outlet or receiver for any purpose whatsoever, except that the grantee may conduct tests of the functioning of the system where necessary in order to ensure proper maintenance of the system and to collect performance data for agencies regulating the quality of signals, and the grantee may conduct systemwide or individually addressed “sweeps” for the sole purpose of verifying system integrity (including individual security system integrity), controlling return path transmissions, billing for pay services or collecting aggregate data on viewing patterns by channel. “Tapping” shall mean observing a communications signal exchange where the observer is neither of the communicating parties, whether the exchange is observed by visual, aural or electronic means, for any purpose whatsoever. The provision of interactive services shall not be construed to be “tapping” or “monitoring” under this subsection.

    B.   The grantee shall not place in any private residence or in any institution any equipment capable of two-way communications without the written consent of the subscriber and shall not utilize the two-way communications capability of the system for subscriber surveillance of any kind without the written consent of the subscriber specifying how the data collected will be used and by whom. Tenants who occupy premises connected by the system shall be subscribers within the meaning of this subsection, regardless of who actually pays for the service. The written consents shall be, and shall show on their face, that they are revocable by the subscriber at any time by written communication mailed by the subscriber to the grantee. No penalty shall be invoked for a subscriber’s failure to provide a written consent or for his or her revocation thereof, and all written consents shall so state on their face. The grantee shall not make such written consent a condition precedent to receipt by a subscriber of noninteractive service. The provisions of this subsection shall not require consent as a condition precedent to systemwide or individually addressed “sweeps” for the sole purpose of verifying system integrity, controlling return-path transmissions, billing for pay services or collecting aggregate data on viewing patterns by channel.

    C.   No cable, line, wire, amplifier, converter or other piece of equipment associated with cable communications system services shall be attached to any residence or other property of a citizen (except within streets) without first securing the written permission of the owner or tenant of the property. If such permission is later revoked, whether by the original or a subsequent owner or tenant, the grantee shall remove forthwith all of the equipment and promptly restore the property to its original condition. The grantee shall perform all installations in a workmanlike manner and shall be responsible for any damage to residences or other property caused by the installation.

    D.  No grantee or officer, agent or employee thereof shall sell or otherwise make available lists of the names and addresses of its subscribers or any list which identifies by name and otherwise individual subscriber viewing habits, to any person, agency or entity for any purpose whatsoever; except that the grantee, upon a request, shall provide lists of the names and addresses of its subscribers to authorized representatives of the city when the city council deems such information necessary for the performance of the regulatory functions of the city. Names and addresses of subscribers within the possession of the city shall not be subject to public inspection or review.

    E.   A grantee may release the number of subscribers but only as a total number and as a percentage of the potential subscribers within the franchise area. When indicating the number of subscribers viewing a particular channel, a grantee shall indicate only the total number of subscribers viewing during the relevant time and the percentage of all subscribers which they represent, but not the identity of any subscriber.

    F.   No poll or other two-way response of subscribers shall be conducted, whether for commercial purposes, in connection with community use or otherwise, unless the program of which the poll is a part contains an explicit disclosure of the nature, purpose and prospective use of the results of the poll. The grantee shall supervise and monitor all polls in which responses are received through the cable communications system and shall adopt and enforce measures which ensure that personally identifiable information concerning a subscriber, including his or her viewing habits and response or responses to the inquiry or inquiries, is not received by any third party, including the party sponsoring the poll.

    G.  A grantee shall not tabulate any test results, nor permit the use of the system for such tabulation, which would reveal the commercial product preference or opinions of individual subscribers or members of their families or their invitees, licensees or employees, without advance written authorization by the subscriber. (County code § 11-1.1314)

 

4.20.150 Records.
    Each grantee shall maintain for a period of five years and make available for inspection and copying by authorized representatives of the city the following:

    A.  A permanent service log which shows the name and address of each person requesting maintenance or repair service, the nature of the service requested, the date and time the request was received, and the disposition (including the date on which the repair was made or the request otherwise resolved and the method of resolution);

    B.   A permanent record of each request for a subscription to basic service, including the name and address of the person making the request, and the date of the request; and

    C.   A permanent record of each written complaint received by the grantee pursuant to the provisions of Section 4.20.190 together with the name and address of the complainant, the nature of the complaint, and the dates and descriptions of any and all investigatory, corrective or other actions taken as a result thereof. (County code § 11-1.1315)

 

4.20.160 Reports.
    A.  During the term of any franchise issued pursuant to the provisions of this title, each grantee, not less frequently than annually, shall file a written report with the city clerk. The report shall be filed not later than forty-five calendar days after the end of the grantee’s fiscal year. The report shall include the following:

    1.   A summary of the activities of the grantee during its previous fiscal year in the development and operation of the cable communications system, including, but not limited to: a description of all services provided through the cable communications system as of the conclusion of the fiscal year; a statement of the number of subscribers by category of services rendered as of the end of the fiscal year; and a summary of the facilities, channels and resources made available during the fiscal year for community use, including a list of the persons and organizations which have produced, sponsored and broadcast programming upon community use channels, a description of the types of programming provided through such channels, and any recommendations by the grantee for improvements in community use;

    2.   A specific detailed description of all components, elements and extensions of the cable communications system which have been installed during the grantee’s previous fiscal year, showing the locations of all such installations and including copies of the plans, specifications and drawings showing the components, elements and extensions as installed;

    3.   A statement showing the grantee’s investments in property within the city during the grantee’s previous fiscal year, including an identification of all real property or interests therein within the city acquired or transferred by the grantee and the amounts which the grantee paid for the acquisition of such property or interests, a description of all buildings or other improvements which the grantee constructed upon or added to real property within the city, together with the cost of such construction or additions, and an itemization by component category of all costs of components, elements, and extensions of the cable communications system;

    4.   An audited statement signed by a public or certified public accountant of all income received by the grantee during its previous fiscal year, including an itemization of all services provided through the cable communications system, the unit or regular rates or charges for such services, and the amount of income received attributable to each service, and all other income from whatever sources, including an identification of each source and the amount of income attributable thereto; and

    5.   Audited financial statements for the grantee’s previous fiscal year signed by a public or certified public accountant, including a balance sheet and profit and loss statement.

    B.   A grantee shall prepare and furnish to the city council, at the time and in the form prescribed by the city council, such other reports with respect to its operations, affairs, transactions or property as the city council may deem necessary or appropriate to the performance of its functions. (County code § 11-1.1316)

 

4.20.170 Discrimination in services prohibited.
    A.  No grantee shall deny service, deny access or otherwise discriminate against subscribers, channel users or general citizens on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin or sex.

    B.   It shall be the right of all subscribers, subject only to the payment of the lawful rates and reasonable terms and conditions established by a grantee or the city council, to receive and continue to receive services. Initial subscriptions to services shall not be denied to any person on the basis of the person’s credit rating or for other reasons relating to economic conditions. (County code § 11-1.1317)

 

4.20.180 Grantee’s rules.
    A.  Each grantee shall have the authority to promulgate rules and conditions governing the conduct of its business. No such rules or conditions shall conflict with the franchise documents applicable to the franchise, the provisions of federal or state statutes or regulations or city laws.

    B.   Such rules or conditions shall be reasonable and subject to approval as to reasonableness by the city council after public hearings, notice of which has been given in the manner prescribed by Section 4.08.060, and shall not conflict with rules and regulations enacted by the city council. (County code § 11-1.1318)

 

4.20.190 Complaints.
    A.  The city and each grantee shall separately designate representatives whose responsibility it is to receive and investigate complaints relating to violations of the franchise documents.

    B.   As subscribers are connected or reconnected to a cable communications system, and at least annually as respects continuing subscriptions, each grantee, by appropriate means, such as cards or brochures, shall furnish information concerning the opportunity to make complaints, including the names, addresses and telephone numbers of the representatives designated by the grantee and the city.

    C.   Each grantee shall make available for inspection and copying all records relating to complaints and make such other information available to the city’s representatives as necessary to permit a complete investigation of the complaints by the representatives. (County code § 11-1.1319)

 

4.20.200 System and services reviews.
    To provide for technological, economic and regulatory changes in the state of the art of cable communications, to facilitate renewal procedures, to promote the maximum degree of flexibility in the cable system and to provide on a continuing basis an advanced, modern system, the grantor and the grantee shall comply with the following system and services review provisions:

    A.  At the grantor’s sole option, the grantor and grantee shall hold a system and services review session on or about the third anniversary date of the franchise agreement. Subsequent system review sessions shall be scheduled by the grantor each three years thereafter.

    B.   Sixty days prior to the scheduled system and services review session, the grantee shall submit a report to the grantor indicating the following:

    1.   A survey of cable system services which are being provided on an operational basis, excluding tests and demonstrations, to cities in the United States of similar size and complexity; and

    2.   A plan for the provision of such services not provided by the grantee or an explanation indicating why such services are not feasible for the franchise area.

    C.   Topics for discussion and review at the system and services review sessions shall include, but shall not be limited to, services provided, the rate structure, the application of new technologies, system performance, programming (including access opportunities), subscriber complaints, user complaints, rights of privacy, amendments to the franchise, undergrounding processes and developments in the law.

    D.  Either the grantor or the grantee may select additional topics for discussion at any review session.

    E.   Not later than sixty days after the conclusion of each system and services review session, the grantor shall issue findings, including specifically a listing of any cable services not then being provided to the grantor, which are considered technically and economically feasible. The grantor may request the grantee to provide such services within a reasonable time, under reasonable rates and conditions. Failure to provide such requested services may be considered a breach of the franchise, subject to remedies as provided in this title. (County code § 11-1.1320)

 

4.20.210 City rules and regulations.
    At any time the city council may adopt reasonable rules, regulations and standards governing the operation of cable communications systems in the city, consistent with the provisions of this title and the franchise ordinance. Such rules, regulations and standards shall apply to and shall govern the operations of the grantee of any cable communications franchise and are expressly declared to be a part of any such franchise. (County code § 11-1.1321)

 

4.20.220 Hearings.
    Prior to adopting any such rule, regulation or standard, the city council shall conduct a duly noticed hearing thereon. At the time set for such hearing or at any adjournment thereof, the city council shall proceed to hear any relevant evidence relating to the matter. Thereafter, the city council, by resolution, may adopt, amend or modify such rules and regulations. (County code § 11-1.1322)

 

4.20.230 Standards.
    To the extent not prompted by federal or state laws or regulations, the standards adopted by the city council may govern the engineering, construction, installation, service and maintenance of all cable communications systems in the city, including, but not limited to, standards governing carrier levels, signal-to-noise ratios, hum modulation, distortion levels, channel interactions and interreactions, and composite beat levels. (County code § 11-1.1323)

 

4.20.240 No discrimination.
    In the carrying out of the construction, maintenance and operation of the cable communications system, the grantee shall not discriminate against any employee or applicant for employment because of race, creed, color, sex or national origin. (County code § 11-1.1324)

 

4.20.250 Affirmative action.
    The grantee shall take affirmative action to ensure that applicants are employed, and that employees are treated during employment, without regard to their race, creed, color, sex or national origin. Such action shall include, but not be limited to, the following: employment upgrading, recruitment or recruitment advertising, rates of pay or other forms of compensation, and selection for training, including apprenticeship. (County code § 11-1.1325)

 

4.20.260 Posting nondiscrimination notices.
    The grantee shall post in conspicuous places available to employees and applicants for employment notices setting forth the provisions of the nondiscrimination clause. (County code § 11-1.1326)

 

4.20.270 Solicitations.
    The grantee, in all solicitations or advertisements for employees placed by or on behalf of the grantee, shall state that all qualified applicants will receive compensation for employment without regard to race, creed, color, sex or national origin. (County code § 11-1.1327)

 

4.20.280 Incorporation of nondiscrimination provisions in contracts.
    The grantee shall incorporate the requirements of this article relating to nondiscrimination in all of its contracts for work relative to the construction, maintenance and operation of the cable communications system, other than contracts for standard commercial supplies or raw materials, and shall require all of its contractors for such work to incorporate such requirements in all subcontracts for such work. (County code § 11-1.1328)

 

Article II. Community Use Programming
4.20.290 Proposals.
    A.  The purpose of this section and Sections 4.20.300 through 4.20.330 is to permit applicants for each cable communications franchise to propose plans and resources for community use programming in order to permit the community to design, produce and present programming of local interest and to promote the educational, recreational and character-building opportunities of the viewing public.

    B.   An applicant who chooses not to make such a proposal shall not be disqualified from applying for consideration in the selection of the grantee. It is expressly declared that the factors upon which selection will be based are so numerous and subjective as to make it impossible to know in advance the relative importance of a determination by an applicant to either make or not to make such a proposal in relation to other factors upon which an award of the cable communications franchise will be based. (County code § 11-1.901)

 

4.20.300 Application.
    A.  Applicants for each franchise shall be authorized, alternatively, to propose in their applications:

    1.   No community use programming, by making no reference to community use programming therein; or

    2.   To propose community use programming in the form of and in accordance with that as described by Section 4.20.310.

    B.   An applicant who proposes community use programming in its application shall include in the application the following:

    1.   Any standard of criteria which will be utilized in connection with the following matters:

    a.   The time made available for and community use programming covering candidates for public elective offices during election campaigns;

    b.   Program quality control;

    c.   The legality of program content and the violation of the legal rights of others; and

    d.   Any and all preconditions of whatever kind or nature relating to use by third parties of studio facilities or production equipment and the broadcast of programming presented thereby; and

    2.   The establishment of an independent body proposed by the applicant to administer PEG programming and community use programming other than PEG programming produced by a public agency. Such a body shall not include any officer or employee of the city or a cable communications area advisory committee; nor shall such body include the appointment of officers, employees, governing bodies or city councils or committees of the city. Once formed or created, the body also shall not include any grantee nor any appointee by a grantee or representative of a grantee. Any such proposal shall specifically identify the following representing such a body:

    a.   The legal form of existence;

    b.   How the body will be established and who will be responsible for the establishment;

    c.   The size, composition and method of selection and appointment of the members;

    d.   The terms of the members and the grounds and procedures for the removal of members, if any;

    e.   The specific powers of the body in relation to the administration of community use programming and the means by which such will be exercised and enforced; and

    f.    The sources and amounts of funding for the support and operation of the body. (County code § 11-1.902)

 

4.20.310 Generally.
    A.  Community use programming constitutes a form of access opportunity to members of the general public to produce programming in separate studio facilities with minimal instructional assistance, direction and control by a grantee.

    B.   Applicants desiring to propose community use programming shall include the following within their applications:

    1.   The number of hours per week that one or more (specifying the number) channels on the subscriber network will be made available exclusively for the type of access use programming prescribed by this section;

    2.   If two or more channels are to be made available for such use, a specification of the tier or tiers of service in which all channels, except the one included in the basic services, will be placed;

    3.   A description of the location, nature and extent of the separate and independent studio facilities, production equipment, personnel resources and other resources to be provided in connection with such access use and community use programming, designed in such a manner as to permit operation by members of the public with minimal training and supervision;

    4.   A commitment to make the studio facilities, production equipment, personnel resources, other resources and channels available for use, program production and broadcasts a specified number of hours per day during the term of the franchise; the actual number of days per week and hours per day such resources will be available for use, program production and broadcasts being subject to regulation from time to time by the independent authority created pursuant to Section 4.20.300 (B)(2);

    5.   A commitment to operate and provide the studio facilities, production equipment, personnel resources, other resources, channel broadcast time and programming opportunity at the sole cost of the applicant without any charge whatsoever;

    6.   A statement of the nature and extent of all training to be offered by the applicant respecting the equipment, operation and training required as a condition of facility and equipment use and operation by members of the public; and

    7.   A commitment to allow the use of the studio facilities, production equipment, personnel resources, other resources and channels for the production and broadcast of community use programming by members of the general public, including individuals and local nonprofit community organizations, on a first-come first-served basis during the term of the franchise. (County code § 11-1.903)

 

4.20.320 PEG facilities—Programming—Funding.
    An applicant may, but shall not be required to, propose, in its application, PEG facilities, PEG programming or PEG funding. With respect to any such proposal, the application shall contain:

    A.  A description of the location, nature and extent of the PEG facilities, PEG programming, PEG funding and other PEG resources proposed to be made available by the applicant; and

    B.   A statement identifying the parties to whom PEG facilities and PEG funding will be made available by the grantee and whether the apportionment of such facilities and funding will be vested within the sole discretion of the applicant or determined in accordance with standards or criteria and, if so, a statement of all criteria, standards and requirements proposed to be utilized by the applicant in apportioning the PEG facilities and PEG programming should the demand therefor exceed the facilities and funding proposed by the grantee. (County code § 11-1.904)

 

4.20.330 Compliance with proposals.
    A grantee who has included within its application for the franchise a proposal for community use programming or PEG facilities, PEG programming or PEG funding pursuant to Sections 4.20.290 through 4.20.320 shall comply during the entire term of the franchise with all such commitments contained in its application and the ordinance offering the franchise, including, but not limited to, provision of the specified number of hours of community use programming and/or PEG programming pursuant to the terms and conditions stated, and provision of all studio facilities, production equipment, personnel resources and other resources identified for the uses specified pursuant to the terms and conditions stated. During such term, the grantee shall keep and maintain all such facilities, equipment and resources in good condition and repair and replace any and all such facilities, equipment and resources as necessary to fulfill the obligation that the foregoing be provided and maintained during the entire term of the franchise. The failure to comply with the commitments and obligations identified by this section shall constitute a material violation and breach of the franchise documents. (County code § 11-1.905)

 

4.20.340 Resources for public agencies.
    A.  Applicants for a franchise shall be authorized, but not required, to include within their applications proposals for services, resources or benefits to the city, including, but not limited to, free or discounted rates for subscriptions to services on the subscriber network or institutional network, channels or time thereon on the subscriber network or institutional network, electronic or other equipment, the use of the institutional network, staffing resources or other services and resources or benefits for improvement in the delivery of governmental services or efficiency of governmental operations. A grantee who has proposed such commitments in its application shall comply during the entire term of the franchise with all such commitments contained in its application and the ordinance offering the franchise pursuant to the terms and conditions stated therein, and the failure to provide such services resources or benefits pursuant to the terms and conditions stated shall constitute a material violation and breach of the franchise documents.

    B.   An applicant who chooses not to make such a proposal shall not be disqualified from bidding or consideration in selection of the grantee. It is expressly declared that the factors upon which selection will be based are so numerous and subjective as to make it impossible to know in advance the relative importance of a determination by an applicant to either make or not to make such a proposal in relation to other factors upon which an award of a franchise will be based. (County code § 11-1.906)

 

4.20.350 Resources for others.
    A.  Applicants for a franchise, for the purpose of promoting improvements in cable services to the community and influencing the motivation of the city to select the particular applicant as the grantee, may include within their applications the commitment of services resources or other benefits (including, but not limited to, ongoing financial support, channels or broadcast time thereon, personnel resources or facilities or equipment) to specifically identified parties other than the city. The application shall contain an identification of any such commitments, including a specific description of the nature and extent of all services, resources or benefits committed, the names and addresses of all parties to whom the commitments are made, all terms and conditions of the commitments, and copies of the legal instruments, such as contracts, leases, memoranda of understanding or other documents, by which the commitments, when accepted, and the documents executed by the recipients would be evidenced. Each such legal instrument shall contain provisions requiring that such services, resources or benefits be utilized exclusively for cultural, educational, scientific, character-building, recreational or public service purposes and prohibiting the utilization thereof for commercial purposes.

    B.   During the hearing conducted pursuant to the provisions of subsection E of Section 4.08.150, the city council shall:

    1.   Order such changes in the legal instruments by which the commitment of such services, resources or benefits are to be evidenced as are found necessary in order to fulfill the objectives and purposes of the application submitted by the tentative selectee without altering the nature or scope of the commitments made or direct the proposed recipients and tentative selectees to meet separately for the purpose of developing mutually acceptable changes in the legal instruments for later review and approval by the city council;

    2.   Approve as to form all legal instruments determined to be sufficient to adequately express the commitments and terms and conditions thereof; and

    3.   Determine which, if any, of such legal instruments are to be incorporated into the franchise documents made a part of the terms and conditions of the franchise and order such incorporation by reference to the instrument in the ordinance offering the franchise.

    C.   With respect to any legal instrument which is made a part of the franchise documents by reference in the ordinance offering the franchise, the violation and breach by the grantee of the obligations therein shall constitute a material violation and breach of the franchise documents. The obligations and prohibitions assumed by the recipient under such legal instruments by either the execution of the instruments or the acceptance of the services, resources or benefits committed shall be enforceable either by the grantee or the city. A violation and breach of the franchise documents by reference in the ordinance offering the franchise shall not constitute a violation or breach of the franchise documents. The incorporation of such a legal instrument into the franchise of any legal instrument which is made a part of the franchise documents by reference in the ordinance offering the franchise shall not obligate the city to fulfill any promise contained therein. Services, resources or benefits committed to specifically identified parties, other than the city, which are not evidenced by separate legal instruments included with the application shall not be considered in the selection process.

    D.  An applicant who chooses not to commit services, resources or benefits as authorized by this section shall not be disqualified from bidding or consideration in the selection of the grantee. It is expressly declared that the factors upon which selection will be based are so numerous and subjective as to make it impossible to know in advance the relative importance of a determination by an applicant to either make or not to make such proposals in relation to other factors upon which an award of a franchise will be based. (County code § 11-1.907)

Chapter 4.24 RATES AND CHARGES
4.24.010 Applicability.
    To the extent permitted by federal and state laws, the city council expressly reserves the right to take such action as is authorized by law to regulate the rates and charges associated with the providing of services under this title and any franchise issued pursuant to this title. (County code § 11-1.1401)

 

4.24.020 Separate rates.
    No rate established shall afford any undue preference or advantage among subscribers, but separate rates may be established for separate classes of subscribers and installation charges may reflect the increased cost of providing service to isolated or sparsely populated areas. (County code § 11-1.1407)

 

4.24.030 Termination of services.
    A grantee may require subscribers to the subscriber network to pay for each month of basic service in advance at the beginning of the month. Service shall not be terminated for delinquencies in making a monthly advance payment earlier than forty-five calendar days following the date upon which the advance payment is due, and monthly statements to subscribers shall provide notice of the grantee’s policy respecting the termination of service for delinquencies in making advance payments. With the foregoing exception, and except as otherwise expressly authorized by this chapter, a grantee, without advance approval by the city council, shall not require any other advance payment or deposit of any kind with respect to the provision of basic service to subscribers. (County code § 11-1.1408)

Chapter 4.28 COMPENSATION AND GUARANTEES
4.28.010 Franchise fees.
    For the use of the streets and for the purposes of providing revenue with which to defray the costs of regulation arising out of the issuance of franchises under this title, and promoting, assisting and financing community use programming, PEG programming and other cable services of a public character, each grantee shall pay franchise fees in the amount prescribed by Section 4.28.020. (County code § 11-1.1501)

 

4.28.020 Amount and payment of franchise fees.
    A.  During the term of each franchise, each grantee shall pay to the city an amount equal to five percent per year of the grantee’s annual gross revenues derived from the operation of the cable communications system.

    B.   Such fees shall be paid quarterly not later than August 1st, November 1st, February 1st and May 1st for the preceding three-month period ending, respectively, June 30th, September 30th, December 31st and March 31st. Not later than the date of each payment, each grantee shall file with the city clerk a written statement, signed under penalty of perjury by an officer of the grantee, which identifies in detail the sources and amounts of gross revenues received by a grantee during the quarter for which the payment is made.

    C.   No acceptance of any payment shall be construed as an accord that the amount paid is, in fact, the correct amount, nor shall such acceptance of payment be construed as a release of any claim which the city may have for further or additional sums payable under the provisions of this chapter. (County code § 11-1502)

 

4.28.030 Future laws.
    A.  The city does not have or expect in the foreseeable future to receive sufficient funds with which to defray the costs of administering and regulating cable communications franchises within the city. The ability to finance such costs through franchise fees pursuant to the provisions of Section 4.28.020 constitutes a material inducement to initiate a cable communications program within the community, because the city would not be willing to reduce or eliminate other public programs in order to make public funds available with which to defray the costs of administering and regulating the cable communications program.

    B.   Therefore, should any future law or regulation limit or prevent the city from imposing a franchise fee in the amount provided for in this chapter, each grantee shall make a good faith effort to obtain any possible waiver or permission to pay the full amounts provided for in this chapter and, to the extent such future law or regulation permits a grantee discretion to make the limitation or prohibition applicable or inapplicable, each grantee shall elect to make the limitation or prohibition inapplicable.

    C.   The failure of the city to receive the fees prescribed by Sections 4.28.010 and 4.28.020, and as otherwise permitted by law, shall constitute a substantial and material failure to comply with the franchise documents. (County code § 11-1.1503)

 

4.28.040 Auditing and financial records.
    A.  The city finance director, from time to time during the term of a franchise, may prescribe standards governing the nature, extent and type of accounting system and accounting procedures utilized by a grantee, and require changes in accounting standards or procedures utilized by a grantee for the purpose of promoting the efficient administration of the franchise pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. Any such standards shall be in writing, shall be filed with the city clerk and shall be mailed to the grantee to whom directed. A grantee shall promptly comply with all such standards.

    B.   During the term of each franchise, the city, not more frequently than once each year, may conduct an audit of the books, records and accounts of the grantee for the purpose of determining whether the grantee has paid franchise fees in the amounts prescribed by Section 4.28.020. The audit may be conducted by the city finance director or by an independent certified public accounting firm retained by the city, and shall be conducted at the sole expense of the city. The party conducting the audit shall prepare a written report containing its findings, and the report shall be filed with the city clerk. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, the city shall conduct such an audit at any time if requested to do so by the city. The cost of such an audit so requested shall be borne by and at the sole expense of the city and the cost shall be paid within thirty calendar days following the receipt of the billing therefor by the city. The report of the audit shall be filed and mailed as prescribed in this section.

    C.   At any time during the term of a franchise the city, through its finance director or a certified public accounting firm which it retains, and at its sole expense, may conduct an audit of the books, records and accounts of the grantee for the purpose of identifying any information which the city council deems necessary to obtain for the purpose of administering the franchise under the provisions of this title. A written report of such audit shall be filed with the city clerk and mailed to the grantee. The grantee shall comply with any recommendations or directives set forth in such report respecting changes in its accounting system.

    D.  Each grantee shall make available for inspection by authorized representatives of the city its books, accounts and all other financial records at reasonable times and upon reasonable advance notice for the purpose of permitting the exercise of the authorities conferred by this section. (County code § 11-1.1504)

 

4.28.050 Delinquent fees—Limitations—Damages.
    The period of limitation for the recovery of any franchise fees payable pursuant to the provisions of Section 4.28.020 of this article shall be five years after the date on which payment by the grantee is due. Unless within five years after the date the city initiates recovery pursuant to the provisions of Section 4.28.060, recovery shall be barred. Delinquent franchise fees shall bear interest at an annual rate equivalent to that Federal Reserve Discount Rate on advances to member banks in effect on January 2nd, April 1st, July 1st and October 1st for the succeeding quarter of delinquency. The interest shall be compounded quarterly at the end of each quarter. In addition to interest as prescribed in this section, a ten percent per annum penalty shall be paid on all delinquent franchise fees in recognition of the fact that fluctuating interest rates on borrowed funds make it impossible to establish a reliable interest rate standard as a measure of damages for delinquencies in the payment of franchise fees and other elements of damages resulting from delinquencies, such as the inadequacy of revenue with which to adequately administer and enforce the franchise, arising out of such delinquencies are subjective and impossible to estimate. (County code § 11-1.1505)

 

4.28.060 Delinquent fees—Arbitration.
    A.  In the event a grantee fails to pay franchise fees pursuant to Section 4.28.020 or the city council determines that a grantee has paid franchise fees in a lower amount or amounts than prescribed, written notice thereof shall be mailed to the grantee. The notice shall show the basis for the determination that fees are owing and the amount thereof, if known, and may show the amount of interest and penalties accumulated to date.

    B.   Within thirty calendar days following the date of the mailing of such notice, the grantee may pay any amount stated in the notice, plus interest and penalties, without protest. Any payment made without the accompaniment of a written statement of protest shall constitute a waiver of the right to request arbitration or other relief respecting any and all amounts so paid.

    C.   Within thirty calendar days following the date of the mailing of such notice, the grantee, alternatively, may file a written request for arbitration with the city clerk objecting to the payment, and specifically identifying why an objection is made, and wherein the grantee disagrees with the determination. At the time of filing such a request for arbitration, the grantee may deposit with the city, under protest, any amount, including interest and penalties, which the grantee estimates to be in dispute. Any such deposit shall be accompanied by a written statement by the grantee stating that the amount deposited is pursuant to protest and a request for arbitration. From and after the date of any such deposit, interest and penalties on such amount shall accrue subsequent to the date of the deposit. In the event it is finally determined that the whole or any portion of an amount so deposited under protest was not owing by the grantee, such amount, without interest, shall be credited against and reduce the amount of the franchise fees which become owing by the grantee subsequent to the date of such final determination; provided, however, no such future payment shall be reduced as such a credit by an amount greater than ten percent of the franchise fee payment otherwise owing; and provided further, in no event shall the city become or be liable to the grantee for the reimbursement of any portion of an amount so deposited under protest, except as a credit against any future franchise fees which become owing.

    D.  If the notice to the grantee by the city shows the amount of franchise fees owing, including interest and penalties, the city council’s determination shall become final and conclusive, not subject to judicial review or reversal by any authority and judicially enforceable, unless the grantee requests arbitration within the time and in the manner prescribed in this chapter.

    E.   If the grantee fails to either pay the franchise fees without protest or requests arbitration, and if the notice by the city does not specify the amount of franchise fees, including interest and penalties, owing, or if the grantee pays an amount without protest, and the city council disagrees that the amount paid is the amount owing, the city council, at its sole discretion, may request arbitration by mailing a written notice of its election to arbitrate to the grantee.

    F.   If arbitration is requested, the arbitration panel shall be selected, the hearing scheduled within the time prescribed, notice given, the hearing conducted, a decision made and the costs divided in the manner prescribed by Sections 4.44.140 through 4.44.190. The discovery provisions of the California Arbitration Act (Sections 1280, et seq., of the Code of Civil Procedure of the state) shall be applicable to the arbitration proceedings under this chapter. The questions which may be submitted to the arbitration panel and the jurisdiction of the arbitration panel shall be limited to the following:

    1.   The interpretation of the provisions of the franchise documents solely in relation to the decision required by subsection G of this section; and

    2.   The amount, if any, owing by the grantee.

    G.  the grantee shall immediately pay any amount determined to be owing by the arbitration panel. The arbitration award may be judicially enforced, shall be final, binding and conclusive upon the parties and shall not be subject to judicial review or vacation, except on the grounds set forth in Section 1286.2 of the Code of Civil Procedure of the state. (County code § 11-1.1506)

 

4.28.070 Increases in franchise fees—Arbitration.
    A.  The amount of the franchise fees prescribed by Section 4.28.020 has been established pursuant to limitations set forth in Section 602 of the Act.

    B.   In the event such limitations upon the amount of franchise fees, during the term of any franchise issued pursuant to the provisions of this title, should be increased or eliminated, the grantee, upon a request by the city, shall enter into negotiations with the city for the purpose of formulating a mutually agreeable increase in the franchise fees prescribed by Section 4.28.020.

    C.   Any agreement relating to such an increase shall be embodied in a written contract between the city and the grantee, which shall amend Section 4.28.020 respecting the amount of the fees. If, within ninety calendar days following the date of a request by the city for negotiations, mutual agreement has not been reached respecting an amendment of the provisions of Section 4.28.020 increasing the fees, the city council may cause written notice of its request to arbitrate to be mailed to each concerned grantee and the city. The notice shall specifically identify the amount of increase in fees which the city council desires to submit to arbitration and shall describe the nature and amount of uncompensated costs which the city incurs or desires to incur in administering the franchise or franchises and promoting, assisting and regulating the various types of access use.

    D.  The arbitration panel shall be selected, the hearing scheduled within the time prescribed, notice given, the hearing conducted, a decision made and the costs divided in the manner prescribed by Sections 4.44.140 through 4.44.190. Parties to the arbitration proceeding may include each grantee who would be affected by an amendment of Section 4.28.020 and the city. The questions which may be submitted to the arbitration panel and the jurisdiction of the panel shall be limited to:

    1.   The interpretation of the provisions of the franchise documents solely in relation to the determination required by subsection E of this section; and

    2.   The amount, if any, by which the franchise fees prescribed by Section 4.28.020 may be increased.

    E.   The arbitration panel shall authorize an increase in the franchise fees by an amount which the panel finds is justified by actual (including past uncompensated) or proposed costs incurred by the city in administering each franchise issued pursuant to the provisions of Sections 4.20.290 through 4.20.330; provided, that the annual franchise fee shall under no circumstances exceed ten percent per year of a grantee’s annual gross revenues. In the event more than one franchise is issued pursuant to the provisions of this title, the arbitration panel shall establish such an amount with respect to each grantee. Any increase ordered by the arbitration panel shall amend the provisions of Section 4.28.020 respecting the amount of fees. The city shall be authorized to amend Section 4.28.020 by increasing the franchise fees by any amount authorized under the decision of the arbitration panel.

    F.   Negotiations and arbitration proceedings pursuant to this chapter may be initiated by the city not more frequently than once each year during the remainder of the term of any franchise issued pursuant to the provisions of this title following the increase of or elimination of the statutory and regulatory limitations upon the amount of franchise fees which may be charged under state and federal laws.

    G.  The arbitration award pursuant to this chapter may be judicially enforced, shall be final, binding and conclusive upon the parties and shall not be subject to judicial review or vacation, except on the grounds set forth in Section 1286.2 of the Code of Civil Procedure of the state. (County code § 11-1.1507)

 

4.28.080 Performance bonds.
    A.  Each grantee shall file with the certificate of acceptance which it files pursuant to the provisions of Section 4.08.180, and at all times thereafter maintain in full force and effect, an acceptable corporate surety bond in the amount of seven hundred fifty thousand dollars, effective for the entire term of the franchise, and conditioned that in the event the grantee shall fail to comply with any one or more of the provisions of the franchise documents, whether or not the franchise is terminated, then there shall be recoverable jointly and severally from the principal and surety of such bond any damages suffered by the city as a result thereof, including, but not limited to, the full amount of any liquidated damages, delinquent franchise fees, compensation and costs of repairing or completing the cable communications system and compensation and costs of the removal or abandonment of property, and the repair of streets and other public or private improvements, up to the full amount of the bond. Such condition shall be a continuing obligation for the duration of the franchise and thereafter until the grantee has satisfied all of its obligations which may have arisen from the acceptance of the franchise or from its exercise of any privileges thereunder. Neither the provisions of this chapter, any bond accepted pursuant thereto, nor any damages recovered thereunder shall be construed to excuse faithful performance by the grantee or to limit the liability of the grantee under the franchise or for damages, either to the full amount of the bond or otherwise. The bond shall contain a provision which prohibits cancellation by the surety during the term of the franchise, whether for failure to pay a premium or otherwise, without thirty calendar days’ advance written notice mailed by the surety to the city clerk.

    B.   The form of the bond and surety shall be subject to approval by the city attorney.

    C.   On or after the date of the issuance of the final order of completion pursuant to the provisions of Sections 4.12.010 or 4.12.020, the city council, in its sole discretion, may reduce, for the remainder of the term of the franchise, the required amount of the bond to a sum not less than two hundred fifty thousand dollars. (County code § 11-1.1508)

 

4.28.090 Security deposits.
    A.  Each grantee shall file with the certificate of acceptance which it files pursuant to the provisions of Section 4.08.180 a certified or cashier’s check in the amount of five dollars for each dwelling to be served, made payable to the order of the city. The check shall be cashed and the proceeds retained by the city finance director in a special account. Such sum shall be maintained by the city finance director as security for the faithful performance by the grantee of all the provisions of the franchise documents, any damages, including, but not limited to, liquidated damages, delinquent franchise fees, compensation and costs of completing or repairing the cable communications system, and compensation and costs of the removal of abandoned property and the repair of streets and other public or private improvements incurred as a result of the failure of the grantee to comply with the provisions of the franchise documents, and shall be payable from the account upon the terms, conditions and under the procedures prescribed by Section 4.28.020. Interest earned upon the sum shall accrue to the credit of the account; provided, however, the city shall pay to the grantee any sums in the account in excess of the amount required for the original deposit.

    B.   Within ten calendar days after notice is mailed to the grantee that any amount has been withdrawn from the special account, the grantee shall deposit with the city finance director such sum as may be necessary to restore the account to its required amount.

    C.   On the date of the issuance of the final order of completion pursuant to Section 4.12.010 or 4.12.020, the city shall reduce the amount of such security deposit by paying so much thereof to the grantee as will reduce the amount of the deposit retained to two dollars and fifty cents for each dwelling to be served, unless on the date there are scheduled or pending, or intended to be scheduled or pending, proceedings relating to the alleged violation by the grantee of any of the provisions of Section 4.12.020. In such event, the reduction shall not occur and payment shall not be made until such proceedings are terminated and any damages determined to be owing compensated. Subsequent to such reduction and payment, such deposit shall be maintained at two dollars and fifty cents plus interest accumulations credited thereto during the remainder of the term of the franchise.

    D.  Upon the termination of the franchise and the satisfaction of any damages, including liquidated damages which may be due, the balance of the special account, including all interest credited thereto, shall be returned to the grantee.

    E.   The rights reserved with respect to the special account are in addition to all rights of the city, whether reserved by the franchise documents or authorized by law and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right with respect to such account shall affect any other right which the city may have; nor shall the amount of the special account constitute a monetary limit on the liability for any actual or liquidated damages resulting from a breach of the franchise documents. (County code § 11-1.1509)

 

4.28.100 Indemnification by grantees.
    A.  Each grantee, at its sole expense, shall fully indemnify, defend and hold harmless the city and, in their capacity as such, the officers, agents and employees thereof, from and against any and all claims, suits, actions, liability and judgments for damages or otherwise:

    1.   For actual or alleged injuries to persons or property, including the loss or use of property due to an occurrence, whether or not such property is physically damaged or destroyed, in any way arising out of or through, or alleged to arise out of or through, the acts or omissions of the grantee or its officers, agents, employees or contractors, or to which the grantee’s or its officers, agents, employees or contractors, acts or omissions in any way contribute;

    2.   Arising out of, or alleged to arise out of, any claim for damages for invasion of the right of privacy, defamation of any person, firm or corporation, or the violation or infringement of any copyright, trademark, trade name, service mark or patent, or of any other right of any person, firm or corporation; and

    3.   Arising out of, or alleged to arise out of, the grantee’s failure to comply with the provisions of any statute, regulation or ordinance of the United States, state or any local agency applicable to the grantee in its business.

    B.   The indemnification and hold harmless provisions of this section shall include those prescribed by Section 4.20.090.

    C.   Nothing set forth in this chapter shall prevent the parties indemnified and held harmless from participating in the defense of any litigation by their own counsel at the grantee’s sole expense. Such participation shall not under any circumstances relieve the grantee from its duty of defense against liability or of paying any judgment entered against such party. (County code § 11-1.1510)

 

4.28.110 Public liability and property damage insurance.
    The grantee at all times shall maintain in full force and effect a policy of insurance in such form as the city may require, executed by an insurance company authorized to write the required insurance and approved by the Insurance Commissioner of the state, insuring the payment of any sum which the grantee or the city, or its officers, boards, commissioners, agents and employees, may become obligated to pay by reason of any liability imposed upon them by law for damages because of personal injury or death, or injury to or destruction of property that may result to any person or property arising out of the construction, operation or maintenance of any facilities pursuant to a franchise. The sums, payment of which shall be so insured, shall not be less than two million dollars combined single limits, including bodily injury liability and property damage liability. Such policy of insurance shall be filed with the city council and approved as required by city ordinance. (County code § 11-1.1511)

 

4.28.120 Workers’ compensation insurance.
    Upon being granted a franchise and upon the filing of the acceptance required under Section 4.08.180, the grantee shall file with the city clerk and shall thereafter, during the entire term of such franchise, maintain in full force and effect workers’ compensation insurance coverage in at least the minimum amounts required by law. If a grantee shall fail to obtain or maintain such required insurance coverage, the city, without notice to the grantee, may obtain at the grantee’s sole expense such coverage or forthwith terminate, without prior notice, the franchise as granted. (County code § 11-1.1512)

 

4.28.130 Waivers of subrogation.
    Each grantee shall cause each insurance policy obtained by it to provide that the insurance company waives all right of recovery by way of subrogation against the city and, in their capacities as such, the officers, agents and employees thereof, in connection with any damage covered by any policy. The city and, in their capacities as such, the officers, agents and employees thereof, shall not be liable to the grantee for any damage caused by any of the risks insured against under an insurance policy obtained by the grantee. (County code § 11-1.1513)

Chapter 4.32 CABLE COMMUNICATIONS ADVISORY COMMITTEES
4.32.010 Policy.
    It is the policy of the city to create:

    A.  An ad hoc cable communications advisory committee to advise the city council as to the granting of any cable communications franchise; and

    B.   Cable communications area advisory commissions for each franchise area to advise the city council as to the operation, renewal and replacement of any cable communications franchise. (County code § 11-1.501)

 

4.32.020 Ad hoc committees.
    The city council may create an ad hoc cable communications advisory committee of such composition as it may choose, to serve at its pleasure, to advise it on such matters as it may prescribe. The city council may prescribe advice as to the following:

    A.  Whether to grant a franchise;

    B.   Whether to grant or deny an application for a franchise;

    C.   Whether to issue a request for proposals and as to the contents of a request for proposals;

    D.  The evaluation of responses to a request for proposals;

    E.   Matters related to the negotiation of franchise documents; and

    F.   Amendments to this title. (County code § 11-1.502)

 

4.32.030 Establishment.
    The city council may establish a commission for each franchise area in which the city council grants a cable communications franchise. The city council may act as the commission, or designate an appropriate existing advisory board, commission or committee to serve as the commission for a particular franchise area; otherwise the city council shall establish a commission as set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 90-24 § 1(A): county code § 11-1.503)

 

4.32.040 Appointment—Term.
    A.  Five of the seven regular members of each board and commission shall be appointed and have the term of office as follows:

    1.   Each member of the city council shall appoint one regular member, subject to ratification of the city council;

    2.   Each member’s term of office shall be for two years commencing on September 1st of an even-numbered year and ending on September 1st of the next even-numbered year, except that the initial appointment may be at a time other than September 1st and may be for more than two years and shall expire on September 1st of the next even-numbered year after appointment. Subsequent appointments or reappointments by members of the city council shall be made every two years, prior to September 1st of each even-numbered year.

    B.   The remaining two of the seven regular members of the commission shall be appointed by the city council for a two-year term commencing on September 1st of an even-numbered year and ending on September 1st of the next even-numbered year, except that the initial appointments may be at a time other than September 1st and may be for more than two years and shall expire on September 1st of the next even-numbered year after appointments. Subsequent appointments or reappointments shall be made by the city council every two years, prior to September 1st of each even-numbered year.

    C.   There shall be no maximum length on the number of terms that may be served by a single person.

    D.  A regular member of the commission shall hold office unless and until:

    1.   The commission member submits his or her written resignation;

    2.   The commission member is removed pursuant to Section 4.32.070;

    3.   The death of the commission member; or

    4.   On or after September 1st of an even-numbered year, the commission member’s successor has been appointed and has taken the oath of office.

    E.   A vacancy on a board or commission shall be filled in the same manner as provided for the regular appointment of the particular seat on the commission. A person appointed to fill a vacancy shall serve until the next September 1st of an even-numbered year. (Ord. 90-24 § 1(B): county code § 11-1.504)

 

4.32.060 Organization.
    The following general organizational requirements shall apply to the commission:

    A.  The commission shall organize and adopt rules of procedure to govern the conduct of its meetings. Such rules shall be consistent with applicable provisions of the state and federal law and city ordinance;

    B.   At the first meeting of each calendar year, the commission shall elect, by majority vote, one of its members as chair and one as vice-chair, each to serve a one-year term;

    C.   The commission, by resolution, shall provide for the time, place and manner for holding regular and special meetings;

    D.  A majority of the members of the commission shall constitute a quorum of that commission. Unless otherwise required by law, a majority of the quorum is required to act on any item. (Ord. 90-24 § 1(D): county code § 11-1.506)

 

4.32.070 Removal from office.
    A.  Each regular member of the commission appointed pursuant to Section 4.32.040(A) shall serve at the pleasure of the councilmember, and his or her successor, who appointed such regular member. Each regular member appointed pursuant to Section 4.32.040(B) shall serve at the pleasure of the city council.

    B.   A regular member of the commission appointed pursuant to Section 4.32.040 may be removed from office at any time with or without cause by the councilmember, or his or her successor, who appointed such regular member.

    C.   A regular member of a board or commission appointed pursuant to Section 4.32.040 may be removed from office at any time with or without cause by a four-fifths vote of the city council.

    D.  A regular member of a board or commission will automatically be removed from office if such member has three unexcused absences. (Ord. 90-24 § 1(E): county code § 11-1.507)

 

4.32.080 Meetings—Minutes.
    A copy of the minutes of each meeting of a commission shall be filed with the city clerk. (County code § 11-1.508)

 

4.32.100 City liaison.
    A department designated by the city council shall have the responsibility for providing coordination and liaison between any cable communications advisory commission and the city, and the director or director’s designee of such department shall serve as secretary of each commission. (County code § 11-1.510)

 

4.32.110 Duties.
    The duties and responsibilities of each commission shall be to make recommendations to the city council concerning the following:

    A.  The renewal of a franchise pursuant to Section 4.08.200;

    B.   Exercise of the authority pursuant to Section 4.36.010 to purchase a system;

    C.   Orders for repairs or other matters pursuant to Section 4.16.170;

    D.  The operation of any independent body established to administer community use programming as provided in Section 4.20.300;

    E.   The issuance of the final order of completion pursuant to Section 4.12.150;

    F.   Complaints and excuses for violations made pursuant to Sections 4.12.180 and 4.12.190;

    G.  The regulation of nonentertainment services pursuant to Section 4.20.050;

    H.  The production or elimination of educational and entertainment services pursuant to Section 4.20.060;

    I.    The regulation of educational and entertainment services pursuant to Section 4.20.070;

    J.    Evaluations conducted pursuant to Section 4.20.200;

    K.  Regulations pursuant to Section 4.20.210;

    L.   Any action taken by the city council as to rates pursuant to Chapter 4.24;

    M.  The assignments and transfers pursuant to Chapter 4.40; and

    N.  Any matter upon which a recommendation is sought by the city council. (County code § 11-1.511)

Chapter 4.36 PURCHASE OF SYSTEMS
4.36.010 Authority to purchase systems.
    The city or its designee shall have the right to purchase real and personal property as described by Section 4.36.020 which property is owned or in which an interest is held by the grantee, any parent company of the grantee, any subsidiary of the grantee or any other entity in which the grantee or its parent company or its subsidiary, has a financial interest and which is utilized to provide service under the franchise. Such right shall not arise except, and shall be exercisable under, the following circumstances:

    A.  In the event of the termination of a franchise in advance of the expiration of its terms pursuant to the provisions of Sections 4.44.080 through 4.44.120; or

    B.   At the expiration of the term of a franchise, if the franchise is not renewed to the grantee by the city pursuant to the provisions of Section 4.08.200. (County code § 11-1.701)

 

4.36.020 Scope of purchases.
    A.  The property which is subject to purchase by the city shall consist of the following:

    1.   The cable communications system;

    2.   Land, buildings and other improvements situated within the exterior boundaries of the city (including both incorporated and unincorporated areas) and utilized by the grantee to provide services under the franchise, including studio facilities;

    3.   Cameras and other studio production equipment, mobile production equipment, vehicles for services and repairs, inventories of materials, supplies and parts, tools and other personal property dedicated for use within the city to provide services under the franchise and which the city council determines is peculiarly designed for that purpose; and

    4.   Books, accounts and records relating to the grantee’s business, including subscriber lists.

    B.   There shall be excluded from the purchase of any parcel of land and improvements or leasehold, space which is utilized exclusively for business office purposes and not, for example, repair purposes associated with the operation of the cable communications system.

    C.   Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary, the city council, in its sole discretion, shall have the right to exclude from the purchase any real property (including improvements thereon) upon which no component of the cable communications system is situated and which the city council determines is not essential to the system or the provision of services thereunder. (County code § 11-1.702)

 

4.36.030 Assignments.
The right to purchase as prescribed by Section 4.36.010 may be exercised by the city for public ownership and use by the city in behalf of a third party or by any party to whom the city may assign the right to purchase to any third party at any time prior to payment for the purchase and transfer of titles. Written notice of any such assignment shall be mailed to the grantee. Such an assignee, subsequent to the date of assignment, shall be vested with any and all discretion respecting the purchase which is vested in the city council. The city may condition the grant of a franchise upon agreement by the grantee to accept the assignment of and to exercise a right to purchase the real and personal property of an existing grantee. (County code § 11-1.703)

 

4.36.040 Valuation definitions.
    A.  As used in this section and Sections 4.36.050 through 4.36.110, and to the extent consistent with Section 627 of the Act, the following terms shall be ascribed the meanings set forth in this section:

    “Fair market value” shall mean the price in terms of money which a property will bring in a competitive and open market under all conditions requisite to a fair sale, the buyer and seller each acting prudently, knowledgeably, and assuming the price is not affected by undue stimulus.

    “Going concern value” shall mean the benefits which attach to the business as a result of its location within the franchise area, the grantee’s reputation among subscribers or potential subscribers for dependability and quality of service, and any other circumstances resulting in the probable retention of old subscribers or the acquisition of new subscribers; provided, however, no value shall be assigned to either the franchise itself or any right, privilege or expectancy arising to the grantee out of the right to transact business under the franchise, and particularly no value shall be allowed for any increase in value arising out of any expectation of revenues from the cable communications system beyond the termination date or expiration date of the franchise, whichever is sooner.

    B.   Except to the extent inconsistent with the express provisions of this section and Sections 4.36.050 through 4.36.110, the words of this section shall be ascribed the meanings and the appraisal and valuation standards, methodology, approaches and processes respecting the determination of the amount to be paid for property which the city council or its assignee is entitled to purchase and shall comply with and be consistent with those set forth in that 1975 publication entitled “Real Estate and Urban Economic Studies at the University of Connecticut,” compiled and edited by Byrl N. Boyce, Ph.D., sponsored jointly by the American Institute of Real Estate Appraisers and the Society of Real Estate Appraisers. (County code § 11-1.704)

 

4.36.050 Valuation limits.
    The property which is purchased shall be valued at its fair market value determined in accordance with subsection (a) of Section 627 of the Act and Section 4.36.040 of this chapter. (County code § 11-1.705)

 

4.36.060 Date of valuation.
    The date of valuation for purchases pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be the day immediately following the date of the expiration or termination of the franchise. (County code § 11-1.706)

 

4.36.070 Requests for inventories.
    Proceedings for the acquisition by the city or its assignee under this chapter shall be commenced by a written notice mailed to the grantee of a request by the city or its assignee for an inventory of the grantee’s property. Such a notice shall not be mailed earlier than the following dates:

    A.  The date a determination by the city council to terminate the franchise becomes final under Section 4.44.100 or 4.44.110 when the purchase is made pursuant to the contingency prescribed by Section 4.36.010(A); or

    B.   The date of a determination made by the city council not to renew the franchise or the date renewal is deemed denied, when the purchase is made pursuant to the contingency prescribed by Section 4.36.010. (County code § 11-1.707)

 

4.36.080 Inventories.
    Not later than thirty calendar days after the date of the mailing of the notice of a request for an inventory, the grantee shall file with the city clerk a written inventory which shall include the following:

    A.  A complete plan, with specifications, of the entire cable communications system installed at any time during the term of the franchise;

    B.   An identification of all real property which is subject to the right of acquisition by the city or its assignee, showing the address and the legal descriptions thereof, and including a description of all buildings (including the square footage thereof) and other improvements thereon;

    C.   A list of all cameras and other studio production equipment; mobile production equipment; office and other furnishings; vehicles for services and repairs; inventories of materials, supplies and parts; tools; and other personal property utilized within the community to provide services under the franchise (such lists shall show the manufacturers model and serial numbers, dates of manufacture and dates of acquisition of such property); and

    D.  Copies of all leases, chattel and other mortgages, and other instruments evidencing an interest by any third party in any of the property identified by this section. (County code § 11-1.708)

 

4.36.090 Demands for arbitration.
    Not later than thirty calendar days after the date on which the grantee files the inventory, the city or its assignee may mail to the grantee written notice of its tentative intention to exercise its right to purchase, including a list of all property which the city or its assignee has tentatively elected to purchase, and a demand for arbitration. (County code § 11-1.709)

 

4.36.100 Arbitration of value.
    A.  The arbitration panel shall be selected, the hearing scheduled within the time prescribed, notice given, the hearing conducted, a decision made and the costs divided in the manner prescribed by Sections 4.44.140 through 4.44.190. The grantee shall make its cable communications system, other property and books, accounts and other records available, upon request, for inspection by the city or its assignee or their experts. The discovery provisions of the California Arbitration Act (Sections 1280, et seq., of the Code of Civil Procedure of the state) shall be applicable to the arbitration proceedings under this section.

    B.   The questions which may be submitted to the arbitration panel and the jurisdiction of the panel shall be limited to the following:

    1.   The amount to be paid by the city or its assignee under the valuation limits prescribed by Section 4.36.050; and

    2.   An interpretation of the provisions of the franchise documents solely in relation to the issues within its jurisdiction.

    C.   Upon a request by the city or its assignee or the grantee or upon its own initiative, the arbitration panel shall appoint and retain one or more independent experts for the purpose of providing advice upon the valuation issues to be determined.

    D.  The arbitration award may be judicially enforced, shall be final, binding and conclusive upon the parties, and shall not be subject to Section 1286.2 of the Code of Civil Procedure of the state. (County code § 11-1.710)

 

4.36.110 Subsequent valuations.
    With respect to any proceeding in which the arbitration panel makes valuation determinations in advance of the termination or expiration of the franchise, the same panel shall be available to receive and determine values for any additions to, replacements of or other acquisitions of property tentatively elected to be purchased which have occurred subsequent to the award made pursuant to Section 4.36.100. Such determination shall be initiated by a written notice mailed to the arbitration panel by the grantee and filed with the city clerk and shall be governed by all the standards, procedures and other provisions of Sections 4.36.040 through 4.36.100 and this section and written recital thereof shall be mailed to the grantee, city clerk and the city’s assignee (if any) not later than ninety calendar days following the date of the mailing of the notice initiating the determination. No such notice shall be mailed or filed later than one hundred twenty calendar days prior to the date of the expiration or termination of the franchise. (County code § 11-1.711)

 

4.36.120 Judicial relief.
    In the event a grantee or the city or its assignee fails to comply with any provision contained in Sections 4.36.010 through 4.36.130, the injured party shall be authorized to either seek judicial relief or relief from the arbitrator during the arbitration proceedings. In the event judicial relief is sought, the provisions of Sections 4.36.100 and 4.36.110 shall not deprive the court of jurisdiction to interpret the provisions of this chapter, and any such interpretation shall be binding upon the arbitrator. (County code § 11-1.712)

 

4.36.130 Sales—Transfers of title.
    A.  No later than thirty calendar days following the date of the expiration or termination of a franchise, the city or its assignee shall notify the grantee of its intention to purchase the property identified in the notice mailed pursuant to the provisions of Section 4.36.090. The purchase price shall be the value as determined by the arbitration panel. The election to purchase shall be evidenced by a written notice so stating mailed to the grantee not later than thirty calendar days following the date of the expiration or termination of the franchise. The failure to mail such notice within the time prescribed in this section shall conclusively be presumed to constitute an election not to purchase the property pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and the grantee shall not be entitled to any compensation for such property or other costs or proceedings or otherwise. If any notice, memorandum or report required by Section 4.36.100 or 4.36.110 has not been received by the date of the expiration or termination of the franchise, the notice of election required by this section need not be mailed until thirty calendar days following the date of the receipt of such notice, memorandum or report.

    B.   The purchase price shall be deposited into an escrow of a title company named by the city or its assignee. The title company shall be authorized to pay the purchase price as directed by the grantee when it can provide for the city or its assignee grant deeds with respect to real property, bills of sale with respect to personal property or other evidences of title vesting insured title in the city or its assignee free and clear of all liens and encumbrances, except easements and rights-of-way respecting the real property which do not impair its use for the purposes intended, and assignments of leases, if any, with respect to real or personal property which is leased. The seller or sellers shall pay all title insurance, recording, escrow and closing fees and costs. (County code § 11-1.713)

 

4.36.140 Negotiated acquisitions.
    The provisions shall not preclude acquisition by the city or its assignee through a negotiated agreement; provided, however, the commencement or existence of such negotiations shall not waive or relieve any actions or times therefore prescribed by Sections 4.36.080 through 4.36.130. (County code § 11-1.714)

 

4.36.150 Policy for financing purchases.
    It is the policy of the city that no territory or subscriber not served by a franchise shall bear the financial burden of any purchase made pursuant to this chapter. (County code § 11-1.715)

Chapter 4.40 ASSIGNMENTS AND TRANSFERS OF SYSTEMS
4.40.010 Transfers restricted.
    A.  Except as provided by either Section 4.40.020 or 4.40.030, no part or element of a cable communications system or any other real or personal property which is mandatorily included by Section 4.36.020 within a purchase which the city or its assignee is authorized to make shall be sold, transferred, assigned, mortgaged, pledged, leased, sublet or otherwise encumbered for any purpose whatsoever, nor shall title thereto, either legal or equitable, or any right or interest therein, pass to or vest in any party.

    B.   Except as provided by either Section 4.40.020 or 4.40.030, a franchise issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, either in whole or in part, shall not be sold, transferred, assigned, mortgaged, pledged, leased, sublet or otherwise encumbered for any purpose whatsoever; nor shall title thereto, either legal or equitable, or any right or interest therein, pass to or vest in any party.

    C.   Any such sale, transfer, assignment, mortgage, pledge, lease, sublease or other encumbrance of whatever kind or nature made in violation of the provisions of this section shall be void. (County code § 11-1.1601)

 

4.40.020 Encumbrances for financing purposes.
    A.  Upon a written application by a grantee, the lender, and any and all signators or guarantors upon the proposed loan, the city council, in its sole discretion, from time to time, may consent by duly adopted resolution to the sale, transfer, assignment, mortgage, pledge, lease, sublease or other encumbrance upon real or personal property mandatorily included by Section 4.36.020 within a purchase which the city or its assignee is authorized to make, or upon a franchise issued pursuant to the provisions of this title, for the purpose of securing a loan or capital or constituting a purchase money security interest. Such information concerning the identity and background of the lender, terms of the transaction, intended expenditure of the capital, and other matters relating to the transaction shall be provided as is required by the city council or its authorized representative. If, in its sole discretion, the city council elects to approve such encumbrance or encumbrances, such approval may be granted upon such terms and conditions as the city council determines to be appropriate, including, but not limited to, the following:

    1.   The purpose for which the capital to which the encumbrance relates will be utilized, including guarantees relating to the expenditure or disposition of such capital;

    2.   The terms and conditions of the encumbrance instruments relating to such matters as default and the rights of the lender and successors in interest in relation thereto;

    3.   The amount of the encumbrance and types of properties encumbered;

    4.   The subordination of the encumbrance to the rights of the city, under the franchise, consistent with the terms and conditions of the encumbrance approved by the city council; and

    5.   An agreement by any party in whose name the loan secured by the encumbrance is made or any signator or guarantor thereon to be bound by the terms, conditions, provisions and requirements of the franchise documents, in addition to the party or parties in whose names the franchise is issued by the franchise agreement and certificate of acceptance.

    B.   The city council by resolution shall be authorized to delegate its power to consent in writing to such encumbrance for financing purposes of individual items of property described by Section 4.36.020, subject to the limitations prescribed. (County code § 11-1.1602)

 

4.40.030 Transfers of systems or franchises.
    The city council, pursuant to the provisions of Section 4.40.050, may consent by duly adopted resolution to the sale, transfer, assignment, mortgage, pledge, lease, sublease or other transfer of right, title or interest in property mandatorily included by Section 4.36.020 within that authorized to be purchased, or in a franchise issued pursuant to the provisions of this title, when such transfer is for a purpose other than securing a loan of capital. Any such transfer shall be subject and subordinate to the rights of the city under the franchise documents for the franchise, and the transferee shall acknowledge in writing such subordination and agreement to comply with and be bound by the terms, conditions, provisions and requirements of the franchise documents. (County code § 11-1.1603)

 

4.40.040 Transfers of control.
    Every change, transfer or acquisition of control of the grantee or of any owner of the grantee who is named in the ordinance offering the franchise shall render the franchise subject to cancellation by the city council, unless the city council consents thereto by duly adopted resolution pursuant to the provisions of Section 4.40.050. As used in this section, the word “control” shall mean the acquisition of sufficient dominance to determine the operational and financial policies of the grantee, including the disposition of its assets. A rebuttable presumption that a transfer of control has occurred shall arise upon:

    A.  The acquisition or accumulation by any party or association of parties of ten percent or more of the voting shares of stock of the grantee or named owner of the grantee;

    B.   A change in the general partners of a grantee or named owner of the franchise; or

    C.   A merger or consolidation of the grantee or named owner of such grantee. The presumption shall be subject to rebuttal only by determination by the city council. (County code § 11-1.1604)

 

4.40.050 Determinations of proposed transfers.
    A.  A grantee shall file written notice with the city clerk as soon as the grantee acquires knowledge of any impending transaction or other event, consent to which by the city council is required by Section 4.40.030 or 4.40.040. The written notice shall be filed not less than ninety calendar days in advance of the proposed effective date of the transaction or event for which consent is required.

    B.   The notice shall state the name or names and address or addresses of the party or parties who are interested in the transaction or event and describe the details of the transaction or event. In the event of a voluntary assignment, transfer, lease, sublease, mortgage or other encumbrance, a copy of the executed or proposed agreement shall be filed with the notice. Any written acknowledgment of subordination to the rights of the city under the franchise documents and agreement to comply with and be bound thereby required by the provisions of Section 4.40.030 shall be filed with the notice.

    C.   The grantee shall immediately submit such additional information concerning such a transaction as the city council or other authorized representative of the city may request.

    D.  The city council shall schedule a public hearing to determine whether the consent required by the provisions of Section 4.40.030 or 4.40.040 will be given. Notice of the hearing shall be given in the manner prescribed by Section 4.08.060. The hearing shall be commenced not later than sixty calendar days following the filing of the notice by the grantee pursuant to this section. At the conclusion of the hearing the city council shall determine whether consent will be given.

    E.   In the hearing to determine whether consent will be given, the grantee (proposed transferor) shall have the burden of proving by clear and convincing evidence each of the following factors:

    1.   That the reputation, responsibility, integrity and reliability of the party or parties to whom the transfer is contemplated, and of the directors, officers, employees and agents thereof, is equal to that of the parties obligated under the franchise documents;

    2.   That the financial capability and capacity of the party or parties to whom the transfer is contemplated is equal to that of the parties obligated under the franchise documents;

    3.   That the terms, conditions or other circumstances of the transfer are not likely to result in an increase in the rates or charges for services;

    4.   That at the time of the transfer the grantee is in compliance with the terms, conditions and requirements of the franchise documents and any rules, regulations or determinations promulgated thereunder;

    5.   That the installation of the cable television system has been completed in the manner and within the times prescribed by Section 4.12.020. In the absence of extraordinary circumstances, a transfer shall not be approved in advance of such completion; and

    6.   That the transaction would not detrimentally affect the public interest.

    F.   The determination by the city council as to whether to give such consent shall be vested within the sole discretion of the city council but shall be based exclusively upon the factors prescribed by subsection E of this section. Such consent may be given upon such express conditions relating to such factors, including the maintenance or operation of the cable communications system, services to be provided, rates and charges for services, management of the franchise business, and other requirements relating to the franchise, as the city council, in its sole discretion, may order.

    G.  In the event the city council does not consent, and the grantee seeks a judicial review of the city council’s decision, the grantee agrees, by the filing of the certificate of acceptance, that the decision of the city council shall be upheld by a trial or appellate court if there is any substantial evidence supporting the decision of the city council as to any of the prescribed factors set forth in subsection E of this section. (County code § 11-1.1605)

 

4.40.055 Payment of city costs.
    A.  A grantee seeking city approval of transfer of control or transfer of a franchise shall reimburse the city for all costs incurred (including any consultants or legal expenses incurred by the city) in the processing of such approval, regardless of whether or not approval is granted.

    B.   Concurrently with the filing of written notice as required by Section 4.40.050, the grantee shall deposit with the city clerk ten thousand dollars to defray the cost of processing such approval. Grantee shall pay such further sums as may be necessary if the city’s costs exceed the original deposit. In the event that the city’s costs are less than the original deposit, the excess shall be refunded to the grantee upon the conclusion of the process for approving or disapproving transfer of control or transfer of the franchise. (Ord. 01-01 § 2)

 

4.40.060 Receiverships.
    The city council shall have the right to cancel a franchise one hundred twenty calendar days after the appointment of a receiver or trustee to take over and conduct the business of the grantee, whether in receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy or other action or proceeding, unless such receivership or trusteeship shall have been vacated prior to the expiration of one hundred twenty calendar days, or unless within such one hundred twenty calendar day period the receiver or trustee shall both:

    A.  Have fully complied with all of the provisions of the franchise documents and any rules, regulations or determinations promulgated thereunder; and

    B.   Have executed an agreement, duly approved by the court having jurisdiction in the premises, whereby such receiver or trustee acknowledges that its rights are subject and subordinate to those of the city under the franchise documents and any orders, directives, rules or regulations issued thereunder. (County code § 11-1.1607)

 

4.40.070 Recording and filing.
    Each grantee shall execute a document in a form determined by the city evidencing the franchise documents appropriate for recording in the office of the city clerk and a financial statement in a form determined by the city for filing pursuant to the provisions of Sections 9401 through 9403 of the Commercial Code of the state. (County code § 11-1.1608)

 

4.40.080 No recourse against agencies.
    No grantee shall have any recourse whatsoever against the city or its officers, agents or employees, for any loss, costs, expenses or damages arising out of or resulting from any provision or requirement of the franchise documents, or any rule, regulation, requirement or directive promulgated thereunder, or because of the enforcement of any provision of the franchise documents, or any rule, regulation, requirement or directive promulgated thereunder, or in the event any provision of the franchise documents, or any rule, regulation, requirement or directive promulgated thereunder, is determined to be invalid. (County code § 11-1.1609)

 

4.40.090 Nonenforcement.
    A grantee shall not be relieved of any obligation to comply with any of the provisions of the franchise documents, or any rule, regulation, requirement or directive promulgated thereunder, by reason of any failure of the city or its officers, agents or employees, to enforce prompt compliance. (County code § 11-1.1610)

Chapter 4.44 REMEDIES
4.44.010 Classification of violations.
    Violations of the provisions of Sections 4.08.130, 4.08.160 and 4.20.140 shall constitute a misdemeanor. With the foregoing exceptions, a violation of the provisions of this title shall not constitute a misdemeanor, infraction or other crime. (County code § 11-1.1201)

 

4.44.020 Impracticality of ascertaining damages.
    A.  At the time of the issuance of any franchise under the provisions of this title, it will be impractical to reasonably ascertain the total extent of damages which may be incurred as a result of the breach by the grantee of its obligations under the franchise documents as prescribed by Section 4.44.030. The provisions of Section 4.44.030 shall apply in the event of a breach as liquidated damages therefor. Factors relating to the impracticality of ascertaining damages shall include, but are not limited to, the following:

    1.   The facts that:

    a.   The primary damage resulting from breaches by the grantee of the schedules for the construction and extension of the cable communications system and provision of services prescribed by Sections 4.12.020 through 4.12.150, and of the duty prescribed pursuant to Sections 4.12.150 and 4.16.170, will be to members of the public who are denied services or denied quality or reliable services,

    b.   Such breaches cause inconvenience, anxiety, frustration and deprivation of the benefits of the franchise to individual members of the general public in subjective ways and in varying degrees of intensity which are incapable of measurement in precise monetary terms,

    c.   That services might be available through the cable communications system which are both necessary and available at a substantially lower cost than alternative services, and the monetary loss resulting from the denial of services or denial of quality or reliable services is impossible to calculate in precise monetary terms, and

    d.   The termination of a franchise for such breaches and other remedies is, at best, a means of future correction and not a remedy which makes the public whole for past breaches;

    2.   The fact that the failure of a grantee to make timely reports identifying its progress in installing its cable communications system within service areas will make it difficult in ways which are not measurable for the city to administer the construction schedule, delay initiation to enforcement proceedings and impede compliance with the periods allowed for construction; and

    3.   The fact that the failure of a grantee to file timely annual reports will deny information necessary to enable the city to expeditiously, effectively and efficiently administer the franchise and exercise its regulatory powers in relation thereto for the promotion and protection of the public convenience, health, safety and welfare.

    B.   Without the provisions of Section 4.44.030, the actual damages for which a grantee would be liable could greatly exceed the specified amount of liquidated damages. Therefore, the provisions of Section 4.44.030 are of benefit to a grantee. (County code § 11-1.1202)

 

4.44.030 Liquidated damages—Amount.
    A.  The city council shall assess a grantee, and the grantee shall be liable, for liquidated damages in the amount of one thousand dollars for each calendar day on which a grantee is in breach and for each breach of any of the provisions of any of the following: Sections 4.12.020 through 4.12.150; the time limitations prescribed pursuant to Section 4.12.210; or Section 4.16.170. Such liquidated damage sum shall be separately applicable to each calendar day of delay in complying with the provisions of Section 4.12.020(A)—(E) and separately applicable for each calendar day of delay in complying with any of the provisions of Section 4.12.020. Such liquidated damage sum shall be separately applicable to each calendar day of delay in complying with each approval or the conditions thereof issued pursuant to the provisions of Section 4.12.050.

    B.   The city council shall assess a grantee, and the grantee shall be liable, for liquidated damages in the amount of five hundred dollars for each calendar day in excess of twenty calendar days the grantee is in breach of any of the provisions of Section 4.20.160. (County code § 11-1.1203)

 

4.44.040 Reduction in term.
    In addition to the liquidated damages set forth in Section 4.44.030, in its sole discretion, the city council may reduce the term of any franchise one calendar month for each cumulative thirty calendar days in excess of the first thirty calendar days a grantee is in breach of any of the provisions of Section 4.12.020. The purpose of this section is to authorize the city council, after a grantee has been in breach of the provisions of the section for the first thirty calendar days, to reduce the term of the franchise for subsequent delays caused by the grantee’s breach on a month-to-month basis. (County code § 11-1.1204)

 

4.44.050 Collection of damages.
    A.  The city finance director shall charge and transfer from the security fund established pursuant to Section 4.28.090 to the credit of the city such amounts as are assessed as liquidated damages by determinations of the city council pursuant to Section 4.12.230 which are not appealed to arbitration and become final, or which are affirmed by an arbitration panel under the provisions of Section 4.12.240.

    B.   With respect to breaches of any of the provisions of Sections 4.20.150 or 4.16.170, the city council shall determine the amount of liquidated damages to be assessed and mail notice thereof to the grantee. Such a notice may provide for assessments for breaches occurring in advance of the notice and for periods of breach subsequent to the issuance of the notice pending compliance by the grantee. The determinations by the city council shall become final, binding and conclusive, not subject to judicial review or reversal by any authority, and judicially enforceable, unless, within thirty calendar days following the date of the mailing of the notice of the determination, the grantee files with the city clerk a written notice appealing the determination to arbitration pursuant to the provisions of Section 4.44.060. The notice of appeal shall specifically identify the grounds for the appeal. The city finance director shall charge and transfer from the special account established pursuant to Section 4.28.090 to the credit of the city such amounts as are assessed as liquidated damages by determinations of the city council pursuant to this subsection which are not appealed to arbitration and become final, or which are affirmed by an arbitration panel under Section 4.44.060.

    C.   With respect to breaches of any of the provisions of Section 4.28.020 or 4.28.030, the city finance director shall charge and transfer from the special account established pursuant to Section 4.28.090 to the credit of the city such amounts as are assessed as franchise fees, interests and liquidated damages by determinations of the city council pursuant to Section 4.28.060 which are not appealed to arbitration and become final or which are affirmed by an arbitration panel under Section 4.28.060, or such amounts of franchise fees, interests and liquidated damages as are prescribed by a judgment of a court.

    D.  The city finance director shall mail notice to the grantee of transfers from the special account. The notice shall identify the amount of transfer, the balance of the account after transfer (including accumulated interest) and the total amount, if any, which the grantee is required to pay in order to replenish the account in accordance with the requirements of Section 4.28.090.

    E.   Any amount owing by a grantee in excess of the current balance within the special account established pursuant to Section 4.28.090 may be recovered from the surety on the performance bond filed pursuant to the provisions of Section 4.28.080 or from the grantee. (County code § 11-1.1205)

 

4.44.060 Liquidated damage arbitration proceedings.
    A.  With a request for arbitration proceedings conducted pursuant to the provisions of Section 4.44.050(B), the arbitration panel should be selected, the hearing scheduled within the time prescribed, notice given, the hearing conducted, a decision made and the costs divided in the manner prescribed by Sections 4.44.140 through 4.44.190. The questions which may be submitted to the arbitration panel and the jurisdiction of the arbitration panel shall be limited to the following:

    1.   The interpretation of the provisions of the franchise documents solely in relation to the decision required by subsection B of this section; and

    2.   The amount, if any, owing by the grantee.

    B.   The grantee shall immediately pay any amount determined to be owing by the arbitration panel.

    C.   The arbitration award may be judicially enforced, shall be final, binding and conclusive upon the parties, and shall not be subject to judicial review or vacation, except on the grounds set forth in Section 1286.2 of the Code of Civil Procedure of the state. (County code § 11-1.1206)

 

4.44.070 Remedies nonexclusive.
    Neither the reduction of the term of the franchise nor liquidated damages shall be the exclusive remedy for the types of breaches identified in Section 4.44.030. Neither the right to assess liquidated damages, nor the assessment of liquidated damages, nor the right to reduce, nor the reduction of the term of the franchise shall bar or otherwise limit the right of the city to obtain judicial enforcement of the grantee’s obligations by means of specific performance, injunctive relief, mandate or other remedies at law or in equity, other than monetary damages. (County code § 11-1.1207)

 

4.44.080 Termination of franchises.
    The following material breaches of the obligations of a grantee under the franchise documents shall constitute grounds for the termination of a franchise by the city:

    A.  Cumulative unexcused delays in excess of one hundred eighty calendar days in complying with the provisions of Section 4.12.020(C) or beyond the times prescribed pursuant to Section 4.12.210 in relation to Section 4.12.020(C);

    B.   The failure of a grantee to make any payment to replenish the security fund established under Section 4.28.090 within the time required by that section;

    C.   Any violation of Sections 4.40.010, 4.40.040 or 4.40.060;

    D.  The failure to make any disclosure of fact within the application for the franchise which is required by this title, or a request for proposals, or the misrepresentation of such a fact in the application;

    E.   The willful failure to make any payment required by Section 4.28.020; or

    F.   Any other act or omission by the grantee which materially violates the terms, conditions or requirement of the franchise documents, or any other directive, rule or regulation issued thereunder and which is not corrected or remedied within thirty calendar days following the mailing to the grantee of written notice of the violation or within such period beyond the thirty calendar days as is reasonable. (County code § 11-1.1208)

 

4.44.090 Commencement of termination proceedings.
    A.  The city council shall not determine that a franchise shall be terminated either upon grounds identified by Section 4.44.080 or pursuant to Section 4.08.110(K) until a hearing has been conducted upon the matter. Written notice of the time, date and place of the hearing shall be mailed to the grantee and to the grantee’s surety on the performance bond filed pursuant to Section 4.28.080 not later than thirty calendar days in advance of the date of the commencement of the hearing. The notice shall state the reasons for the hearing, describe the basis for termination and identify the terms, conditions or requirements with respect to which the breach has occurred, if a breach is the basis for termination.

    B.   The hearing may be conducted either by the city council or, at the sole discretion of the city council, by a hearing officer appointed by the city council to conduct the hearing. Any such hearing officer shall be an attorney licensed to practice under the laws of the state.

    C.   The cost of providing quarters for the hearing, the compensation for the hearing officer, if any, and the per diem cost of any reporter retained to record the proceedings shall be borne by the city. The cost of preparing a transcript and record of the hearing shall be borne by the grantee. All costs incurred by the parties for attorneys’ fees, expert witness fees and other expenses shall be borne solely by the party incurring the costs. (County code § 11-1.1209)

 

4.44.100 Conduct of hearings.
    A.  All witnesses testifying at the hearing concerning termination shall be sworn. Witnesses shall be subject to direct and cross examination. However, formal rules of evidence applicable to the trial of civil and criminal proceedings in the trial courts of the state shall not be applicable to the hearing. The provisions of the Administrative Procedure Act, commencing at Section 11500 of the Government Code of the state, or any successor legislative enactment, shall not be applicable to any such hearing. The hearing may be continued from time to time.

    B.   If the hearing is conducted by a hearing officer, the officer, upon the conclusion of the hearing, shall prepare a recommended decision which includes findings of fact and conclusions. The recommended decision shall be filed with the city clerk and mailed to the parties not later than thirty calendar days after the conclusion of the hearing. Upon the receipt of such a recommended decision, the city council, without a hearing except as otherwise required as follows, may either:

    1.   Adopt the recommended decision, including findings of fact and conclusions submitted by the hearing officer;

    2.   Adopt the findings of fact and conclusions contained in the recommended decision, modify the decision and adopt the recommended decision as so revised; or

    3.   Based upon the record of the hearing, modify the findings of fact, conclusions or decision and adopt the recommended decision as so revised.

    C.   If the hearing is conducted by the city council, upon the conclusion of the hearing, the city council shall adopt a decision which includes findings of fact and conclusions.

    D.  If the decision by the city council is that there are grounds for the termination of the franchise and that the franchise should be terminated, the city council shall adopt a resolution which terminates the franchise and includes its decision. The effective date of the termination shall be such date as is prescribed by the city council, within its sole discretion, in the resolution, and the effective date may be made variable in relation to whether an appeal to arbitration is filed pursuant to Section 4.44.110. (County code § 11-1.1210)

 

4.44.110 Appeals to arbitration.
    A.  Not later than thirty calendar days following the date of the mailing to the grantee of the resolution of termination by the city council, the grantee shall be authorized to appeal to arbitration the determination to terminate the franchise. The appeal shall be taken by filing a written notice thereof with the city clerk. The notice of appeal shall state the specific reasons for the appeal and shall be accompanied by a fee equal to the estimate by the city clerk of the cost of preparing the transcript and record of the hearing. In the event the grantee fails to file the notice of appeal with the accompanying fee within thirty calendar days following the date on which a copy of the resolution of termination was mailed to the grantee, the termination of the franchise shall become final, binding and conclusive and not subject to review or reversal by any authority. Judicial enforcement of the decision may be sought.

    B.   Except as otherwise provided in this section, the arbitration panel shall be selected, the hearing scheduled within the time prescribed, notice given, the hearing conducted, a decision made and the costs divided in the manner prescribed by Sections 4.44.140 through 4.44.190.

    C.   The questions which may be submitted to the arbitration panel and the jurisdiction of the panel shall be limited to a decision as to whether the evidence received during the hearing preceding the determination by the city council established a basis for the termination of the franchise and interpretation of the provisions of the franchise documents solely in relation to the question of whether there was a basis for termination. Under no circumstances shall the arbitration panel have authority to be vested with jurisdiction to review, reverse or otherwise nullify the exercise of discretion by the city council in terminating the franchise if the panel determines there are grounds for termination.

    D.  The hearing by the arbitration panel shall not be trial de novo, and no new evidence shall be introduced, received or considered and the sole function of the panel shall be to review the record of the hearing preceding the decision by the city council to decide whether there was substantial evidence in the record to support the findings and to interpret the franchise documents in relation to the decision by the city council. The city council’s determination to terminate shall be sustained by the arbitration panel if it finds that there is substantial evidence in the record to sustain the determination and that the conclusions are consistent with the provisions of the franchise documents. In determining whether there is substantial evidence in the record to support the findings, the panel shall conduct an independent review of the evidence in the record and determine weight of the evidence contained in the record. The panel shall not substitute its discretion for that of the city council with respect to the determination to terminate. If the panel decides that the determination by the city council to terminate violates the provisions of the franchise documents, the panel shall remand the matter to the city council for further determination, reserving jurisdiction to review the determination. However, such remand shall not include a duty to receive further evidence, unless such evidence was initially offered and excluded during the hearing preceding the city council’s decision. Objections by the grantee which were not presented during the hearing preceding the city council’s decision shall have been waived.

    E.   The decision by the city council as affirmed by the arbitration award may be judicially enforced, shall be final, binding and conclusive upon the parties, and shall not be subject to judicial review or vacation, except on the grounds set forth in Section 1286.2 of the Code of Civil Procedure of the state to the extent such grounds are consistent with the express terms of this title. (County code § 11-1.1211)

 

4.44.120 Acquisition of property.
    Upon the final determination to terminate the franchise pursuant to Section 4.44.100 or 4.44.110, the city council, in its sole discretion, shall be authorized to purchase the property associated with the franchise as defined by Section 4.36.020. The purchase of the property shall be made in accordance with the standards, procedures and provisions set forth in Sections 4.36.010 through 4.36.140. No compensation shall be payable by the city or its assignee in relation either to the termination of the franchise or purchase of the property, except pursuant to and in accordance with Section 4.36.010 through 4.36.140. (County code § 11-1.1212)

 

4.44.130 Right to operate systems.
    In the event a grantee fails to operate its cable communications system for seven consecutive days without prior approval by the city council and for reasons which are not beyond its control, the city, through its officers, agents, employees or contractors, at its option, may enter upon the premises of the grantee, occupy such premises and property constituting the cable communications system, and operate the system until such time as the grantee presents proof satisfactory to the city council that the grantee is ready, willing and able to renew the operation of the system. In operating the system, the city or its contractor shall be authorized to contract in the name of the grantee, incur expenses in the name of the grantee, and take any and all other actions necessary to enable it to effectuate the purposes of this section. The costs incurred by the city council in undertaking such operation shall be a charge against the assets of the grantee, and the city or its contractor shall be authorized to reimburse itself for the costs incurred from revenues received during the period of operation. (County code § 11-1.1213)

 

4.44.140 Arbitration proceedings.
    Except as otherwise provided by this title, arbitration proceedings of matters expressly made arbitrable under the provisions of this title shall be conducted in compliance with the provisions of the California Arbitration Act, commencing with Section 1280 of the Code of Civil Procedure of the state. (County code § 11-1.1214)

 

4.44.150 Arbitration panel.
    A.  Each arbitration panel shall be conducted by a panel of three arbitrators. One arbitrator shall be appointed by the grantee, one arbitrator shall be appointed by the city and the third arbitrator shall be the chairperson of the panel and shall be appointed by the other two arbitrators. If the other two arbitrators are unable to agree upon an appointment, the third arbitrator shall be appointed by the presiding judge of the superior court of the county. Each member of the arbitration panel shall be an attorney licensed to practice within the courts of the state. No member of the panel shall be an officer, employee or attorney of any grantee, or any affiliate thereof, or of the city.

    B.   The grantee and the city council shall each appoint its arbitrator and mail notice to the other of its selection not later than fifteen calendar days following the filing of a notice of appeal to arbitration or the mailing of the initiation of arbitration. The third arbitrator shall be appointed no later than thirty calendar days following the filing of the notice of the appeal to arbitration or the mailing of the initiation of arbitration. (County code § 11-1.1215)

 

4.44.160 Arbitration hearings.
    The chairperson of the arbitration panel shall select the site of the hearing, retain a stenographic reporter to report the hearing and, in consultation with the other members of the panel and the parties, schedule the hearing. The hearing shall be scheduled to commence not later than seventy-five calendar days following the filing of the notice of appeal to arbitration or the mailing of the initiation of arbitration. The chairperson of the panel shall mail written notice of the time, date and place of the hearing to the other two arbitrators, the grantee and the grantee’s surety on the performance bond filed pursuant to the provisions of Section 4.28.080 not later than twenty calendar days in advance of the hearing. (County code § 11-1.1216)

 

4.44.170 Costs of arbitration.
    A.  The compensation and expenses of the arbitrator appointed by the grantee shall be borne and paid solely by the grantee. The compensation and expenses of the arbitrator appointed by the city council shall be borne and paid solely by the city. The grantee and city shall each bear and solely pay their own costs of attorneys’ fees, expert and other witness fees, and other expenses incurred in preparing and prosecuting their respective cases. In proceedings where the record of a public hearing of the city council is to be considered by the arbitration panel, the costs of transcribing, typing and copying the record shall be borne and paid solely by the grantee.

    B.   The compensation and expenses of the chairperson of the arbitration panel, rental, if any, for the place of the hearing, per diem costs of the stenographic reporter, costs of transcribing the typing of any transcripts of the arbitration hearing and any other costs of the arbitration proceeding not identified in subsection A of this section shall be divided equally between, borne and paid by the grantee and the city. The arbitration panel shall not be empowered to order a division of costs, fees or expenses different from that prescribed by this section. (County code § 11-1.1217)

 

4.44.180 Arbitration awards.
    The arbitration award shall be determined by a majority of the members of the arbitration panel and shall be in writing. If it is necessary for the panel to make determinations of fact, the panel shall include findings of fact and conclusions with the award if requested by any party to the proceeding. The award shall be issued and mailed to the parties not later than ninety calendar days following the close of the arbitration hearing. (County code § 11-1.1218)

 

4.44.190 Limitations of powers.
    The arbitration panel shall have no authority to add to, delete or alter any provision of the franchise documents but shall limit its interpretation to the express terms of the franchise documents. Under no circumstances shall an arbitration panel be vested with authority or jurisdiction to determine or award monetary damages (by way of setoff, counterclaim, directly, or otherwise) or any other relief against the city, or its officers, agents or employees, except with respect to proceedings under Section 4.36.100 or 4.36.110 to determine the value of property and, in such instances, any of the property according to the expressed terms and standards of the franchise documents. (County code § 11-1.1219)

 

4.44.200 Alternative remedies.
    No provision of this chapter shall bar the right of the city to seek or obtain judicial relief from a violation of any provision of the franchise documents or any rule, regulation, requirement or directive promulgated thereunder. Neither the existence of other remedies identified in this chapter nor the exercise thereof shall bar or otherwise limit the right of the city to recover monetary damages (except where liquidated damages are otherwise prescribed) for such violation by the grantee, or judicial enforcement of the grantee’s obligations by means of specific performance, injunctive relief or mandate, or any other judicial remedy at law or in equity. (County code § 11-1.1220)

Title 5 BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS
Chapter 5.04 BUSINESS LICENSES GENERALLY
Chapter 5.08 BINGO
Chapter 5.12 MASSAGE PARLORS
Chapter 5.16 PRIVATE PATROL OPERATORS
Chapter 5.24 MOBILE ICE CREAM VENDORS
Chapter 5.28 CANNABIS RETAIL
Chapter 5.30 MICRO-MOBILITY OPERATIONS

Chapter 5.04 BUSINESS LICENSES GENERALLY
Article I. General Provisions
5.04.010 Title.
    This chapter shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the “Business License Law of the City of West Sacramento.” (Ord. 89-13 § 3(1.1))

 

5.04.020 Purpose.
    A.  The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the health, safety and general welfare of the people of the city to assure:

    1.   Compliance with minimum standards for safe buildings;

    2.   Compliance with building code provisions concerning the alteration and modification of the premises;

    3.   Compliance with zoning regulations;

    4.   Compliance with fire regulations;

    5.   Monitoring the use and storage of hazardous materials; and

    6.   Compliance with other regulations of the city.

    B.   Such purposes shall be accomplished through this chapter by licensing the occupancy of real property for business purposes. (Ord. 89-13 § 3(1.2))

 

5.04.030 Authority.
    This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority conferred by Section 7 of Article XI of the Constitution of the state, Chapter 3 of Part 2 of Division 3 of the Government Code (commencing with Section 37100) and Chapter 1 of Part 1 of Division 7 of the Business and Professions Code of the state (commencing with Section 16000). (Ord. 89-13 § 3(1.3))

 

5.04.040 Other provisions unimpaired.
    Persons required to obtain business licenses pursuant to this chapter may also be required to obtain other permits or licenses under other provisions of this code. The issuance of a business license pursuant to this chapter shall not be deemed to excuse the requirement for any other permit or license. The issuance of any other license or permit shall not excuse the requirement for a business license. The provisions of this chapter are declared to be independently applicable to each business to which the provisions of this chapter apply. (Ord. 89-13 § 3(1.4))

 

5.04.050 Definitions.
    For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases are defined as set forth in this section:

    “Building codes” mean the Uniform Building Code, Uniform Mechanical Code, Uniform Plumbing Code, National Electrical Code, Uniform Fire Code, and all amendments thereto, as adopted by the city.

    “Building inspector” means the building official of the city, or his or her representative.

Business.

    1.   “Business” means any trade, manufacturer, profession, occupation or service of all and every kind, whether or not carried on for profit or for charitable, philanthropic or other purposes, including the arrangement of business transactions, holding sales or training meetings and administrative conferences, the receipt of client or customer payments, and the keeping of records and accounts pertaining to a business. Notwithstanding subsection 2 of this section, “business” shall not include any activity, corporation, partnership, person or organization of which the city is prohibited by law from requiring a business license or collecting a business license fee.

    2.   A “business” shall include, but is not limited to, the following:

    a.   Manufacturing operations;

    b.   Warehouse, corporation yard, or other facilities for the storage of equipment, merchandise, chemicals, or other property maintained or stored for commercial purposes;

    c.   Wholesaling businesses;

    d.   Stores for the sale of merchandise at retail;

    e.   Offices for the providing of legal, medical, engineering, accounting or other professional services;

    f.    Insurance, real estate, or other business or administrative offices;

    g.   Banks, savings and loans, or other financial establishments;

    h.   Stores, shops, offices, service stations or other outlets for the sale of products, performance of repair services (such as repair of shoes, motor vehicles or appliances), or provision of personal services (such as equipment rental, barbershops and beauty shops, cleaners, swimming pool maintenance, or taxicabs);

    i.    Motion picture or live entertainment theaters, bowling alleys, skating rinks, golf courses, racetracks, stadiums, auditoriums, museums, swim and racket clubs, poolhalls, arcades or other places of public assembly or gathering;

    j.    Hotels, motels or other lodgings where, for compensation, for intermittent or other overnight use or other uses in which living units are rented or leased solely on a term of under thirty days, all or any portion of the property is made available for overnight occupancy for periods of thirty consecutive days or less;

    k.   Restaurants, bars or other establishments for the sale of food or beverages;

    l.    Hospitals, convalescent homes, laboratories, schools or colleges, or other institutions;

    m.  Use for a business or other commercial purpose of a single-family or other residence (such as day, boarding child, handicapped, and other care homes required to be licensed under state laws and home occupations);

    n.   The solicitation of funds in public places for charitable (including religious) or public interest purposes;

    o.   Traveling merchants, hawkers, peddlers, itinerant vendors and taxicab drivers;

    p.   Other establishments or uses for business or commercial purposes;

    q.   Taxicab businesses.

    3.   A “business” shall not include the following:

    a.   Apartments, roominghouses, duplexes or other residential facilities in which living units are rented or leased solely for a term of thirty days or longer;

    b.   Churches to the extent of use for worship, religious education, or social affairs of the religious group; however, this exception does not extend to other activities not undertaken primarily for members of the religious group, including, but not limited to, day schools and social services programs;

    c.   Offices, stores or other facilities maintained without paid employees by a nonprofit public benefit corporation;

    d.   Furnishing vending machines to the premises of another person or business holding a valid business license;

    e.   Activities consisting of producing, or the sale on the property on which produced, by the producers, of products of cultivation of the soil and its fruits, and raising and harvesting crops or products for the rearing, feeding and management of livestock.

    “Business licensing officer” means the director of finance for the city or designee.

    “City council” means the city council of the city.

    “Community development director” means the community development director of the city or designee.

    “Finance director” means the finance director of the city or designee.

    “Fire chief” means the fire chief of the city or, in his or her absence, the fire marshal of the city, or their designees.

    “Fixed place of business” means a particular location where a business is regularly conducted on four or more days during any consecutive thirty-day period by the owner, or agents or employees of the owner, and shall include a business carried on in a residence.

    “Health officer” means the health officer of Yolo County. (Ord. 08-12 § 2; Ord. 05-15 § 2(A); Ord. 91-2 § 2(A): Ord. 89-13 § 3(Art. 3))

 

Article II. Administration
5.04.060 Business licensing officer.
    The business licensing officer shall:

    A.  Receive applications and fees;

    B.   Refer applications for investigation;

    C.   Receive investigation reports;

    D.  Grant or deny licenses pursuant to this title;

    E.   Give notice of renewals; and

    F.   Give notice of the violation of the municipal code upon petition of any city or county officer identified in Section 5.04.230(A). (Ord. 91-2 § 2(B): Ord. 89-13 § 3(2.1))

 

5.04.070 Investigations.
    The following persons shall investigate and report to the business licensing officer on applications referred to them:

    A.  The police chief;

    B.   The fire chief;

    C.   The community development director;

    D.  The director of public works;

    E.   The health officer of the county, if applicable;

    F.   Such other city, county and/or special service district officials as may be assigned from time to time. (Ord. 89-13 § 3(2.2))

 

Article III. Prohibitions and Exemptions
5.04.100 Occupation of property in violation.
    No person shall occupy real property in violation of the provisions of this code. (Ord. 89-13 § 3(4.1))

 

5.04.110 Conducting business in violation.
    No person shall conduct a business in violation of the standards set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 89-13 § 3(4.2))

 

5.04.120 Conducting business after revocation or suspension.
    No person shall conduct business without a valid license issued pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 91-2 § 2(E): Ord. 89-13 § 3(4.3))

 

5.04.130 Display of business license.
    No person shall occupy real property for business purposes without displaying a valid business license in prominent public view. (Ord. 89-13 § 3(4.4))

 

5.04.140 False statements.
    No person shall make a false statement in an application or other statement required for the issuance of a business license pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 89-13 § 3(4.5))

 

5.04.150 Occupying property without consent.
    No person conducting business without a fixed place of business shall occupy private real property without the written consent of the person entitled to the possession of the premises. (Ord. 89-13 § 3(4.6))

 

5.04.160 Conducting business on public property.
    No person without a fixed place of business shall do business in a public easement or right-of-way without the written consent of the public agency and the person entitled to the possession of the adjoining private property. (Ord. 89-13 § 3(4.7))

 

5.04.170 Existing businesses.
    A.  Any person otherwise required by this chapter to obtain a business license and who has on the applicable operative date filed an application therefor with the business licensing officer accompanied by the appropriate fee, any other person filing an initial application accompanied by the appropriate fee after fourteen days following filing, and any person filing a renewal application accompanied by the appropriate fee, shall be exempt from the licensing requirements of this chapter until an order of the business licensing officer granting or denying the license has become final or until the application is deemed granted pursuant to Section 5.04.230.

    B.   The exemptions provided by this section shall terminate upon the issuance of an order for suspension pending a hearing pursuant to Section 5.04.250. (Ord. 89-13 § 3(4.8))

 

Article IV. Licenses
5.04.180 Required.
    A.  Every person, firm, corporation, partnership or other business organization occupying real property within the city for business purposes shall obtain a business license.

    B.   Those persons, firms, corporations, partnerships and organizations not covered by subsection A, but engaged in the activities identified below, shall also obtain a business license:

    1.   Common carriers of persons or tangible goods, including documents;

    2.   Contractors of every kind;

    3.   Consultants of every kind;

    4.   Traveling merchants, hawkers, peddlers and itinerant vendors; and

    5.   Any other persons, firms, corporations and organizations conducting business within the city.

    C.   Where a charitable organization qualifies as a business by virtue of its solicitation of funds in public places, the organization must obtain a business license, but it shall be exempt from payment of the business license fee.

    D.  Every person subject to the licensing provisions of this chapter, at the time of the effective date of these provisions, shall make an application therefor before commencing any business or activity for which a license is required. The license shall authorize the person obtaining it to conduct the license activities for the period named in the license. Licenses which were issued under the prior licensing law and before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall continue to be valid for one year after the date the license was issued. (Ord. 12-2 § 3; Ord. 89-13 § 3(5.2))

 

5.04.190 Multiple locations or types of business.
    If the same type of business is carried on by the same person, firm, corporation, partnership or other business organization at more than one location within the city, a separate license shall be required for each location. If more than one type of business is operated by the same person, firm, corporation, partnership or other business organization at the same location, a separate business license shall be required of each type of business. (Ord. 89-13 § 3(5.3))

 

5.04.200 Application—Preparation—Form.
    A.  Any person required to apply for and obtain a business license under the provisions of this chapter shall prepare and submit to the business licensing officer an application for such license on forms provided for such purpose by the city.

    B.   No business license shall be issued and no business license application shall be deemed complete until the applicant has completed and submitted the sewage discharge questionnaire.

    C.   No business license shall be issued and no license application shall be deemed complete until the applicant has stated whether or not hazardous materials, as defined by the Uniform Fire Code as adopted by the city, are located on any premises to be occupied for business purposes and shall indicate whether a disclosure form is required for such hazardous materials.

    D.  All applications shall be executed under penalty of perjury. (Ord. 91-2 § 2(F): Ord. 89-13 § 3(5.1))

 

5.04.210 Application—Form.
    All applicants for licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be in the form prescribed by the business licensing officer. Such form shall require the applicant to state whether or not hazardous materials, as defined by the Uniform Fire Code as adopted by the city, are located on any premises to be occupied for business purposes and shall indicate whether or not a disclosure form is required for such hazardous materials. All applications shall be executed under penalty of perjury. (Ord. 89-13 § 3(5.10(a)))

 

5.04.220 Traveling merchant, hawkers, peddlers, itinerant vendors or taxicab drivers.
    Licenses to engage in the business of traveling merchant, hawker, peddler, itinerant vendor or taxicab driver shall be issued or denied after considering, among other things, the following:

    A.  Information from the applicant sufficient to enable the business licensing officer to investigate the qualifications of the applicant;

    B.   Submission of a photograph of the applicant for identification purposes;

    C.   Fingerprints from the applicant for the protection of the public should any misuse of the license occur; and

    D.  Submission of a processing fee as prescribed by resolution of the city council.

    Provisions in this section may be satisfied by showing proof of a business license for a similar business activity in another jurisdiction within the Sacramento region consisting of Yolo, Sacramento and Placer counties. (Ord. 08-12 § 3; Ord. 89-13 § 3(5.10(b)))

 

5.04.230 Investigation—Issuance or denial.
    A.  The business licensing officer shall refer the application to the police chief, fire chief, building official, community development director and director of public works and, if applicable, the health officer of the county, who shall cause such investigations as they deem appropriate to be made of the facts stated in the application and of the activity for which the application is made, and who shall make a report thereon to the business licensing officer.

    B.   If no city or county officer referenced in subsection A of this section has denied the application, the application shall be approved and a business license shall be issued, subject, however, to the subsequent denial by any of the city or county officers referred to in subsection A of this section. Should any city or county officer subsequently deny the application, the business licensing officer shall promptly notify the licensee of the denial of license and of this or her right to appeal that denial under this chapter. (Ord. 91-2 § 2(H): Ord. 89-13 § 3(5.9))

 

5.04.240 Grant or denial order—Issuance.
    The business licensing officer shall make his or her order granting, granting with conditions, or denying the application in writing and shall mail a copy thereof to the applicant. The order shall become final on the fifteenth day following such mailing. Such mailing shall identify the steps necessary for the applicant to file an appeal as set forth in Section 5.04.350. (Ord. 91-2 § 2(I): Ord. 89-13 § 3(5.13))

 

5.04.250 Denial order—Effect of appeal.
    An order of the business licensing officer granting with conditions or denying an application shall state the reason for such order and the necessary appeal process, pursuant to Chapter 1.08. If an appeal is taken, upon notification to the business licensing officer from the city clerk that the appeal has been approved after a hearing, the business licensing officer shall issue a license without additional application and/or payment of fees. (Ord. 91-2 § 2(J): Ord. 89-13 § 3(5.18))

 

5.04.260 Term.
    The term of a business license shall be one year, plus the remainder of the unexpired calendar year quarter. Calendar year quarters end March 31st, June 30th, September 31st and December 31st. Every business license issued pursuant to this chapter shall terminate at the expiration of one year, plus the remainder of the unexpired calendar year quarter, after the date of issuance. (Ord. 89-13 § 3(5.11))

 

5.04.270 Transfer.
    Unless otherwise specifically allowed by this title, no license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be transferred from one person to another person or from one location to another location, or from one type of business to another. (Ord. 89-13 § 3(5.8))

 

5.04.280 Specified location only.
    When a license specifies the location of the business licensed, the licensee may conduct such business only at the location specified in the license. (Ord. 89-13 § 3(5.4))

 

5.04.290 Fictitious names.
    A license may be issued pursuant to this title to a corporation duly authorized to transact business in the state, a limited partnership which has filed a certificate with the Secretary of State pursuant to Sections 15621 or 15692 of the Corporations Code, a partnership or other association of persons, or to a person operating under a fictitious name, who has complied with the provisions of Chapter 5 of Part 3 of Division 7 of the Business and Professions Code of the state (commencing with Section 17900) or any statute superseding or taking the place of such provisions. All such licenses shall indicate both the true name of the person, corporation, limited partnership or partnership applying therefor and the fictitious name under which the business shall operate. Except as otherwise provided in this section, no business so licensed may operate under any false or fictitious name. (Ord. 89-13 § 3(5.5))

 

5.04.300 Illegal occupation.
    Licenses shall not be granted pursuant to this chapter which permit any occupation or activity of any kind which is prohibited by this title or any other law or by any statute, rule, order, decision or regulation. (Ord. 89-13 § 3(5.6))

 

5.04.310 License not evidence of compliance.
    Under certain circumstances, a new or renewal license may be issued in the absence of affirmation or inspection by the various officers who identify deficiencies or violations of laws to be enforced. Such circumstances are the result of the time periods set to promote the expeditious processing of applications and reduce delays to waiting applicants. For such reasons, a license may be issued notwithstanding the existence of violations of the law sought to be enforced. Neither the issuance nor the receipt of a license shall constitute evidence of compliance with the laws sought to be enforced or a representation or assurances to the recipient upon which reliance is authorized or intended by the city that the enterprise for which the license is issued or the property or premises upon or in which the enterprise is located complies with such laws. (Ord. 89-13 § 3(5.7))

 

5.04.320 Fees.
    Each application and each appeal shall be accompanied by such fee as is prescribed by resolution of the city council, except as provided in Section 5.04.180(D). The submission of an application or an appeal shall not be deemed to be complete until such fees are paid to the business licensing officer. (Ord. 89-13 § 3(5.12))

 

5.04.330 Suspension—Grounds.
    Any business license issued pursuant to this chapter may be suspended or revoked by the hearing officer assigned by the city clerk if he or she finds upon review of a petition for suspension from any city or county officer listed in Section 5.04.230(A) that:

    A.  A court of competent jurisdiction has determined that the establishment, business or activity has caused or become a public nuisance;

    B.   The licensee has violated a condition of the business license;

    C.   Due to a change in circumstances and conditions, the continuance of the establishment, business or activity is hazardous to the public health, welfare or safety;

    D.  The applicant for the permit made a material misrepresentation of the facts in the application or supporting statements; or

    E.   The establishment, business or activity is maintained in violation of the standards prescribed by this chapter. (Ord. 91-2 § 2(K): Ord. 89-13 § 3(5.14))

 

5.04.340 Suspension—Petition.
    A petition to suspend a business license shall be filed with the business licensing officer or his or her representative accompanied by a statement of the grounds or reasons for such action. The city clerk shall serve the licensee with a notice of suspension and a copy of such petition by certified mail. The notice will provide the licensee with the process for appeal and/or correction process required to reinstate the license. (Ord. 91-2 § 2(L): Ord. 89-13 § 3(5.15))

 

5.04.350 Suspension—Hearing determination.
    Upon notification of suspension, the affected business licensee may appeal the suspension by the procedures set forth in Chapter 1.08 of the city code. The business licensee may continue to operate his or her business during the hearing and appeal process until a final decision has been rendered. (Ord. 91-2 § 2(M): Ord. 89-13 § 3(5.16))

 

5.04.360 Suspension—Effect of appeal.
    Upon receipt by the business licensing officer that an appeal of the order of suspension has been approved after hearing, a license will be issued without need for additional application and/or payment of fees. (Ord. 91-2 § 2(N): Ord. 89-13 § 3(5.17))

 

Article V. Standards
5.04.370 Applicability.
    Applications for the issuance of business licenses and petitions for the revocation or suspension of business licenses shall be determined in accordance with the standards prescribed in this article. (Ord. 89-13 § 3(6.1))

 

5.04.380 Scope of standards.
    Such standards shall consist of any enactment, statute, order, quarantine, rule or regulation lying within the enforcement authority of the city, or any officer or employee thereof, including the provisions of this code, and this title thereof. (Ord. 89-13 § 3(6.2))

 

5.04.390 Safe buildings.
    The occupation of real property for business purposes is governed by the building codes adopted and enforced by the building official and, in particular, but not limited to, the provisions thereof for the construction, alteration, maintenance or modification of premises. (Ord. 91-2 § 2(O): Ord. 89-13 § 3(6.3))

 

5.04.400 Zoning compliance.
    The occupation of real property for business purposes is governed by the zoning regulations of the city, the general plan of the city, and any specific plans of the city. (Ord. 89-13 § 3(6.4))

 

5.04.410 Fire regulations.
    The occupation of real property for business purposes is governed by the Uniform Fire Code adopted by the city and by any enactments, statutes, rules or regulations the fire chief is authorized to enforce. (Ord. 89-13 § 3(6.5))

 

Article VI. Violation—Penalty
5.04.420 Enforcement authorities—Right to inspect.
    The police chief or his or her representative, or the fire chief or his or her representative, the building official or his or her representative, code enforcement officers and community services officer’s who have received a course of training pursuant to Section 832 of the Penal Code of the state, shall be authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter in accordance with Section 836.5 of the Penal Code of the state and shall be permitted to enter and inspect at any reasonable time, without charge or other restraint and in accordance with procedures required by law, any premises to which any permit granted under this chapter may pertain for the purpose of ascertaining whether or not any of the provisions of this chapter is applicable thereto are being violated. (Ord. 05-15 § 2(A); Ord. 96-12 § 2; Ord. 91-2 § 2(P): Ord. 89-13 § 3(7.2))

 

5.04.430 Violation—Misdemeanor.
    A.  Every business willfully violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor for each day such violation continues, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in Chapter 1.12 of this code, imposing penalties for misdemeanor violations of city ordinances.

    B.   Every day that any such violation continues constitutes a separate offense. (Ord. 89-13 § 3(7.1))

Chapter 5.08 BINGO
5.08.010 Statutory authority.
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, this chapter is adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 19 of Article IV of the Constitution of the state and Section 326.5 of the Penal Code of the state in order to make the game of bingo lawful under the terms and conditions of this chapter. (County code § 5-16.01)

 

5.08.020 Definitions.
    For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:

    “Authorized organization” means an organization exempted from the payment of the bank and corporation tax by Sections 23701a, 23701b, 23701d, 23701e, 23701f, 23701g and 237011 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state, a mobile home park association, or a senior citizens organization.

    “Bingo” means a game of chance in which prizes are awarded on the basis of designated numbers or symbols on a card which conform to numbers or symbols selected at random.

    “Initial license” means any license issued pursuant to this chapter which is not a renewal license.

    “Minor” means any person under the age of eighteen years.

    “Renewal license” means a license issued pursuant to this chapter within six months after the expiration of the term of an earlier license issued pursuant to this chapter to the same applicant organization. (County code § 5-16.02)

 

5.08.030 License—Required.
    It is unlawful for any person to conduct any bingo game in the city unless such person is an authorized organization and holds a valid, unexpired, unrevoked license issued in accordance with this chapter. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, a senior citizens organization or mobile home park association which conducts bingo games which have twenty-five or fewer participants and which do not generate any net proceeds shall not be required to obtain a license in accordance with this chapter. (County code § 5-16.03)

 

5.08.040 License—Application.
    A.  Applications for bingo licenses shall be made to the city police chief on forms prescribed by him and shall be filed not less than thirty days prior to the proposed date of the bingo game or games. Such application form shall require from the applicant at least the following:

    1.   The name of the applicant and a statement that the applicant is an authorized organization;

    2.   The name and address of at least two officers, including the presiding officer, of the applicant organization;

    3.   The particular property within the city, including the street number, owned or leased by the applicant for an office or for the performance of the purposes for which the applicant is organized on which bingo games are to be conducted, together with the occupancy capacity of such place;

    4.   Whether the premises used for bingo are leased or owned by the applicant;

    5.   The proposed day of the week and hours of the day for the conduct of the bingo games; and

    6.   A list of all officers and directors of the applicant and of the person or persons designated by the applicant as being responsible for the operation of bingo games, including for each the full name, date of birth, place of birth, physical description, and driver’s license number.

    B.   The application shall be accompanied by a certificate of determination of exemption under Sections 23701a, 23701b, 23701d, 23701e, 23701f, 23701g or 237011 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state or a letter of good standing, either issued by the Exemption Division of the Franchise Tax Board of the state, showing an exemption under one of those sections, or by satisfactory proof that the applicant is a mobile home park association or a senior citizens organization, as applicable.

    C.   The application shall be accompanied by a certificate of the fire chief of the agency with fire suppression and prevention responsibility for the premises to be used for bingo games that the premises comply with all the laws, ordinances, rules or regulations of such agency. Such certificate shall include any terms and conditions necessary to maintain such compliance.

    D.  Each person who will be responsible for the operation of bingo games for an applicant shall be fingerprinted by the city police chief, and the applicant shall pay to the police chief such fees as may be required by the police chief to make a background check based upon such fingerprints.

    If, after a license has been issued, an additional person or persons become responsible for the operation of a licensee’s bingo games, such additional person or persons shall be fingerprinted by the police chief, and the licensee shall pay to the police chief such fees as may be required by the police chief to make a background check based on such fingerprints. (County code § 5-16.04)

 

5.08.050 License—Investigation—Issuance.
    A.  Upon the receipt of an application and fee, the city police chief shall send copies of such application to any office or department which he or she deems essential in order to carry out a proper investigation of the applicant.

    B.   The police chief and every officer and/or department to which an application is referred shall investigate the truth of the matters set forth in the application and the character of the applicant and may examine the premises to be used for a bingo game.

    C.   Upon the approval of an application for a bingo license, the police chief shall issue the license. (County code § 5-16.06)

 

5.08.060 License—Fees.
    A.  The initial application fee for a bingo license shall be fifty dollars. For an authorized organization which does not award cash prizes in bingo games and does not charge a cash entry fee to play, the fee shall be twenty- five dollars. The license fee shall accompany the application; if the license is denied, half of the application fee shall be refunded.

    B.   There shall be no fee for the renewal of a license if the renewal application is submitted prior to the expiration of the preceding license. If the preceding license has expired, the fee shall be fifty dollars.

    C.   Each licensee shall pay, in addition to the fee required by subsection A of this section, a fee for law enforcement and public safety costs incurred, that are directly related to bingo activities. Said fee will be pursuant to the applicable section of the Book of City Imposts and shall not exceed the actual cost incurred in providing the service. (Ord. 03-21 § 1; county code § 5-16.05)

 

5.08.070 License—Term.
    The term of all bingo licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire on July 1st of each year. (County code § 5-16.07)

 

5.08.080 License—Nontransferability.
    Each license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be used by a specific authorized organization to conduct a bingo game at a specific location and shall in no event be transferred from one organization to another or from one location to another. (County code § 5-16.08)

 

5.08.090 Operation of games.
    A.  An authorized organization shall conduct a bingo game only on property both owned or leased by it, or on property whose use is donated to the organization, and which property is used by such organization for an office or for the performance of the purposes for which the organization is organized.

    B.   No authorized organization shall conduct bingo games in excess of the following time limits:

    1.   Weekly Maximum. No authorized organization shall conduct bingo games at any one location in excess of four hours per week.

    2.   More Frequent Operators. No authorized organization conducting bingo games more frequently than set forth in subdivision 3 of this subsection shall conduct a bingo game for more than one hour for each ten hours of service by its volunteers or employees at that property to run the office or for the performance of the purposes for which the organization is organized (exclusive of conducting bingo games). The hours of service shall be within the same calendar month in which the bingo game is conducted.

    3.   Less Frequent Operators. Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivision 2 of this subsection, if (a) an authorized organization conducts no more than four bingo games per year, and (b) the property owned or leased by it or whose use is donated to the organization will be the location of no more than three bingo games conducted within the same calendar week by any operator, the authorized organization may conduct a bingo game for no more than two hours for each ten hours of service by its volunteers or employees at that property to run the office or for the performance of the purposes for which the organization is organized (exclusive of conducting bingo games). The hours of service shall be within the same calendar month in which the bingo game is conducted. No such authorized organization shall conduct bingo games in excess of such limit.

    4.   Sole Location. Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivision 3 of this subsection, an authorized organization which conducts a bingo game only on property which is also the sole location used by it for an office or for the performance of the purposes for which it is organized may conduct bingo games for up to four hours per week.

    5.   Additional Hours. Notwithstanding the time limit set forth in subdivision 1 of this subsection, once per each calendar year the city police chief may permit a licensee who is a more frequent operator to conduct bingo games for additional time up to four hours; provided, however, that such permission shall be limited to bingo games.

    C.   No minor shall be allowed to participate in any bingo game.

    D.  All bingo games shall be open to the public, not just to members of the authorized organization.

    E.   A bingo game shall be operated and staffed only by the members of the authorized organization which organized it. Such members shall be approved by the police chief and shall not receive a profit, wage or salary from any bingo game. Only the organization authorized to conduct a bingo game shall operate such game or participate in the promotion, supervision or any other phase of such game. This subsection shall not preclude the employment of security personnel who are not members of the authorized organization at such bingo games by the organization conducting the games. No person who has been convicted of any crime involving fraud or theft shall participate in the operation of a bingo game.

    F.   No individual, corporation, partnership or other legal entity, except the organization authorized to conduct a game, shall hold a financial interest in the conduct of a bingo game.

    G.  With respect to organizations exempt from the payment of the bank and corporation tax by Section 23701d of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state, all profits derived from a bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. Such profits shall be used only for charitable purposes.

    H.  With respect to other organizations authorized to conduct bingo games pursuant to this chapter, all proceeds derived from a bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. For the purposes of this subsection, “proceeds” means the receipts of bingo games conducted by organizations not coming within the provisions of subsection F of this section. Such proceeds shall be used only for charitable purposes, except as follows:

    1.   Such proceeds may be used for prizes.

    2.   A portion of such proceeds, not to exceed twenty percent of the proceeds before the deduction for prizes, or two thousand dollars per month, whichever is less, may be used for the rental of property, overhead, including the purchase of bingo equipment, administrative expenses, security equipment, and security personnel.

    I.    No person shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game unless the person is physically present at the time and place in which the bingo game is being conducted.

    J.    The total value of the prizes awarded during the conduct of any bingo game shall not exceed two hundred fifty dollars in cash or kind, or both, for each separate game which is held.

    K.  No bingo game shall be conducted between the hours of midnight and eight a.m.

    L.   The licensee shall report to the city police chief in writing each change in officers or directors and shall furnish in writing such information as to each new officer or director as is required of officers or directors in a license application.

    M.  No intoxicated person shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game.

    N.  No alcoholic beverages shall be served or consumed on the premises on which a bingo game is conducted.

    O.  Within thirty days following the close of each calendar month, the licensee shall file with the city police chief a report, on forms prescribed by the police chief, setting forth all moneys collected from games held during the month, all moneys deposited in connection therewith, the moneys remaining for charitable purposes, the number of hours per week bingo games were conducted, and the number of hours of service per week by its volunteers or employees at the location where bingo games were conducted, exclusive of conducting bingo games.

    P.   No bingo game shall be conducted unless a person designated as responsible for operating the game is present physically on the premises at all times at the time and place in which the bingo game is being operated.

    Q.  The licensee shall report to the police chief in writing each change in designation of such information as to each new responsible person as required of responsible persons in a license application. (Ord. 03-21 § 1 (part); county code § 5-16.09)

 

5.08.100 Inspections.
    Any peace officer of the city shall have free access to any bingo game licensed pursuant to this chapter. The licensee shall have the bingo license and lists of approved staff available for inspection at all times during any bingo game. (County code § 5-16.10)

 

5.08.110 License denial or revocation.
    A.  Grounds. The city police chief may deny an application for a bingo license, or suspend or revoke a bingo license, if he or she finds the applicant or licensee, or any agent or representative thereof, has:

    1.   Knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of a material fact in the application or in any record or report required to be filed pursuant to this chapter; or

    2.   Violated any of the provisions of this chapter.

    B.   Procedure. If, after an investigation, the police chief determines that a bingo license should be suspended or revoked or an application for such license denied, he or she shall prepare a notice of suspension, revocation or denial of the application, setting forth the reasons for such suspension, revocation or denial of the application. Such notice shall be sent by certified mail to the applicant’s last address provided in the application or be personally delivered. Any person who has had an application for a bingo license denied by the police chief, or who has had a bingo license suspended or revoked by the police chief, may appeal the decision of the police chief in the manner provided in this chapter. (County code § 5-16.11)

 

5.08.120 Appeals.
    Whenever an appeal is provided for in this chapter, such appeal shall be filed and conducted as prescribed in this section.

    A.  Within fifteen calendar days after the date of any denial, suspension, revocation or other decision of the police chief, an aggrieved party may appeal such action by filing with the city clerk a written appeal briefly setting forth the reasons why such denial, suspension, revocation or other decision is not proper.

    B.   Upon the receipt of such written appeal, the city clerk shall cause the appeal to be set for a hearing before the hearing officer. At least one week prior to the date of the hearing on the appeal, the city clerk shall notify the appellant and police chief of the date and place of the hearing. At such hearing, the police chief and the appellant may present evidence relevant to the denial, suspension, revocation or other decision of the police chief.

    C.   At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer may uphold the denial, suspension, revocation or other decision of the police chief, or the hearing officer may allow that which has been denied, reinstate that which has been suspended or revoked, or modify or reverse any other decision of the police chief which is the subject of the appeal. The hearing officer’s decision shall be final. (Ord. 09-17 § 2; County code § 5-16.12)

Chapter 5.12 MASSAGE PARLORS
5.12.010 Title.
    This chapter shall be known as the “Massage Parlor Permit Law of the City of West Sacramento.” (County code § 5-6.102)

 

5.12.020 Authority.
    This chapter is enacted pursuant to Chapter 6 of Part 1 of Division 1 of Title 5 of the Government Code of the state (commencing with Section 51030). (County code § 5-6.101)

 

5.12.030 Definitions.
    For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:

    “Applicant” means any person who applies for a permit as required by this chapter.

    “Clerk” means the city clerk.

    “Council” means the city council.

    “Health officer” means the health officer or his or her authorized representative.

    “Massage” means any method of pressure on, or friction against, or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating, or stimulating of the external parts of the body with the hands or with the aid of any mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliance with or without such supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powder, creams, lotions, ointments or other similar preparations commonly used in the practice of massage.

    “Massage establishment” means any establishment having a fixed place of business where any person engages in or carries on, or permits to be engaged in or carried on, any activity set forth in the definition of “massage” in this section. Any establishment engaged in, carrying on, or permitting any combination of massage and bathhouse shall be deemed a massage establishment.

    “Massage technician” means any person who gives or administers to another person for any form of consideration whatsoever a massage as defined in this section.

    “Permittee” means any person operating or maintaining a massage establishment under a permit issued pursuant to this chapter.

    “Person” means any individual, copartnership, firm, association, joint stock company, corporation or combination of individuals of whatever form or character.

    “Recognized school” means any school or institution of learning which has for its purpose the teaching of the theory, method, profession, or work of massage, which school requires a resident course of study of not less than two hundred hours to be given in not more than three calendar months before the student shall be furnished with a diploma or certificate of graduation from such school or institution of learning following the successful completion of such course of study or learning, and which school has been approved pursuant to Chapter 3 (commencing with Section 94300 of Part 59) of the Education Code of the state. (County code § 5-6.201)

 

5.12.040 Establishment permit—Required.
    It is unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct or carry on, or to permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, in or upon any premises in the city the application of massage or the operation of a massage establishment without first having obtained the appropriate permit as provided in this chapter. (County code § 5-6.301(a))

 

5.12.050 Establishment permit—Application.
    The application for a permit to operate a massage establishment shall set forth the exact nature of the business to be administered, the proposed place of business, and the facilities therefor. A form for the application required by this section shall be obtained from the business license officer. The completed application form shall be submitted to the business license officer and shall also contain the following information:

    A.  The full true name and any other names used by the applicant;

    B.   The two previous residential addresses and business addresses, if any, immediately prior to the present address of the applicant;

    C.   Written proof that the applicant is at least eighteen years of age;

    D.  The applicant’s height, weight, color of eyes, and hair;

    E.   The business, occupation or employment of the applicant for the three years immediately preceding the date of the application;

    F.   The massage or similar business license history of the applicant; whether such person, in previously operating in this city or another city, county or state under a license or permit, has had such license revoked or suspended; the reasons therefor; and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation;

    G.  All criminal convictions, except minor traffic violations;

    H.  The name and address of the recognized school attended, the date attended, and a copy of the diploma or certificate of graduation awarded to the applicant showing that the applicant has completed not less than two hundred hours of instruction;

    I.    The applicant shall be fingerprinted and have his or her photograph taken by the city police chief and shall pay such fees therefor as are charged by the police chief for such services generally;

    J.    Such other identification and information as determined by the board, the police chief, any other city department of jurisdiction, or any fire protection district or jurisdiction to be necessary to verify the truth of the matters required by this section; and

    K.  If the applicant is a corporation or partnership, the name of the corporation or partnership shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or partnership agreement, and the information required by this section shall be furnished for the managing director or managing employee, any general partner, and any stockholder owning twenty percent or more of the stock of an applicant corporation. (Ord. 95-1 § 1 (part); county code § 5-6.401)

 

5.12.060 Establishment permit—Administrative referral.
    The business license officer, upon receiving a complete application for a massage establishment permit, shall refer the application to the city police chief, the building official, the fire chief, the director of community development and the county health department. (Ord. 95-1 § 1; county code § 5-6.402)

 

5.12.070 Establishment permit—Issuance.
    A.  Within sixty days after the submission of a complete application with the business license officer for a massage establishment permit, the business license officer shall, based on input from other departments/officials, approve or deny the permit. No permit shall be transferable to any other person.

    1.   Prior to the expiration of such sixty-day period, all officials to which the application has been referred shall inspect the premises, if necessary, and shall file with the business license officer written recommendations concerning compliance with the provisions of this chapter and all other laws which they administer.

    2.   The business license officer may extend the sixty-day period upon the request of the applicant. The business license officer may also extend the period upon the request of any city official to which the application has been referred or county health department if the official or department states that it needs more time to complete its report. No such extensions shall exceed thirty additional days.

    B.   The business license officer shall issue a nontransferable massage establishment permit if the applicant has proven that all the requirements for a massage establishment described in this chapter are met, unless the business license officer finds:

    1.   That the operation as proposed by the applicant will not comply with all the applicable laws, including, but not limited to, the building, health, planning, housing and fire laws of, or applicable to, the city;

    2.   That the massage personnel, or the owners and operators of the massage business, have been convicted of any of the following offenses or convicted of an offense outside the state that would have constituted any of the following offenses if committed within the state:

    a.   Sections 266i, 315, 316, 318 or 647(b) of the Penal Code of the state or that the massage personnel or the owners of a massage establishment are required to register under Section 290 of the Penal Code,

    b.   Any felony offense involving the sale of a controlled substance specified in Sections 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057 or 11058 of the Health and Safety Code of the state;

    3.   That any of the massage technicians are not of good moral character; or

    4.   That the owners and operators of the massage establishment are not of good moral character. (Ord. 95-1 § 1; county code § 5-6.403)

 

5.12.080 Technician permit—Required.
    It is unlawful for any person to be employed or to act as a massage technician without having a valid permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and it is unlawful for any owner, operator, responsible managing employee, manager or permittee in charge of or in control of a massage establishment to employ or permit any person to act as a massage technician who is not in possession of a valid unrevoked massage technician permit. (County code § 5-6.301(e))

 

5.12.090 Technician permit—Application.
    A.  The form for a massage technician application shall be obtained from the business license officer. The completed form shall be submitted to the business license officer and shall set forth the place of business and facilities where the massage services shall be rendered. The application shall also contain the information required by Section 5.12.050 of this title.

    B.   Upon receiving a complete application for a massage technician permit, the business license officer shall refer the application to the city police chief and the county health department. (Ord. 95-1 § 1; county code §§ 5-6.402 (part), 5-6.404)

 

5.12.100 Technician permit—Issuance.
    A.  Within sixty days after the submission of a complete application for a massage technician permit, the business license officer shall act to approve or deny the permit.

    1.   Prior to the expiration of such sixty-day period, the city police chief and the county health department shall file with the business license officer their written recommendations concerning compliance with the provisions of this chapter and all other laws which they administer. The business license officer shall consider such reports.

    2.   The business license officer may extend the sixty-day period upon the request of the applicant. The business license officer may also extend the period upon the request of the county health department or the city police chief if either needs more time to complete its report. No such extension shall exceed thirty additional days.

    B.   The business license officer shall issue a nontransferable massage technician permit if the applicant has proven that all the requirements for a massage technician permit described in this chapter have been met, unless the business license officer finds:

    1.   That the applicant has been convicted of any offenses as set forth in Section 5.12.070(B)(2); or

    2.   That the applicant is not of good moral character.

    C.   No such permit shall be issued unless the health officer has certified that the applicant has been examined and found to be free of any contagious or communicable disease. (Ord. 95-1 § 1; county code § 5-6.405)

 

5.12.110 Technician permit—Education requirement waiver.
    The business license officer may waive the educational requirements of this chapter if any applicant presents evidence satisfactory to the council that he or she has attended not less than two hundred hours of instruction in a school within the United States that provides education substantially to, or in excess of, the educational requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 95-1 § 1; county code § 5-6.406)

 

5.12.120 Technician permit—Deadline.
    The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to persons engaged in the businesses regulated by this chapter on June 29, 1978, and to persons employed as massage technicians on June 29, 1978. Such persons shall file for the permits required by this chapter on or before July 29, 1978. Failure to do so shall make the continued operation of such businesses or the continued employment as a massage technician a violation of Sections 5.12.040 or 5.12.080. (County code § 5-6.407)

 

5.12.130 Permit fees.
    A.  Except as provided in subsection B of this section, permits issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be valid for a period of one year and shall only be issued upon the payment to the city of a nonrefundable annual application fee in an amount which shall be determined by resolution of the city council. Such fee shall be due and payable upon the submission of an initial application or an application to renew a permit. No initial application for a permit or an application to renew a permit shall be accepted by the business license officer unless the filing fee is paid with the submission of the application.

    B.   When a permit is issued after January 1st of any year, the amount of the fee for the remainder of that year shall be reduced proportionately for each whole calendar month which has expired since January 1st. The permit will expire or be subject to renewal on the next succeeding December 31st. (Ord. 95-1 § 1 (part); county code § 5-6.501)

 

5.12.140 Permit renewal—Application.
    If a permittee wishes to renew his or her permit, the permittee shall complete an application form, as required by this chapter, and submit it to the clerk no earlier than November 1st, nor later than November 15th, prior to the expiration of the existing permit. Failure to submit the renewal application with the fee during the time specified shall cause the permit to automatically expire on the next succeeding January 1st. (County code § 5-6.502)

 

5.12.150 Permit renewal—Requirements.
    The council shall renew permits applied for under Section 5.12.140 if the permittee has proven that he or she still meets all of the requirements for a massage establishment or a massage technician permit contained in this chapter, unless the council finds that the permittee no longer complies with the provisions of Section 5.12.070(B) concerning a massage establishment or Section 5.12.090(B) and (C) concerning a massage technician. (County code § 5-6.503)

 

5.12.160 Permit renewal—Procedure.
    The procedure for the renewal of a permit shall be the same as set forth in this chapter for original permit applications. (County code § 5-6.504)

 

5.12.170 Permit revocation.
    A.  Grounds for Revocation. Any permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked or suspended after a hearing by the council upon a finding that any of the following grounds exist:

    1.   A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter; or

    2.   The conviction of any offense described in Section 5.12.070.

    B.   Procedure.

    1.   Any city department of jurisdiction, including but not limited to the city police chief, the health department, the building inspection department, the planning department or any fire protection district of jurisdiction, may notify the clerk that grounds exist for the revocation of a massage establishment or a massage technician permit.

    2.   The clerk shall then give a written notice of the grounds for revocation to the permit holder. The notice shall also advise the permit holder of his or her right to request a hearing by the council on the charges, which request shall be received by the clerk within ten days after the receipt of the notice by the permit holder.

    3.   Such notice shall either be personally delivered to the permit holder, or be mailed to him or her by registered or certified mail, at the business or residential address contained in the permit holder’s application.

    4.   If such notice is delivered by registered or certified mail, it shall be deemed delivered on the day following the deposit of the notice in the United States Postal Service.

    5.   If the permit holder requests a hearing within the time set forth in subdivision 2 of this subsection, the clerk shall set the matter for a hearing. The permit holder shall be given written notice of the time, date and place of such hearing by the clerk at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. Such notice either shall be personally delivered to the permit holder or shall be sent by registered or certified mail.

    6.   If notice is by registered or certified mail, it shall be deemed delivered on the day following the deposit of the notice in the United States Postal Service.

    7.   If the permit holder does not request a hearing within the time set forth in subdivision 2 of this subsection, he or she shall have waived his or her right to a hearing on the charges, and the council may act upon the charges without notice and a hearing.

    8.   If a hearing has been requested, the council shall receive evidence on the charges contained in the notice to the permit holder. Upon the conclusion of the presentation of the evidence on the charges, the permit holder may present evidence to refute the charges.

    9.   Upon the conclusion of the presentation of evidence and any closing statements, the council may take any of the following actions, which shall be final:

    a.   If the council finds that there has been a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, or finds that the permit holder has been convicted of any offense described in Section 5.12.070, the council may:

    i.    Order the revocation of the permit; or

    ii.   Order the suspension of the permit for such time as the council deems proper; or

    iii.  Order the suspension of the permit for such time as the council deems proper, with reinstatement of the permit subject to such conditions as may be ordered by the council.

    b.   If the council finds that the evidence does not support any of the charges, the council shall order that the charges be dismissed. (County code § 5-6.601)

 

5.12.180 Compliance with chapter.
    It is unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct or carry on, or to permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, in or upon any premises in the city, the application of massage or the operation of a massage establishment in violation of the terms and conditions of this chapter. (County code § 5-6.301(b))

 

5.12.190 Operation with revoked permit.
    It is unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct or carry on, or to permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, in or upon any premises in the city, the application of massage or the operation of a massage establishment if such person’s permit has been revoked. (County code § 5-6.301(c))

 

5.12.200 Technician compliance with chapter.
    It is unlawful for any person to act as a massage technician in violation of the terms and conditions of this chapter. (County code § 5-6.301(d))

 

5.12.210 Closed hours.
    It is unlawful for massage operations to be carried on, and for the premises to be open, between the hours of twelve midnight and seven a.m. (County code § 5-6.301(f))

 

5.12.220 Alcoholic beverages.
    It is unlawful for any person to sell, give, dispense, provide or keep, or cause to be sold, given, dispensed, provided or kept, any alcoholic beverage, as defined in Section 23004 of the Business and Professions Code of the state, on the premises of any massage establishment. (County code § 5-6.301(g))

 

5.12.230 Facilities.
    No permit to conduct a massage establishment shall be issued unless an inspection by the health officer reveals that the establishment complies with each of the following minimum requirements:

    A.  Toilet rooms, toilet room vestibules, and rooms containing bathtubs shall be provided with a waterproof floor covering which shall be continued up all walls to a height of at least six inches. Floors shall be coved at the junction with the wall with at least three-fourths-inch radius continuous cove. The walls of all toilet rooms and rooms containing bathtubs shall be finished to a height of six feet with a smooth nonabsorbent finish surface of Keene cement, tile or similar material. Steam rooms and shower compartments shall have waterproof floors with coving at the walls and the walls and ceilings approved by the health officer. Floors of wet and dry heat rooms shall be adequately pitched to one or more floor drains properly connected to the sewer.

    Exception: Dry heat rooms with wooden floors need not be provided with pitched floors and floor drains.

    A source of potable water shall be available within the immediate vicinity of dry and wet heat rooms to facilitate cleaning.

    B.   Separate toilet facilities for each sex shall be provided in convenient locations. All toilet facilities shall be equipped with self-closing doors opening in the direction of ingress to such facilities. Toilets shall be designed as to the sex accommodated therein.

    C.   All portions of massage establishments and baths shall be provided with adequate light and ventilation by means of windows or skylights with an area of not less than one-eighth of the total floor area and shall be provided with artificial light and a mechanical operating ventilating system. When windows or skylights are used for ventilation, at least one-half of the total required window area shall be operable. (County code § 5-6.302)

 

5.12.240 Sanitation and decency.
    A.  Every portion of a massage establishment, including appliances and apparatus, shall be kept clean and be operated in a sanitary condition.

    B.   A separate dressing room for each sex shall be available on the premises with individual lockers for each employee and each patron. Doors to such dressing rooms shall open inward and shall be self-closing.

    C.   All massage establishments shall be provided with clean laundered sheets and towels in sufficient quantity which shall be laundered after each use thereof and stored in a sanitary manner. Receptacles shall be provided for the storage of soiled linens and paper towels.

    D.  Wet and dry heat rooms, shower compartments, and toilet rooms shall be thoroughly cleaned each business day. Bathtubs shall be thoroughly cleaned after each use.

    E.   No massage establishment granted a permit under the provisions of this chapter shall place, publish or distribute, or cause to be placed, published or distributed, any advertising matter that depicts any portion of the human body that would reasonably suggest to prospective patrons that any service is available other than those services as described in the definition of “massage” in Section 5.12.030, nor shall any massage establishment indicate in the text of such advertising that any service is available other than those services as described in that definition of “massage.”

    F.   No service enumerated in the definition of “massage” in Section 5.12.030 may be carried on within any cubicle, room, booth or area within a massage establishment which is fitted with a door capable of being locked. (County code § 5-6.303)

 

5.12.250 Register and list of services.
    A.  The operator of a massage establishment shall maintain a register of all persons employed as massage technicians and their permit numbers. Such registers shall be available for inspection at all times during regular business hours.

    B.   A list of the services available and the cost of such services shall be posted in an open and conspicuous public place on the premises. The services shall be described in readily understandable language. No owner, operator, responsible managing employee, manager or permittee in charge of, or in control of, the massage establishment shall permit, and no massage technician shall offer to perform, any services other than those posted. (County code § 5-6.304)

 

5.12.260 Inspections.
    The various city departments of jurisdiction, including but not limited to the city police chief, the health department, the building inspection department, and the planning department, and any fire protection district of jurisdiction, may, at any time, inspect the subject premises and investigate the manner of the operation of the massage establishment to insure that it is operating in compliance with this chapter. (County code § 5-6.305)

 

5.12.270 Change of business name or location.
    No person granted a permit pursuant to this chapter shall operate under any name or conduct his or her business at any location not specified in his or her permit. If the business facilities and/or location is changed, a new permit shall be obtained. (County code § 5-6.306)

 

5.12.280 Exemptions from chapter.
    This chapter shall not apply to the following classes of individuals, and no permit shall be required of such persons while engaged in the performance of the duties of their respective professions:

    A.  Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths and physical therapists who are duly licensed to practice their respective professions in the state;

    B.   Nurses who are registered as such under the laws of the state;

    C.   Barbers and beauticians who are duly licensed under the laws of the state; and

    D.  Trainers of any amateur, semiprofessional or professional athlete or athletic team. (County code § 5-6.701)

Chapter 5.16 PRIVATE PATROL OPERATORS
5.16.010 Authority.
    This chapter is adopted under the authority of Business and Professions Code Section 7582.5. (Ord. 03-21 § 1; Ord. 89-14 § 6(1))

 

5.16.020 Registration—Required.
    Each private patrol operator as defined in Business and Professions Code Section 7582.5, or employee of a private patrol operator, before operating in such capacity or employment, shall first register with the chief of police of the city. An employee who is not engaged as a watchman, guard, patrolman or otherwise acting to protect persons or property shall not be required to so register. (Ord. 03-21 § 1; Ord. 89-14 § 6(2)(a))

 

5.16.030 Registration—Required information.
    Before issuance of a current certificate of registration, the applicant must supply the chief of police with the following:

    A.  The names, social security numbers and current driver’s license numbers of each employee or employer and the name and address of each client;

    B.   A valid current license to act as a private patrol operator, security guard or security officer, issued pursuant to the Private Investigator Act set forth in Chapter 11.5 of Division 3 of the Business and Professions Code and the regulations promulgated thereunder;

    C.   A statement of whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted of the illegal use, carrying or possession of a dangerous weapon or of a felony;

    D.  A recent photograph;

    E.   A statement of whether the applicant has ever had a private patrol operator’s license refused, suspended or revoked and describing the circumstances;

    F.   The address of the private patrol operator’s place of business;

    G.  A statement of how long the applicant has worked as a private patrol operator or in a related capacity and the name and address of the last place of employment in such capacity;

    H.  The name, address, phone number and the contact person at the applicant’s last two places of employment;

    I.    The fingerprints of the applicant; and

    J.    If the applicant will carry a firearm, a valid, current firearms qualification card issued by the Bureau of Collection and Investigative Services. (Ord. 89-14 § 6(2)(c))

 

5.16.040 Registration—Investigation.
    Once the information required of an applicant is submitted, the chief of police shall conduct an investigation of the facts and data provided by the applicant. If the chief of police finds that the applicant complies with the requirements of the Private Investigator Act, the regulations issued thereunder and the requirements of this chapter, he or she shall issue a registration certificate to the applicant. (Ord. 89-14 § 6(2)(d))

 

5.16.050 Registration—Certificate.
    Upon registering with the chief of police, the operator or employee shall be issued a certificate of registration, which certificate must be annually renewed. There shall be no charge for such registration. (Ord. 89-14 § 6(2)(b))

Chapter 5.24 MOBILE ICE CREAM VENDORS
5.24.010 Title.
    This chapter shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the “Mobile Ice Cream Vendor Law of the City of West Sacramento.” (Ord. 97-15 § 2; Ord. 95-12 § 1)

 

5.24.020 Statutory authority.
    This chapter is enacted pursuant to the provisions of Section 7 of Article 11 of the Constitution of the state, Chapter 5 of Division 7 of the California Vehicle Code (commencing with Section 16500), Division 1, Section 280 of the California Vehicle Code, and the city Municipal Code. (Ord. 97-15 § 2; Ord. 95-12 § 2)

 

5.24.030 Other provisions unimpaired.
    The provisions of this chapter are not the exclusive regulation of mobile ice cream vendors within the city. The provisions of this chapter shall supplement and be in addition to the regulatory codes, statutes and laws enacted by the city, the county, the state or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction, before or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 97-15 § 2; Ord. 95-12 § 3)

 

5.24.040 Definitions.
    As used in this chapter:

    “Business licensing officer” means the director of finance for the city or designee.

    “City” means the city of West Sacramento unless specified otherwise.

    “County health permit” means the permit issued by Yolo County department of health evidencing that the vehicle and merchandise has been found to be in clean, sanitary, and safe operating condition.

    “County health sticker” means the sticker affixed to an ice cream truck evidencing that the vehicle is in possession of a Yolo County health permit.

    “Darkness” means any time from one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise and any other time when visibility is not sufficient to render clearly discernible any person or vehicle on the highway at a distance of one thousand feet.

    “Delivery” means and includes leaving, handing over or surrendering any goods, wares, merchandise or materials previously ordered or purchased by a patron or customer.

    “Frozen dessert product” means and includes ice cream, ice milk, popsicles, frozen yogurt, confections and chilled desserts of any kind.

    “Ice cream truck” means any vehicle as that term defined in the California Vehicle Code, which is equipped or primarily used for retail sales on any public street, alley or highway within the city of West Sacramento of ice cream, ice milk, popsicles, frozen yogurt, frozen dessert products and confections of any kind.

    “Mobile ice cream vendor” means any person, as defined in this section who:

    1.   Conducts, permits or causes the operation of an ice cream truck(s) or pushcart(s).

    2.   Owns, operates, controls, manages or leases an ice cream truck(s) or pushcart(s).

    3.   Contracts with person(s) to drive and vend from ice cream truck(s) or pushcart(s).

    “Operator” means any person who drives, operates, or vends from an ice cream truck or pushcart and shall include the driver and assistant on each ice cream truck.

    “Person” means any natural person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, stockholder and includes, but is not limited to owners, operators, drivers, lessors and lessees of ice cream trucks.

    “Pushcart” means any non-motorized vehicle which is equipped or primarily used for retail sales on any public street, alley or highway within the city of West Sacramento of ice cream, ice milk, popsicles, sherbets, frozen yogurt, frozen dessert products and confections of any kind.

    “Safety inspection certificate” means an inspection certificate evidencing that the vehicle has been inspected by a state certified Licensed Vehicle Inspection Station and found to be in a safe operating condition.

    “Vend or vending” means offering frozen dessert products of any kind for sale from a motor vehicle or pushcart on a street, alley, highway or public place within the city of West Sacramento and includes the movement or standing of an ice cream truck for the purpose of searching for, obtaining or soliciting retail sales of frozen dessert products. (Ord. 97-15 § 2; Ord. 95-12 § 4)

 

5.24.050 Compliance with chapter.
    It is unlawful for any person to operate an ice cream truck or pushcart in violation of the terms and conditions imposed by this chapter. (Ord. 97-15 § 2; Ord. 95-12 § 5)

 

5.24.060 License—Required.
    It is unlawful for the owner of an ice cream truck or pushcart to drive or operate, or cause or permit another person to drive or operate an ice cream truck or pushcart on the public ways of the city without having a valid mobile ice cream vendor license. (Ord. 97-15 § 2; Ord. 95-12 § 6)

 

5.24.070 License—Application.
    Any person required to apply for and obtain a license under the provisions of this chapter shall prepare and submit to the business licensing officer, a mobile ice cream vendor license application, and a business license application pursuant to this code.

    A.  Each applicant for a license to operate as an ice cream vendor shall provide on the mobile ice cream vendor application the following information:

    1.   Full name;

    2.   Other names used;

    3.   Date of birth;

    4.   Current address;

    5.   Telephone number;

    6.   Sex, weight, height, color of hair and eyes;

    7.   Place of birth;

    8.   California driver’s license number;

    9.   Social Security Number;

    10. Scars, tattoos, or other distinguishing marks;

    11. Places of previous employment for the last five years preceding the date of application;

    12. Previous home addresses for the last five years;

    13. Whether or not he or she has been convicted of any felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude.

    The application shall be signed by the applicant under penalty of perjury and filed with the business licensing officer. Such application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee in such amount as set forth by resolution of the city council.

    B.   The applicant shall provide the number of vehicles or pushcarts to be operated or controlled, and the year, make, body style, serial and engine number, state license plate number, and name and address of the registered and/or legal owner(s) of each vehicle.

    C.   Each ice cream truck shall submit a current inspection certificate issued by a Licensed Vehicle Inspection Station of the state certifying that all required safety equipment on each vehicle is in proper operating condition.

    D.  Each applicant will be required to be fingerprinted and photographed for identification card purposes. The applicant shall be responsible for payment of any state or city fees relating to fingerprinting or photographing.

    E.   Employees of the applicant must also furnish the information in subsection A(1) through (13) and subsection D of this section. (Ord. 97-15 § 2; Ord. 95-12 § 7)

 

5.24.080 Investigations.
    The business licensing officer shall cause an investigation of each applicant pursuant to the procedures set forth in Chapter 5.04 of this code. (Ord. 97-15 § 2; Ord. 95-12 § 8)

 

5.24.090 License—Grant or denial determination—Issuance.
    The business licensing officer shall make his or her determination granting, granting with conditions, or denying the application in writing, and shall mail a copy thereof to the applicant. The order shall become final on the fifteenth day following such mailing. Such mailing shall identify the steps necessary for the applicant to file an appeal as set forth in Section 5.24.150.

    A mobile ice cream vendor license shall be denied by the business licensing officer if he or she finds any of the following grounds:

    A.  The applicant knowingly made a false statement of fact required to be revealed in the license application.

    B.   Failure to pay the required fees.

    C.   Failure to provide the insurance required pursuant to Sections 5.24.220 and 5.24.230.

    D.  Failure to provide the number of vehicles or pushcarts to be operated or controlled, and other identifying information for each vehicle.

    E.   Failure to provide a current inspection certificate certifying that all required safety equipment on each vehicle is in proper operating condition.

    F.   The applicant has been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude. (Ord. 97-15 § 2; Ord. 95-12 § 9)

 

5.24.100 License—Term.
    The term of a mobile ice cream vendor license shall be one year. The term of the licenses shall be consistent with the provisions set forth in Chapter 5.04 of this code.

    Current mobile ice cream vendor license holders will be required to comply with the provisions of the ordinance codified in this chapter within thirty days of its effective date. Failure to comply will result in suspension of the mobile ice cream vendor license. Current license holders will not be required to pay additional applications fees. Fees paid at the initial application process will continue to apply until such time the license expires. (Ord. 97-15 § 2; Ord. 95-12 § 10)

 

5.24.110 License—Nontransferability.
    No license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be transferable or used by a person or entity not named on the permit. (Ord. 97-15 § 2; Ord. 95-12 § 11)

 

5.24.120 License fees.
    Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be issued upon payment, to the business licensing officer a non-refundable application fee in an amount to be determined by resolution of the city council. Such fee shall be due and payable upon the submission of an initial application, or an application to renew a license. Licenses shall not be renewed without proof that the public liability insurance required by this chapter remains in full force and effect. (Ord. 97-15 § 2; Ord. 95-12 § 12)

 

5.24.130 License—Revocation.
    A.  The business licensing officer shall revoke any license issued pursuant to this chapter when any of the following occurs:

    1.   The owner fails to maintain the public liability policy specified in Sections 5.24.220 and 5.24.230 to remain in full force and effect.

    2.   Upon cancellation of such policy for any other reason than as set forth in subdivision 1 of this subsection.

    3.   If the public liability policy does not meet the requirements of Sections 5.24.220 and 5.24.230.

    4.   The renewal fee is not paid.

    B.   The business licensing officer shall not revoke any license issued pursuant to this chapter without first giving five days notice to the holder of such license by certified mail, return receipt requested. (Ord. 97-15 § 2; Ord. 95-12 § 13)

 

5.24.132 Suspension—Grounds.
    Any license issued pursuant to this chapter may be suspended by the business licensing officer if he or she finds upon review of a petition for suspension from any city or county officer that:

    A.  A court of competent jurisdiction has determined that the vendor has become a public nuisance; or

    B.   The licensee has violated a condition of the license; or

    C.   Due to a change in circumstances and conditions, the continuance of the activity is hazardous to the public health, welfare or safety; or

    D.  The applicant for the permit made a material misrepresentation of the facts in the application or supporting statements; or

    E.   The vehicle is maintained in violation of the standards prescribed by this chapter. (Ord. 97-15 § 2)

 

5.24.140 Suspension—Petition.
    A petition to suspend a permit shall be filed with the business licensing officer or his or her representative and accompanied by a statement of the grounds or reasons for such action. The business licensing officer shall serve the permittee with a notice of suspension and a copy of such petition by certified mail. The notice will provide the licensee with the process for appeal and/or correction process required to reinstate the permit. (Ord. 97-15 § 2)

 

5.24.150 Suspension—Hearing determination.
    Upon notification of suspension, the affected permittee may appeal the suspension to the hearing officer by the procedures set forth in Chapter 1.08 of this code. The permittee may continue to operate his or her business during the hearing and appeal process until a final decision has been rendered unless it has been determined by the business licensing officer or his or her representative that continued operation would constitute a health or safety hazard to the community. The hearing officer’s decision shall be final. (Ord. 09-17 § 2; Ord. 97-15 § 2; Ord. 95-12 § 15)

 

5.24.152 Suspension—Effect of appeal.
    After a formal hearing and upon receipt by the business licensing officer that an appeal of the order of suspension has been approved, a license will be issued without need for additional application and/or payment of fees. (Ord. 97-15 § 2)

 

5.24.154 License—Revoked or expired.
    It is unlawful of an owner of a ice cream truck or pushcart to drive or operate, or cause or permit another person to drive or operate, an ice cream truck or pushcart(s) on the public ways of the city with an expired or revoked mobile ice cream vendor license. (Ord. 97-15 § 2; Ord. 95-12 § 14)

 

5.24.160 Mobile ice cream vendor regulations.
    A.  Each ice cream truck shall have a current, valid county of Yolo health inspection sticker affixed to the upper left side of the rear of the vehicle. Each pushcart shall have a current, valid county of Yolo health inspection sticker affixed to the upper left side of the pushcart. Each ice cream truck shall have a current inspection certificate issued by a Licensed Vehicle Inspection Station of the state certifying that all required safety equipment on each vehicle is in proper operating condition, which shall be made available for inspection by law enforcement officials upon request.

    B.   Each individual who drives, operates or vends from an ice cream truck shall have on his or her person a current, valid California Driver’s License, which he or she shall make available for inspection by law enforcement officials upon request.

    C.   The license holder shall wear or carry a copy of the mobile ice cream vendor license in a visible position upon his or her person at all times while vending from an ice cream truck or pushcart, and shall produce the same for inspection upon request. Each license holder shall immediately surrender to the business licensing officer or his or her designated representative, any operator’s license issued by the city of West Sacramento upon the suspension, revocation or expiration of such or upon leaving employment as an ice cream truck or pushcart operator.

    D.  Each vehicle for which is operated or controlled by the license holder shall have a current valid state vehicle registration form, which shall be made available for inspection by law enforcement officials upon request. (Ord. 97-15 § 2; Ord. 95-12 § 16)

 

5.24.170 Inspection of ice cream trucks.
    A.  Each ice cream truck for which a permit or renewal is sought shall be inspected by a state certified Licensed Vehicle Inspection Station to certify that all required safety equipment on each vehicle is in proper operating condition.

    B.   In addition to other equipment required by law, each ice cream truck shall be equipped with the following:

    1.   A convex mirror mounted so that the occupant of the driver’s seat can see the area in front of the truck which is obscured by the vehicle’s hood.

    2.   A back-up alarm audible for a distance of at least one hundred feet.

    C.   The business operator shall maintain each ice cream truck the business operator operates in such condition that:

    1.   All doors, windows, hood and trunk shall open and close securely;

    2.   The inside of the ice cream truck shall be clean and free of litter and trash;

    3.   There is a trash receptacle that shall be made accessible to the public when sales occur in which patrons can place package wrappers and trash;

    4.   The exterior of the ice cream truck shall be clean and in good repair, and not have any peeling, dents, rust, scratches or missing components which are discernible at a distance of five feet or more from the truck. (Ord. 97-15 § 2; Ord. 95-12 § 17)

 

5.24.180 Required signs and lettering.
    A.  There shall be displayed in a conspicuous place on both the front and back of the ice cream truck appropriate warning signs or lettering, e.g., “CAUTION CHILDREN.” The lettering shall not be less than six inches in height and the lettering shall be in contrast to the color of the background upon which they are placed.

    B.   There shall be displayed in a conspicuous place on both the right and the left side of the ice cream truck lettering permanently affixed showing the name of the company or operator of the ice cream truck and the business address and telephone number of the owner or operator. The lettering shall not be less than three and one-half inches in height, and shall be in contrast to the color of the background upon which they are placed.

    C.   No other lettering, numbering, price lists, signs or insignia shall be displayed on the right and left side of the ice cream truck so as to interfere with the visibility of the lettering required in subsection B of this section. Price lists will be placed directly under the right passenger window, in an area no larger than four feet in width and two and one-half feet in height. A permanent one inch black border shall enclose the price list. (Ord. 98-2 § 2: Ord. 97-15 § 2; Ord. 95-12 § 18)

 

5.24.190 Place of operation.
    A.  No person shall vend from a mobile ice cream truck or pushcart which is stopped, parked or standing on any public street alley or highway:

 

    1.   When the posted speed limit on the public street, alley or highway is thirty miles per hour or greater.

 

    2.   When the ice cream truck is placed in violation of any other provision of this code, including, but not limited to the California Vehicle Code.

    3.   When any part of the ice cream truck is open to prospective customers other than on the side of the vehicle next to the right side of the street, alley or highway.

    4.   When the ice cream truck is not stopped, parked or standing on the right side of the street, alley, or highway.

    5.   When the prospective customer is standing or sitting in other vehicle.

    6.   When the prospective customer is located in that portion of the street, alley or highway which is open to vehicular traffic.

    B.   No person shall back an ice cream truck to make or attempt to make a sale.

    C.   No minor without a work permit shall ride in or on an ice cream truck.

    D.  No more than two individuals shall be in or on a ice cream truck.

    E.   The headlights and standard warning flashers shall be in operation at all times. (Ord. 97-15 § 2; Ord. 95-12 § 19)

 

5.24.200 Hours of operation.
    Sales from mobile ice cream vendors shall be limited to the hours of ten a.m. to darkness, as defined in this chapter. (Ord. 97-15 § 2; Ord. 95-12 § 20)

 

5.24.210 Noise restrictions.
    A.  No person shall use, play or employ any sound, outcry, amplifier, loudspeaker, or any other instrument or device for the production of sound from an ice cream truck when the ice cream truck is stationary.

    B.   No person shall use, play or employ any sound, outcry, amplifier, loudspeaker, or any other instrument or device for the production of sound from an ice cream truck after eight p.m. or one-half hour after sunset, whichever occurs first.

    C.   No person shall use, play or employ any sound, outcry, amplifier, loudspeaker, or any other instrument or device for the production of sound from an ice cream truck in such a manner as to create a disturbance of the peace.

    D.  The chief of police may set restrictions on the type and use of any amplifier, loudspeaker or any other instrument or device for the production of sound employed on the ice cream truck in order to prevent a disturbance of the peace. (Ord. 97-15 § 2; Ord. 95-12 § 21)

 

5.24.220 Insurance—Required.
    No license shall be issued pursuant to this chapter until a policy of public liability insurance as required by this chapter has been secured, and the policy, or a copy of the policy or certificate evidencing the policy, has been deposited with the business licensing officer, along with the required license fee. The policy, or an endorsement thereto, shall provide that the issuing company will not allow the policy to be canceled for any person without first serving a ten-day notice of cancellation upon the city. Such service shall be made by registered mail to the business licensing officer. (Ord. 97-15 § 2; Ord. 95-12 § 22)

 

5.24.230 Insurance—Policy provisions.
    A.  Each policy required by the chapter shall cover each mobile ice cream truck or pushcart operated by an owner for not less than the following sums:

    1.   For the injury to any one person, or the death of any one person in any one accident, one hundred thousand dollars.

    2.   For the injury to or the death of two or more persons in any one accident, three hundred thousand dollars.

    3.   For the injury to or destruction of property in any one accident, fifty thousand dollars.

    B.   The public liability insurance specified by this section shall be executed by an insurance company authorized to do business in the state by the Insurance Commissioner of the state.

    C.   Up to twenty-five thousand dollars of the insurance requirements set forth in subsection A of this section may be satisfied by depositing with the Department of Motor Vehicles of the state sufficient cash or a bond pursuant to Section 16020 et seq., of the Vehicle Code of the state. If a portion of the insurance requirements are satisfied by such deposits, no permit shall be granted until a copy of the acknowledgment of the deposit issued by the Department of Motor Vehicles of the state specifying the amounts of such deposits has been filed with the business licensing officer. (Ord. 97-15 § 2; Ord. 95-12 § 23)

 

5.24.240 Violation—Penalty.
    Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a separate infraction and upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine pursuant to Section 1.12.030 of this code. (Ord. 97-15 § 2; Ord. 95-12 § 24)

Chapter 5.28 CANNABIS RETAIL
5.28.010 Cannabis retailers, microbusinesses and dispensaries prohibited.
    No person or entity shall operate or permit to be operated a cannabis retailer, microbusiness, or dispensary in or upon any premises or any zone in the city. The city shall not issue, approve, or grant any permit, license, or other entitlement for the establishment or operation of a cannabis retailer, microbusiness or dispensary. (Ord. 17-7 § 3; Ord. 11-1 § 3)

 

5.28.020 Cannabis deliveries allowed.
    Medicinal and nonmedicinal cannabis deliveries within the city are allowed by state-licensed dispensaries, retailers, microbusinesses or nonprofits if the delivery originates outside of the city. (Ord. 17-7 § 3)

Chapter 5.30 MICRO-MOBILITY OPERATIONS
5.30.010 Purpose and intent.
    The purpose of this chapter is to establish requirements applicable to micro-mobility businesses operating within the city. These requirements are intended to further the city’s goals of encouraging active transportation and providing adequate mobility parking to meet the needs of residents while also reducing the potential for micro-mobility devices to block or interfere with pedestrian and emergency service use and access to all streets, sidewalks, paths, driveways, doorways, and other avenues of vehicular and pedestrian traffic.

    Without regulation micro-mobility businesses pose a threat to the public health, safety, and welfare. For instance, some micro-mobility devices can be self-locked anywhere within the city, making it difficult for the city to ensure that micro-mobility devices are placed safely, upright, and out of the way of pedestrian walkways, bikeways, and roadways.

    The city council finds that regulations governing micro-mobility businesses are necessary to promote the general health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city by:

    A.  Ensuring safe operation of micro-mobility devices in the city;

    B.   Protecting the public right-of-way from uncontrolled, unmanaged encroachment;

    C.   Creating clear expectations for the management and operations of micro-mobility businesses;

    D.  Establishing responsible parties and processes to address nuisances; and

    E.   Ensuring equitable access and widespread investment in the city. (Ord. 19-3 § 3)

 

5.30.020 Definitions.
    As used in this chapter:

    “Applicant” means any person or entity applying for a micro-mobility operations permit in order to operate a micro-mobility business within the city.

    “Bicycle” means a two-wheeled device with handlebars, pedals, and a seat designed to be sat upon while riding.

    “Bicycle rack” or “rack” means a stationary fixture, including charging stations, intended to be used for parking a micro-mobility device.

    “City manager” means the city manager or designee.

    “Customer” means any person using a micro-mobility device.

    “Electric bicycle” means a bicycle equipped with fully operable pedals and an electric motor of less than seven hundred fifty watts.

    “Micro-mobility business” means a business owning, managing, or making available micro-mobility devices for hire.

    “Micro-mobility device” means a device available to persons for renting on a self-service basis, including bicycles, electric bicycles, scooters, motorized scooters, and other transportation devices, excluding transportation devices that must be registered with the California Department of Motor Vehicles.

    “Micro-mobility fleet” or “fleet” means all micro-mobility devices operated by a specific micro-mobility business.

    “Micro-mobility operations permit” means a permit issued to a micro-mobility business pursuant to Section 5.30.110 of this chapter.

    “Micro-mobility operator” means a person that manages, owns, or operates a micro-mobility business.

    “Motorized scooter” means a scooter equipped with an electric motor.

    “Parking space” means any space in the public right-of-way in which a micro-mobility device may be parked in compliance with this chapter.

    “Scooter” means a two-wheeled device with handlebars and a floorboard designed to be stood upon while riding. (Ord. 19-3 § 3)

 

5.30.100 Micro-mobility operations permit required.
    A.  No person shall operate a micro-mobility business unless the person holds a valid micro-mobility operations permit.

    B.   Micro-mobility operations permits are not transferable. (Ord. 19-3 § 3)

 

5.30.110 Application for a micro-mobility operations permit.
    An application for a micro-mobility operations permit or its renewal shall be filed with the city on a form prescribed by the city manager and shall include:

    A.  The applicant’s true name, address, and telephone number; and the true and fictitious name, address, and telephone number of the micro-mobility business;

    B.   Written evidence that the applicant is an owner or legal representative of the micro-mobility business;

    C.   The name, address, and telephone number of a local point of contact;

    D.  A copy of a valid business license issued to the applicant;

    E.   Proof of compliance with the insurance requirements set forth by the city manager;

    F.   A business plan demonstrating that the micro-mobility business will provide: (1) micro-mobility devices available at an hourly rate or smaller intervals clearly communicated to the customer, (2) micro-mobility devices on a seven-day-per-week basis, (3) anonymized, aggregated data for trip records and micro-mobility availability to the city on a minimum of a monthly basis, (4) an electronic payment system that complies with industry standards, (5) a service area map in an ESRI shapefile format, (6) an education and incentive plan to educate customers about all applicable safety procedures and any applicable city and state regulations, and (7) a privacy policy to safeguard customer data;

    G.  A maintenance and repair plan demonstrating that the micro-mobility business will provide: (1) routine maintenance and cleaning of micro-mobility devices, (2) full service maintenance for micro-mobility devices, and (3) a method for customers to report issues with micro-mobility devices, including twenty-four-hour customer service;

    H.  A rebalancing and relocation plan demonstrating that the micro-mobility business will rebalance micro-mobility devices to and from high use areas within peak operating hours and ensure compliance with the issued permit;

    I.    A community outreach plan demonstrating that the micro-mobility business will educate customers and promote to city residents the safe use of, benefits of, and methods to access, micro-mobility devices;

    J.    An equity plan demonstrating the availability of its micro-mobility devices and a strategy to promote the use of its micro-mobility devices citywide among low income communities;

    K.  Such other material as the city manager may require to carry out the purposes of this chapter;

    L.   A nonrefundable micro-mobility operations permit application fee; and

    M.  Upon approval of a micro-mobility operations permit, a nonrefundable micro-mobility device monitoring fee for each approved micro-mobility device. (Ord. 19-3 § 3)

 

5.30.120 Term of micro-mobility operations permits.
    A micro-mobility operations permit is valid for one year, unless suspended or revoked. A micro-mobility operations permit may be renewed pursuant to Section 5.30.150. (Ord. 19-3 § 3)

 

5.30.130 Fees applicable to micro-mobility operations permits.
    A.  The following fees are hereby established and imposed:

    1.   Micro-mobility operations permit application fee.

    2.   Micro-mobility operations permit renewal fee.

    3.   Micro-mobility device monitoring fee to provide funding for the direct and indirect cost to monitor micro-mobility devices.

    4.   Micro-mobility device impoundment fee.

    B.   The amounts of the fees described in subsection A of this section shall be established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 19-3 § 3)

 

5.30.140 Fleet expansion.
    A.  No micro-mobility operator shall expand its fleet beyond the permitted amount of micro-mobility devices until such expansion has been approved by the city manager.

    B.   An application to expand a micro-mobility operator’s fleet shall be filed with the city on a form prescribed by the city manager.

    C.   Every application for expansion of a fleet shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fleet expansion application fee and, upon the approval of the application, a micro-mobility device monitoring fee for each approved additional micro-mobility device.

    D.  Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary in this chapter, the city reserves the right to limit the number of micro-mobility devices to be operated by the micro-mobility business, based on the projected impact to city streets, sidewalks, paths, driveways, doorways, and other avenues of vehicular and pedestrian traffic. (Ord. 19-3 § 3)

 

5.30.150 Micro-mobility operations permit renewal.
    A micro-mobility operations permit is renewable upon the filing and approval of an application and payment of the nonrefundable micro-mobility permit renewal fee, and, upon the approval of the application, payment of a micro-mobility monitoring fee. The renewal application shall be on a form prescribed by the city manager. (Ord. 19-3 § 3)

 

5.30.160 Issuance of micro-mobility operations permit, renewal permit, or fleet expansion permit.
    Except as provided in Section 5.30.300, a micro-mobility operations permit may be issued, renewed, or expanded by the city manager if there are no grounds for denial in accordance with Section 5.30.170, and after the city manager has:

    A.  Physically inspected the applicant’s micro-mobility devices to ensure compliance with this chapter and applicable state laws; provided, however, that the city manager may accept proof of compliance with this chapter and the applicable state requirements for the micro-mobility devices in lieu of conducting an inspection;

    B.   Confirmed that the micro-mobility business has paid the necessary fees, identified in Section 5.30.130. (Ord. 19-3 § 3)

 

5.30.170 Grounds for denying a micro-mobility operations permit, renewal permit, or fleet expansion permit.
    The city manager may deny a micro-mobility operations permit, renewal permit, or fleet expansion permit on the following grounds:

    A.  Application is incomplete; or

    B.   The applicant or micro-mobility operator is in violation of any provision of this chapter; or

    C.   The applicant is delinquent on any payment of money to the city, including any fees, fines, penalties, or taxes; or

    D.  The applicant has had its micro-mobility operations permit revoked within five years of the date the application was submitted; or

    E.   In the case of applications for micro-mobility operations permits, if the applicant’s proposed operation includes equipment or practices that may pose a threat to the public health, safety, and welfare based on evidence such equipment or practices have presented a threat to public health, safety, or welfare in other markets or in the course of operations of any micro-mobility business in the city; or

    F.   In the case of renewals and fleet expansions, if the micro-mobility operator’s continued operation or expansion includes equipment or practices that may pose a threat to the public health, safety, and welfare based on evidence such equipment or practices have presented a threat to public health, safety, or welfare in other markets or in the course of operations of any micro-mobility business in the city; or

    G.  In the case of renewals and fleet expansions, any grounds that would have been sufficient to merit revocation of the micro-mobility operator’s micro-mobility operations permit regardless of whether the city pursued revocation at the time it became aware of such grounds. (Ord. 19-3 § 3)

 

5.30.200 Micro-mobility business provided parking spaces.
    Micro-mobility businesses may provide and maintain micro-mobility parking spaces. The installation of micro-mobility parking spaces in the public right-of-way is subject to city approval of locations and encroachment permit requirements. (Ord. 19-3 § 3)

 

5.30.220 Retrieval of micro-mobility devices.
    A micro-mobility business shall, within two hours of notice, retrieve its micro-mobility device(s) in any of the following conditions:

    A.  Inoperable or not safe to operate, and parked in the public right-of-way; or

    B.   Not parked at a bicycle rack or in a designated micro-mobility parking space in an upright position; or

    C.   Operating with a battery or motor determined to be unsafe for public use; or

    D.  Parked in violation of Section 10.34.030. (Ord. 19-3 § 3)

 

5.30.230 Micro-mobility standards.
    Every micro-mobility device provided by a micro-mobility business must meet the following minimum requirements:

    A.  Comply with the California Vehicle Code and any other applicable laws and regulations; and

    B.   Be equipped with software or other mechanisms to prevent the motor from providing assistance when the device speed exceeds fifteen miles per hour; and

    C.   Be constructed with high quality, sturdy materials, in compliance with the requirements of the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission and be capable of withstanding the rigors of outdoor storage and constant use for five years or more; and

    D.  Be equipped with tamper-resistant hardware, a locking mechanism, and GPS capable of providing real-time location data; and

    E.   Bear permanent markings in a visible location identifying the micro-mobility business name and telephone number and the micro-mobility device’s unique identification number. (Ord. 19-3 § 3)

 

5.30.300 Grounds for suspending, revoking, or modifying a permit.
    The city manager may suspend, revoke, or modify any micro-mobility business permit issued pursuant to this chapter on any of the following grounds:

    A.  The operation of the micro-mobility business constitutes a nuisance, or is injurious to the public, health, safety, or welfare; or

    B.   The operation of the micro-mobility business violates any condition of the permit or city approved application and plans; or

    C.   The micro-mobility business fails to pay any fines, penalties, fees or damages lawfully assessed upon it; or

    D.  The micro-mobility business violates any provision of this chapter or any other applicable law; or

    E.   The micro-mobility business fails to collect its micro-mobility device from the city within thirty calendar days of receiving written notice from the city of impoundment pursuant to Section 5.30.400; or

    F.   Circumstances that would have been grounds for denial of the permit application. (Ord. 19-3 § 3)

 

5.30.310 Right of appeal from denial, suspension, modification, or revocation of a micro-mobility business permit.
    Any applicant or micro-mobility operator aggrieved by the decision of the city manager, to deny, suspend, modify, or revoke a permit or impose conditions on the permit, may appeal the decision in accordance with the provisions in Chapters 1.08 and 5.04 of the city’s municipal code. (Ord. 19-3 § 3)

 

5.30.400 Impoundment.
    A.  The city may impound a micro-mobility device that is being operated or found in the city in violation of this chapter.

    B.   The micro-mobility business shall reimburse the city for the costs of impoundment and storage within thirty calendar days from the date of written notice of the impoundment from the city. The costs of impoundment will be based on the hourly rate of the city employees, or the fees of city contractors, responsible for impounding the micro-mobility device. (Ord. 19-3 § 3)

 

5.30.410 Violations.
    A.  In addition to any other remedy allowed by law, any person who violates a provision of this chapter may be subject to criminal sanctions, civil actions, and administrative penalties pursuant to Chapter 1.12.

    B.   Violations of this chapter are hereby declared to be a public nuisance.

    C.   All remedies prescribed under this chapter are cumulative and the election of one or more remedies does not bar the city from the pursuit of any other remedy to enforce this chapter. (Ord. 19-3 § 3)

 

5.30.420 Customer use of micro-mobility devices.
    Customers shall use micro-mobility devices in accordance with Chapter 10.34, the California Vehicle Code, and any other applicable law or regulation. The micro-mobility business shall be responsible for any penalty imposed in accordance with Chapter 10.34. (Ord. 19-3 § 3)

 

5.30.500 City manager implementing regulation.
    The city manager is authorized to adopt regulations to implement the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 19-3 § 3)

Title 6 ANIMALS
Chapter 6.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 6.08 ADMINISTRATION
Chapter 6.12 DEFINITIONS
Chapter 6.16 ANIMAL CONTROL REGULATIONS GENERALLY
Chapter 6.20 DOG LICENSES
Chapter 6.24 KENNEL LICENSES
Chapter 6.28 IMPOUNDMENT
Chapter 6.32 RABIES
Chapter 6.36 VICIOUS ANIMALS

Chapter 6.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS
6.04.010 Title.
    This title shall be known as and may be cited and referred to as the animal control law of the city. (County code § 6-1.101)

 

6.04.020 Purpose.
    The purpose of this title is to provide for the preservation of the health and safety of persons and domestic livestock in the city, to fix the limits within which animals shall not run at large, and to provide for the regulation and licensing of dogs and kennels. (County code § 6-1.102)

 

6.04.030 Authority.
    This title is enacted pursuant to authority conferred by Article XI, Section 7 of the California Constitution and Division 1, Part 2, Chapter 1, Article 4 of the Health and Safety Code (commencing with Section 500) of the state. (Ord. 89-14 § 7; county code § 6-1.103)

 

6.04.040 Applicability.
    The provisions of this title apply to the entire incorporated territory of the city. (County code § 6-1.104)

 

6.04.050 Effect of licenses.
    The issuance of any license or permit to keep an animal as provided for in this title shall be prima facie evidence that the owner has satisfied the basic licensing requirements pursuant to the provisions of this title, but such issuance shall be given no evidentiary weight to indicate that the owner has conformed to zoning regulations, building regulations, health and safety regulations, or to any other applicable rule, regulation or statute unless, pursuant to the issuance, official written approval has been given by the office or agency responsible for the administration of the rule, regulation or statute in question. If such approval has been given, it shall be deemed prima facie evidence that the matter approved is in conformance with the rule, regulation or statute in question. (County code § 6-1.501)

 

6.04.060 Exemptions from licensing.
    The licensing regulations of this title are not applicable to the following: owners who use animals for diagnostic purposes or research, the use having been approved by the Board of Public Health of the state pursuant to the provisions of Section 1666 of the Health and Safety Code of the state; owners who use animals for teaching purposes in recognized educational institutions; owners of establishments which treat or board animals and which are owned or operated by veterinarians licensed by the state; and owners of pet shops, circuses, animal exhibits and other enterprises maintaining animals, which have been granted business licenses by the city. (County code § 6-1.502)

Chapter 6.08 ADMINISTRATION
6.08.010 Administration.
    The city council may direct the city manager or his or her designated representative to administer this title in whatever manner is determined to be most efficient, including contracting with the county of Yolo for animal control administration and enforcement services. (Ord. 89-14 § 7; county code § 6-1.201)

Chapter 6.12 DEFINITIONS
6.12.010 Generally.
    For the purposes of this title, unless the provisions or the context indicates otherwise, the terms and words defined in this chapter shall have the meanings set forth in this chapter. (County code § 6-1.301)

 

6.12.020 Animal control center.
    “Animal control center” means the facilities provided by the city for the impounding of animals. (County code § 6-1.303)

 

6.12.030 At large.
    “At large” means an animal off the premises of its owner and not under restraint by leash, or not under the control and in the immediate presence of the owner or his or her agent. (County code § 6-1.304)

 

6.12.040 Chief, division of animal control.
    “Chief, division of animal control” means the person designated by the city manager as the chief of the division of animal control for the city, and his or her duly authorized deputies. (County code § 6-1.305)

 

6.12.050 Dog.
    “Dog” means any domesticated animal of the canine family, including, but not limited to, domesticated coyotes, foxes, dingoes, wolves or other wild species of the same. (County code § 6-1.306)

 

6.12.060 Health officer.
    “Health officer” means the health officer of the city and any health department employee or other person duly authorized by the health officer to act on his or her behalf. (County code § 6-1.307)

 

6.12.070 Kennel.
    “Kennel” means any enclosure, premises, building, structure, lot or area in or on which five or more dogs at least four months of age are kept, harbored or maintained for commercial purposes. (County code § 6-1.308)

 

6.12.080 Owner.
    “Owner” means a person who possesses, has title to or an interest in, harbors, or has control, custody or possession of an animal; and the verb forms of “to own” include all these shades of meaning. (County code § 6-1.309)

 

6.12.090 Person.
    “Person” means any person, firm, company, corporation, partnership or association. (County code § 6-1.310)

 

6.12.100 Vaccination.
    “Vaccination” means the inoculation of a dog with canine anti-rabies vaccine approved by and in the manner prescribed by the Department of Public Health of the state. (County code § 6-1.311)

 

6.12.110 Veterinarian.
    “Veterinarian” means a person licensed by the state to practice veterinary medicine. (County code § 6-1.312)

 

6.12.120 Vicious animal.
    “Vicious animal” means any dog or other animal, except a dog assisting a peace officer in law enforcement duties, which has attacked any person or other animal, without provocation by such person or other animal, at a place other than on private property where the attacking animal is maintained by its owner, or at any place within the city limits, unless the attack occurs within an enclosed yard where the animal is maintained by or on behalf of its owner. (Ord. 89-14 § 7; county code § 6-1.313)

Chapter 6.16 ANIMAL CONTROL REGULATIONS GENERALLY
6.16.010 Running at large.
    The territory to which the provisions of this title apply is fixed as the limits within which animals shall not run at large; and no owner shall permit his or her animal, wild or domestic, except a domestic cat, to run at large within the territory to which the provisions of this title apply. (County code § 6-1.401)

 

6.16.020 Dogs on leashes.
    A.  No owner shall permit his or her dog to be in any residential, commercial or industrial area, other than on private property where the dog is maintained by or on behalf of its owner, unless the dog is restrained by a leash not exceeding eight feet in length; provided, however, this section does not apply if the dog is (1) assisting a peace officer in law enforcement duties, (2) under the control of a person engaged in hunting pursuant to a license issued under Section 3031 et seq., of the Fish and Game Code of the state, or (3) enrolled and actually participating in a dog training or obedience class, exhibition or competition conducted by an organization with the permission of the owner or operator of the grounds or facility.

    B.   As used in this section, “residential, commercial or industrial area” means any R-, C-, M- and PD- (except agricultural parcel) zoned parcel located in whole or in part within the city limits of the city. (Ord. 03-21 § 1 (part); Ord. 89-14 § 7 (part); county code § 6-1.401.1)

 

6.16.030 Animals running at large—Response fees.
    Whenever the chief of the division of animal control or authorized personnel thereof take up, assume control over, herd or otherwise respond to a situation involving any animal which is at large, and which is not impounded pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 6.28, the owner or other person responsible for the care or restraint of such animal shall pay, and be charged and liable for, a fee not to exceed the actual costs incurred by the county in taking up, assuming control over, herding or otherwise responding to the at-large animal. (County code § 6-1.401.2)

 

6.16.040 Trespassing.
    No owner shall permit his or her animal, except a domestic cat, to trespass on any property, public or private, without the consent of the owner of the property. (County code § 6-1.402)

 

6.16.050 Noise.
    No owner shall permit his or her animal, except a domestic cat, habitually to make a loud noise or act in such a manner as to constitute a public nuisance. (County code § 6-1.403)

 

6.16.060 Female dogs in heat.
    No owner of any unspayed female dog shall permit such dog to stray or run at large in the territory to which this chapter applies while such female dog is in the copulating season. (County code § 6-1.404)

 

6.16.070 Proper care.
    No owner or person in charge of an animal shall permit such animal to go without proper food, water, care, shelter or attention. (County code § 6-1.405)

 

6.16.080 Unlicensed dogs.
    No owner shall have a dog required to be licensed within the territory to which this title applies unless such dog has been licensed pursuant to the provisions of this title. (County code § 6-1.406)

 

6.16.090 Tags and collars.
    No owner shall fail, neglect or refuse to attach, by means of a collar, harness or other device, any tag issued pursuant to the provisions of this title to the licensed dog; nor shall any owner fail, neglect or refuse to keep such tag attached to such dog at all times while the license is in force. (County code § 6-1.407)

 

6.16.100 Improper tags.
    No owner shall permit to be attached or kept upon any dog any license tag provided for by this title except a tag issued for that dog pursuant to the provisions of this title, nor shall any owner permit to be attached to or kept upon any dog, or to be made or to be kept in his or her possession, any counterfeit or imitation of any tag provided for by this title. (County code § 6-1.409)

 

6.16.110 Replacement of lost tags.
    No owner shall fail to apply for a new license within ten days after the date of the loss of the license tag. (County code § 6-1.408)

 

6.16.120 Removal of tags.
    No person without authorization from the owner shall remove from any dog any collar, harness or other device to which a current license tag is attached; nor shall any such person remove a current license tag from any such collar, harness or other device. (County code § 6-1.410)

 

6.16.130 Unlicensed kennels.
    No owner shall maintain, conduct or operate, or cause to be maintained or operated, any unlicensed dog kennel. (County code § 6-1.411)

 

6.16.140 Kennel standards.
    No person shall fail, neglect or refuse to maintain a kennel:

    A.  So as to prevent dogs contained therein from running at large;

    B.   So the location does not violate planning and zoning laws;

    C.   So the kennel building does not violate the building codes or sanitary laws;

    D.  So the kennel premises are maintained in a clean and sanitary condition;

    E.   So the dogs therein are not subject to suffering, cruelty or abuse;

    F.   So the kennel does not constitute a public nuisance;

    G.  So the keeping and maintenance of the kennel will not be detrimental to the peace, health or safety of persons in the immediate vicinity or in the city as a whole; or

    H.  Without possessing evidence that each dog in the kennel has been vaccinated in accordance with the provisions of this title. (County code § 6-1.412)

 

6.16.150 Kennels after license revocation.
    No person shall operate or maintain a kennel within one year after the revocation of a kennel license. (County code § 6-1.413)

 

6.16.160 Taking dogs from kennels.
    No person shall take a dog off the premises of a kennel except under leash or the control of the owner; nor shall any owner of a kennel or his or her agent or employee run or take dogs off the premises of a kennel or permit dogs to be run or be taken therefrom except as provided in this title. (County code § 6-1.414)

 

6.16.170 Vaccinations.
    No owner shall have a dog within the incorporated area of the city unless such dog has been vaccinated against rabies pursuant to the provisions of this title. (County code § 6-1.415)

 

6.16.180 Rabies—Duty to report.
    No person having knowledge of an animal of the categories set forth in Section 6.32.050 of this title shall fail to report the animal to the health officer, the chief of the division of animal control, or the city police chief. (County code § 6-1.416)

 

6.16.190 Isolation—Quarantine.
    No person shall violate any of the conditions of isolation or quarantine prescribed by the health officer. (County code § 6-1.417)

 

6.16.200 Epidemic regulations.
    No person shall violate any rules or regulations promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this title based upon a determination or declaration of a rabies epidemic or other unusually dangerous health situation. (County code § 6-1.418)

 

6.16.210 Cats—Damages or injuries.
    No owner of a domestic cat shall permit or suffer such cat to damage property, public or private or real or personal, or to bite, scratch or claw any human being or other animal which is the property of another. (County code § 6-1.420)

 

6.16.220 Dogs—Deposit of fecal matter.
    No owner shall permit his or her dog to deposit fecal matter on the lands of another, unless such owner causes the fecal matter to be removed immediately thereafter. (County code § 6-1.421)

 

6.16.230 Interference with enforcement.
    No person shall interfere with, oppose or resist the animal control officers or other persons authorized under the provisions of this title to take up and impound animals while any such person is engaged in the performance of any act authorized by the provisions of this title. (County code § 6-1.419)

 

6.16.240 Violation—Penalty.
    A.  Any person who violates the provisions of Sections 6.16.010, 6.16.120 through 6.16.150, 6.16.170, 6.16.200 or 6.16.230 is guilty of a misdemeanor.

    B.   Any other provision of this code notwithstanding, any person who violates any provision of this chapter other than the sections set forth in subsection A is guilty of an infraction punishable as set forth in California Government Code Section 25132. (County code § 6-1.422)

 

6.16.250 Separate offenses.
    Every person violating any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each day, or portion thereof, during which such violation continues, and shall be punishable therefor as provided in this chapter. (County code § 6-1.423)

 

6.16.260 Promises to appear.
    A.  Notice to Appear. If any person is arrested for any violation and such person is not immediately taken before a magistrate, the arresting officer, pursuant to the provisions of Penal Code Section 853.6, shall prepare, in duplicate, a written notice to appear in court. Such written notice shall contain the name and address of such person and the offense charged and shall set forth the time when and place where such person shall appear in court. The time set forth in the notice to appear shall be at least fourteen days after such arrest. The place set forth in the notice to appear shall be the court of the magistrate before whom the person would be taken if the requirement of taking an arrested person before a magistrate were complied with, or shall be an officer authorized by such court to receive a deposit of bail.

    B.   Bail. The arresting officer shall deliver one copy of the notice to appear to the arrested person, and the arrested person, in order to secure release, shall give his or her written promise to appear in court by signing the duplicate notice, which shall be retained by the officer. Thereupon, the arresting officer shall forthwith release the person arrested from custody. The officer shall, as soon as practicable, file the duplicate notice with the magistrate specified therein. Thereupon, the magistrate shall fix the amount of bail which, in his or her judgment, in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Penal Code of the state, will be reasonable and sufficient for the appearance of the defendant, and shall endorse upon the notice a statement signed by the magistrate in the form set forth in the applicable section of said Penal Code. The defendant may, prior to the date upon which he or she promised to appear in court, deposit with the magistrate the amount of bail thus set. Thereafter, at the time when the case is called for arraignment before a magistrate, if the defendant does not appear, either in person or by counsel, the magistrate may declare the bail forfeited and may, in his or her discretion, order that no further proceedings shall be had in such case. Upon the making of such order that no further proceedings be had, all sums deposited as bail shall forthwith be paid into the city treasury for disposition pursuant to the applicable provisions of said Penal Code. No warrant shall issue on such charge for the arrest of a person who has given such written promise to appear in court unless and until he or she has violated such promise or has failed to deposit bail, to appear for arraignment, trial or judgment, or to comply with the terms and provisions of the judgment as required by law.

    C.   Violations—Warrants for Arrest. Any person willfully violating his or her written promise to appear in court shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, regardless of the disposition of the charge upon which he or she was originally arrested. Whenever a person signs a written promise to appear at the time and place set forth therein and has not posted bail as provided in said Penal Code, the magistrate shall issue and have delivered for execution a warrant for his or her arrest within twenty days after the delivery of such written promise to appear by the officer to a magistrate having jurisdiction over the offense. When such person violates his or her promise to appear before the officer authorized to receive bail, other than a magistrate, the officer shall immediately deliver to the magistrate having jurisdiction over the offense charged the written promise to appear and the complaint, if any, filed by the arresting officer. (County code § 6-1.424)

Chapter 6.20 DOG LICENSES
6.20.010 Required.
    Every owner of a dog required to be licensed shall procure an annual license for such dog in accordance with the procedure set forth in this chapter. (County code § 6-1.601)

 

6.20.020 Dogs requiring to be licensed.
    A dog required to be licensed shall be a dog that:

    A.  Is over the age of four months; and

    B.   Is not in a licensed kennel; and

    C.   Has not been in a licensed kennel within forty-eight hours; and

    D.  Has been in the city for ten days. (County code § 6-1.602)

 

6.20.030 Application—When made.
    Applications for dog licenses shall be made on or before the first day the dog is required to be licensed pursuant to Section 6.20.020; provided, however, in the case of a dog for which a license has previously been issued pursuant to this chapter, an application shall be made within thirty days prior to the expiration of such previously issued license. Before any dog is released to a new owner, a completed application form, together with the license fee, shall be submitted by such person. (County code § 6-1.603(a))

 

6.20.040 Application—Contents.
    The license application shall bear the name (if any), age, sex, color, breed, previous rabies vaccination date and subsequent revaccination date of the dog for which the license application is made. (County code § 6-1.605)

 

6.20.050 Fees.
    The amount of the annual dog license fee shall be ten dollars; provided, however, if a certificate is presented from a licensed veterinarian that the dog has been either spayed or neutered, or if the veterinarian has on file an affidavit stating that the animal has been spayed or neutered and that examination by the veterinarian discloses no evidence to the contrary, the fee shall be one-half the regular fee. (County code § 6-1.606)

 

6.20.060 Issuance—Requirements—Filing.
    A license shall be issued after the submission of a completed application form, a license fee, and a rabies vaccination certificate issued pursuant to the provisions of this title establishing that the dog in question is vaccinated in accordance with the requirements of the State Department of Health. The license shall be sent to the applicant within ninety days thereafter. A copy of all licenses shall be filed in the office of the chief of the animal control division and shall at all times be open for public inspection. (County code § 6-1.611)

 

6.20.070 Period of validity.
    A license which is initially issued in accordance with this chapter shall be valid for twelve months following such application therefor. A license which is a renewal of a previously issued license shall be valid for the twelve months following the expiration of the previously issued license. (County code § 6-1.603(b))

 

6.20.080 License tags.
    The initial issuance of a dog license shall be accompanied by a license tag which shall be valid for so long as the dog is owned by the person to whom the tag is originally issued. License tags shall be metallic, shall be numbered serially, and shall have a stamp thereon bearing the name of the city. (County code § 6-1.613)

 

6.20.090 Preparation of forms and tags.
    The city manager is authorized and directed to have prepared suitable application forms for dog licenses as provided in this chapter and license tags to be issued to the owners of dogs. (County code § 6-1.604)

 

6.20.100 Notice of license requirement.
    The city manager may notify all dog owners of record that a current license is due and a fee is payable. (County code § 6-1.614)

 

6.20.110 Renewal notice.
    The animal control division shall endeavor to notify the owners of currently licensed dogs of the impending expiration of such licenses approximately thirty days prior to the expiration date; provided, however, the failure of the animal control division to provide such notice shall not relieve a dog owner from the requirements of this chapter. (County code § 6-1.603(c))

 

6.20.120 Lost tags.
    As often as any license tag is lost, the owner, within ten days thereafter, shall procure another tag, for which such owner shall pay a fee of one dollar. (County code § 6-1.615)

 

6.20.130 Penalties.
    A.  The owner of any dog required to be licensed who fails to procure and pay for such license as required by Sections 6.20.020 and 6.20.030 of this chapter shall pay, in addition to the license fee, a penalty in the sum of five dollars.

    B.   The owner of any dog required to be licensed by this chapter for the year immediately preceding the year in which an application for a dog license is filed, who failed to obtain a license for such dog for such year, shall pay, in addition to any other license fee or penalty, a penalty of five dollars. (County code § 6-1.607)

 

6.20.140 Exceptions from penalties.
    A.  The penalty provided for in Section 6.20.130(A) shall not apply to the owner of a dog required to be licensed which has not been subject to the licensing requirement for more than thirty days.

    B.   The penalty provided for in Section 6.20.130(B) shall not apply to the owner of a dog required to be licensed that was not subject to the licensing requirement for more than thirty days during the immediately preceding year. (County code § 6-1.608)

 

6.20.150 Seeing Eye dogs.
    A.  No fee or penalty shall be collected or received for any dog license issued for a Seeing Eye dog owned by a blind or partially blind person.

    B.   If a person presents written verification from Guide Dogs for the Blind, Inc., that his or her child is raising a Seeing Eye puppy and will deliver it to Guide Dogs for the Blind, Inc., when it is approximately one year old, no fee or penalty shall be collected or received for any dog license issued for a Seeing Eye puppy. (County code § 6-1.609)

 

6.20.160 Law enforcement dogs.
    If a dog is owned and used exclusively for law enforcement purposes by a public agency, no fee or penalty shall be collected or received for such dog. (County code § 6-1.610)

Chapter 6.24 KENNEL LICENSES
6.24.010 Required.
    Every person owning or controlling a kennel shall procure an annual kennel license on or before February 15th of each year in accordance with the procedure set forth in this title, which kennel license shall be a license for all dogs kept therein. (County code § 6-1.701)

 

6.24.020 Preparation of forms and certificates.
    The chief of the animal control division is authorized and directed to have prepared suitable application forms for kennel licenses and kennel license certificates as provided in this chapter. (County code § 6-1.702)

 

6.24.030 Application—Contents.
    The application forms for kennel licenses shall set forth the name and address of the applicant, the location, including the address, of the kennel, a description of the facility for housing the dogs, and the number and description of the dogs to be kept in the kennel. (County code § 6-1.703)

 

6.24.040 Fees.
    The kennel license fee shall be the sum of twenty-five dollars. (County code § 6-1.704)

 

6.24.050 Investigation.
    Upon the receipt of an application and license fee and penalties, if any, the chief of the animal control division shall send copies of the application to the health officer and to the building official and planning official having jurisdiction over the territory where the kennel is located for an investigation and report as to conformity with the sanitation laws, building codes and planning and zoning laws, respectively. (County code § 6-1.708)

 

6.24.060 Action on applications.
    After the receipt of the sanitation, building code and planning and zoning reports and making such investigations as he or she may deem proper, the chief of the animal control division shall act on the application as follows:

    A.  He or she shall approve the application if he or she finds that the kennel is maintained in accordance with each of the conditions of Sections 6.16.010, 6.16.070, 6.16.140 through 6.16.200 and 6.16.230 of this title.

    B.   He or she may impose such conditions upon granting an application as are reasonably necessary to bring a kennel into compliance with the provisions of this title.

    C.   He or she shall deny the application if he or she does not make the findings set forth in this section, or he or she may grant the application subject to conditions. (County code § 6-1.709)

 

6.24.070 Issuance—Endorsement and filing.
    The issuance of the license shall be endorsed upon the application form by the person issuing the license. All license application forms so endorsed shall be filed in the office of the chief of the animal control division, and shall be at all times open for public inspection. (County code § 6-1.710)

 

6.24.080 License certificates.
    The issuance of a kennel license shall be evidenced by the issuance of a kennel license certificate in a form determined by the chief of the animal control division; however, kennel license certificates shall bear the name of the city and the year of issuance and shall be numbered serially. (County code § 6-1.711)

 

6.24.090 Notice of license requirement.
    The chief of the animal control division may notify all kennel owners of record that a current license is due and a fee is payable. (County code § 6-1.712)

 

6.24.100 Penalties.
    A.  The owner of any kennel who fails to procure and pay for such license until after February 15th of any year shall nevertheless procure a kennel license until January 1st next ensuing and, except as otherwise provided in Section 6.24.110, shall pay in addition to the license fee a penalty in the sum of twenty-five dollars.

    B.   The owner of any kennel required to be licensed by this chapter for the year immediately preceding the year in which an application for a kennel license is filed, who failed to obtain a license for that kennel for that year, shall pay, in addition to any other license fee or penalty, a penalty of twenty-five dollars. (County code § 6-1.705)

 

6.24.110 Exceptions from penalties.
    A.  The penalty provided for in Section 6.24.100 (A) of this chapter for the nonpayment of a license fee on or prior to February 15th in any year shall not apply to the owner of a kennel required to be licensed that has not been subject to the licensing requirement for more than ten days.

    B.   The penalty provided for in Section 6.24.100(B) of this chapter for the nonpayment of a license fee for the immediately preceding year shall not apply to the owner of a kennel required to be licensed that had not been subject to the licensing requirement for more than ten days during the immediately preceding year. (County code § 6-1.706)

 

6.24.120 Law enforcement dogs.
    If a kennel is used exclusively for housing dogs used exclusively for law enforcement purposes by a public agency, no fee or penalty shall be collected or received for such a kennel. (County code § 6-1.707)

 

6.24.130 License suspension—Grounds.
    The chief of the animal control division may make an order suspending any kennel license issued pursuant to the provisions of this title upon a finding that there exists any fact which would have been a ground for refusal to issue a kennel license, or if there has been a violation of the provisions of Sections 6.16.010 through 6.16.070, 6.16.130 through 6.16.200 or 6.16.230 of this title, or if there has been a violation of the conditions imposed in any kennel license, or if the owner of the kennel, or any agent or employee employed therein, has been convicted of a violation of the provisions of Section 597 of the Penal Code of the State. (County code § 6-1.713)

 

6.24.140 License suspension—Notice.
    No order of suspension shall become effective until the chief of the animal control division causes a copy thereof to be mailed to the applicant by United States certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, at the address set forth in his or her application. (County code § 6-1.714)

 

6.24.150 Appeals.
    The applicant or permittee may appeal an order of the chief of the animal control division denying a license, issuing a license subject to conditions, or suspending a license to the city council by filing such appeal within fifteen days after the denial or granting of an application with conditions or after the mailing of a notice of revocation. (County code § 6-1.715)

 

6.24.160 Automatic revocation.
    If no appeal is taken within the time specified for an appeal following an order of suspension of a license, the license shall be deemed revoked. (County code § 6-1.716)

Chapter 6.28 IMPOUNDMENT
6.28.010 Taking up and impounding.
    The chief of the animal control division shall take up and impound in the animal control center, in a manner consistent with recognized standards of humane treatment, all animals found to be in violation of the provisions of this title or of Chapter 7 of Division 9 of the Food and Agricultural Code of the state. (County code § 6-1.801)

 

6.28.020 Redemption period.
    Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, all animals impounded at the animal control center shall be kept and maintained at least for the following redemption periods:

    A.  Five days for any dog found wearing a current annual license tag;

    B.   Seventy-two hours for any dog found not wearing a current annual license tag;

    C.   Five days for any animal governed by the provisions of Section 17003 of the Food and Agriculture Code of the state; and

    D.  Seventy-two hours for any other animal. (County code § 6-1.802)

 

6.28.030 Redemption—Fees and conditions.
    A.  The owners of impounded animals, during the redemption period and at any time before the disposition of such animals, may redeem them by paying the impoundment fees and licensing dogs in the manner provided in this section.

    B.   The chief of the animal control division shall charge and collect the following fees for every impounded animal when claimed and before release:

    1.   For food and ordinary care:

    a.   Dog/cat/small animal, three dollars per day,

    b.   Livestock/large animal, five dollars per day;

    2.   For extraordinary care or expenses, including livestock impoundment, actual costs incurred;

    3.   Redemption fees as follows:

    a.   For the first impoundment within any twelve-month period, fifteen dollars,

    b.   For the second impoundment within any twelve-month period, twenty dollars,

    c.   For the third and subsequent impoundments within any twelve-month period, thirty dollars,

    d.   For livestock impoundment, thirty dollars.

    C.   No dog four months or older may be redeemed unless a dog license is issued for it; however, if the dog has not been vaccinated against rabies or exempted therefrom by the submission of an exemption certificate issued in accordance with the provisions of this title, the dog may be released to an owner who has paid all the fees required, including the license fee, on the condition that such owner shall:

    1.   Have the dog vaccinated for rabies within two days; and

    2.   Exhibit a valid certificate of vaccination to the chief of the animal control division within two days, at which time the license will be issued.

    D.  A dog less than four months of age may be redeemed upon submission of a dog license application and payment of all applicable fees, including the license fee, on the condition that the owner shall have the dog vaccinated for rabies and present a valid certificate of vaccination within fifteen days of the dog reaching four months of age, at which time the license shall be issued. (County code § 6-1.804)

 

6.28.040 Animals voluntarily surrendered.
    Any animal which is voluntarily surrendered to or deposited with the animal control center, or authorized personnel thereof, shall not be deemed to be impounded and need not be kept or retained for any minimum period of time. (County code § 6-1.803)

 

6.28.050 Surrendered or abandoned animals—Adoption—Immunization.
    A.  Except as otherwise prohibited by law, the chief of the animal control division may authorize the adoption of any animal in the care, custody and control of the animal control center which has been abandoned or voluntarily surrendered to or deposited with the animal control center or authorized personnel thereof. The chief of the animal control division may issue regulations to implement the provisions of this section. A fee of five dollars per animal shall be charged to defray costs associated with the adoption of the animal, which fee shall be in addition to all other fees provided for or authorized by law.

    B.   The chief of the animal control division may authorize the immunization of any dog, six months of age or less, which is voluntarily surrendered to or deposited with the animal control center or authorized personnel thereof by its legal owner, against certain viral diseases, including, but not necessarily limited to, immunization against canine distemper. A fee of two dollars and fifty cents shall be assessed to all persons adopting an immunized dog, which fee shall be in addition to all other fees provided for or authorized by law. (County code § 6-1.803.1)

 

6.28.060 Disposition.
    A.  Except as otherwise provided in this title, an impounded animal which is not redeemed within the redemption period specified in this chapter, in the discretion of the chief of the animal control division, may be sold for not less than the amount of the redemption fees specified by this chapter, be destroyed, or be otherwise disposed of; provided, however, no animal shall be sold, destroyed or otherwise disposed of until seventy-two hours after a notice of the impoundment thereof has been given to the owner, if he or she is known.

    B.   If an animal is sold, the receipt, signed by the chief of the animal control division, shall be valid title to the animal.

    C.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this title to the contrary, an impounded animal which is determined by the chief of the animal control division to constitute a health hazard may be destroyed or otherwise disposed of as ordered by the chief of the animal control division, upon the concurrence of a veterinarian.

    D.  The possession of any animal governed by the provisions of Section 17003 of the Food and Agriculture Code of the state shall be delivered to the Director of the Department of Agriculture of the state or designee. (County code § 6-1.805)

 

6.28.070 Euthanasia.
    A.  The chief of the animal control division may provide euthanasia services on animals whose owners request it. The chief of the animal control division may issue regulations to implement the provisions of this section.

    B.   A fee of five dollars shall be charged and collected by the animal control division for every animal which is euthanized at its owner’s request. This fee shall be waived upon submission of proof that the owner of the animal is sixty-five years of age or older. (County code § 6-1.804.1)

 

6.28.080 Disclaimer of liability.
    No person shall be liable for the disposition of any animal in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (County code § 6-1.806)

Chapter 6.32 RABIES
6.32.010 Vaccination—When required.
    Every owner of a dog over four months in age shall have such dog vaccinated with such canine anti-rabies vaccine and at such intervals as prescribed by the State Department of Health. (County code § 6-1.901)

 

6.32.020 Vaccination—Imported dogs.
    Every owner who brings into the city a dog which has not been vaccinated within twelve months prior to the importation thereof shall have the dog vaccinated within five days from and after its arrival in the city. The certificate of vaccination issued by a duly licensed veterinarian from any other jurisdiction for the specific dog, establishing the vaccination with an approved vaccine, may be accepted by the chief of the animal control division as evidence of vaccination upon the date of the vaccination indicated in the certificate. (County code § 6-1.902)

 

6.32.030 Exemptions.
    A dog shall be exempt from the vaccination requirements of this title if within one year:

    A.  A veterinarian has examined the dog and certified that a vaccination will endanger the dog’s health for physiological reasons;

    B.   Such certificate is presented to the health officer within five days after the examination; and

    C.   The health officer concurs in the opinion of the veterinarian and endorses his or her approval on the veterinarian’s certificate. (County code § 6-1.903)

 

6.32.040 Vaccination—Procedure.
    A.  Dogs shall be vaccinated by a veterinarian or at a vaccine clinic approved by the health officer.

    B.   Every person who vaccinates a dog for rabies shall issue to the owner of the dog a certificate containing the following:

    1.   The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the dog;

    2.   The type of rabies vaccine administered (including name of the manufacturer and lot number of vaccine used);

    3.   The date of the vaccination, the interval for the next vaccination, and the date that the next vaccination is due;

    4.   A description of the dog, including breed, age, sex, color and markings of the dog;

    5.   The stamped, printed or typewritten name, address and telephone number of the person who administered the vaccine; and

    6.   The signature, with date, of the person administering the vaccine.

    C.   Every person who vaccinates a dog for rabies shall submit to the animal control division a copy of the rabies vaccination certificate required by subsection B of this section no later than thirty days after the date on which the vaccination was administered. (County code § 6-1.904)

 

6.32.050 Duty to report.
    It is the duty of any person having knowledge of any animal falling into the following categories to immediately report the animal to the health officer, the chief of the animal control division, or the city police chief and to furnish complete information regarding the incident:

    A.  Known rabid animals;

    B.   Suspected rabid animals;

    C.   Animals which have bitten a human or otherwise exposed a human to rabies;

    D.  Animals of a species subject to rabies which have been bitten by a known rabid or suspected rabid animal or have been in intimate contact with a rabid or suspected rabid animal. (County code § 6-1.905)

 

6.32.060 Reports to health officer.
    Upon the receipt of a report pursuant to the provisions of Section 6.32.050, upon acquiring knowledge of an animal listed in said Section 6.32.050, or upon the receipt of information of the existence of any case of rabies or any other animal disease dangerous to human beings in the city, the chief of the animal control division or the city police chief shall report the same to the health officer. (County code § 6-1.906)

 

6.32.070 Isolation or quarantine.
    A.  The health officer shall order the isolation or quarantine of all animals of the categories set forth in Section 6.32.050, shall order the place and conditions thereof in a manner not inconsistent with state and local laws and regulations, and, with the cooperation of the chief of the animal control division, shall ensure the isolation or quarantine of such animals.

    B.   Upon a determination by the city manager or designee, or the chief of the animal control division, that the health officer is not reasonably available for such purposes, the chief of the animal control division may discharge the powers and duties of the health officer set forth in subsection A of this section, in accordance with procedures established by the health officer, until such time as the health officer is determined to be available to do so. (County code § 6-1.907)

 

6.32.080 Carcasses of rabid animals.
    Upon the death of any rabid animal, clinically suspected rabid animal, or animal which has bitten or otherwise exposed a human to rabies, the chief of the animal control division shall obtain and turn over to the health officer the carcass of such animal or an adequate specimen thereof. (County code § 6-1.908)

 

6.32.090 Destruction.
    Upon an order of the health officer, the chief of the animal control division shall destroy any animal or its carcass if an examination shows such animal or carcass to be rabid. (County code § 6-1.909)

 

6.32.100 Epidemic regulations.
    The health officer may determine and declare that a rabies epidemic or other unusually dangerous health situation exists among dogs or other animals in the city, or in any part thereof. Upon making such a declaration, the health officer shall prepare and promulgate, with the approval of the city council, such rules and regulations as are necessary for the conduct of all persons within the area where the dangerous condition exists and such rules and regulations as are necessary for the control of dogs and other animals within such area. Such rules and regulations of the health officer may include, but not be limited to, the quarantine, vaccination and destruction of diseased or suspected or stray animals by humane methods. It shall be the duty of the chief of the animal control division to comply with all the directives of the health officer in the enforcement of such rules and regulations. (County code § 6-1.910)

 

6.32.110 Fees.
    Upon a determination by the health officer that an animal which has been isolated or quarantined in accordance with provisions of this chapter may be released or discharged from such isolation or quarantine, the animal may be released to the owner or other person responsible for its care and control upon payment of the fees provided by Section 6.28.030 of this title. If the owner or other person responsible for the care and control of the animal does not obtain the release of the animal, such owner or other responsible person shall pay, and be charged and liable for, the fees set forth in Section 6.28.030(B)(1) and (2). (County code § 6-1.911)

Chapter 6.36 VICIOUS ANIMALS
6.36.010 Findings—Purpose.
    The uncontrolled maintenance of vicious animals constitutes a dangerous situation which presents a threat to the health, safety and welfare of persons and animals within the city. This situation presents a serious hazard within the city which is compounded by the increasing tendency to maintain animals which, by virtue of breeding and training, have a propensity to attack others. The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety and welfare by regulating vicious animals. (County code § 6-1.1001)

 

6.36.020 Applicability.
    The provisions of this chapter apply to the entire incorporated territory of the city. (County code § 6-1.1009)

 

6.36.030 Filing of charges—Contents of affidavit.
    Any person possessing knowledge of facts indicating that there is a vicious animal within the city may file with the chief of the animal control division a written affidavit containing the following facts:

    A.  A description of the animal, including, to the extent known, the color, size, sex, breed and name of the animal and the name and address of the owner of the animal;

    B.   An assertion that the animal described is a vicious animal, together with a statement of facts upon which the assertion is based, including the name and address of any person or animal which has been victimized by the allegedly vicious animal, the date and location of any incidents related to the assertion, the name and address of any witnesses thereto, and an explanation of how the knowledge of the incident was acquired; and

    C.   The name, residential and occupational addresses, and telephone numbers of the affiant. (County code § 6-1.1002)

 

6.36.040 Investigation—Impoundment.
    A.  Upon the receipt of an affidavit filed in compliance with Section 6.36.030, the chief of the animal control division may investigate the incident or incidents described in the affidavit for the purpose of verifying the facts stated or for obtaining other information. In conducting such investigation, the chief of the animal control division shall attempt to obtain pertinent information from the attacking animal’s owner.

    B.   If, based upon such affidavit and investigation, the chief of the animal control division identifies facts which, in his or her discretion, show the existence of a vicious animal, the chief of the animal control division may immediately locate and impound the animal as necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare. The chief of the animal control division may use any lawful means which are reasonably necessary to so locate and impound the animal. (County code § 6-1.1003(a))

 

6.36.050 Rabies control.
    If, based upon an affidavit or investigation pursuant to this chapter, the chief of the animal control division determines that an animal capable of carrying or transmitting rabies has bitten a person or other animal, the chief of the animal control division shall report the matter to the chief of the environmental health division, who shall take such action as is appropriate under Chapter 6.32 of this title. In the event of a conflict between this chapter and Chapter 6.32, the provisions of Chapter 6.32 shall supersede the conflicting provisions of this chapter. (County code § 6-1.1003(b))

 

6.36.060 Determining whether attack was provoked—Criteria.
    A.  The following factors shall be considered in determining whether an attack has been provoked for purposes of this chapter:

    1.   Whether the person or animal which was attacked acted in a manner which would reasonably be expected to excite the attacking animal;

    2.   In the case of a person being attacked, whether the exciting conduct, if any, was intentionally and knowingly engaged in;

    3.   The nature and extent of the attack as compared to the nature and extent of the exciting conduct, if any; and

    4.   Whether the attack occurred in an enclosed space and, if so, whether the enclosure was prominently and clearly posted in a manner which would notify a reasonable person of the dangers of entering the enclosure.

    B.   The list set forth in subsection A is intended to be illustrative and is not exhaustive. Furthermore, conduct which may be provocation for a minor attack is not necessarily provocation for an attack of a more serious nature. (County code § 6-1.1003.1(a))

 

6.36.070 Determination of appropriate disposition of vicious animal—Criteria.
    A.  The following factors shall be considered in determining the appropriate disposition of a vicious animal under this chapter:

    1.   The factors specified in Section 6.36.060;

    2.   The location of the attack;

    3.   Efforts by the owner to control the attacking animal; and

    4.   Prior incidents of a similar nature involving the attacking animal and/or its owner.

    B.   The list set forth in subsection A is intended to be illustrative and is not exhaustive. (County code § 6-1.1003.1(b))

 

6.36.080 Disposition.
    The chief of the animal control division may do any of the following with regard to an animal which has been determined to be vicious in accordance with Sections 6.36.040 and 6.36.050 of this chapter:

    A.  Retain the animal for observation for a period not to exceed fourteen days;

    B.   Release the animal to the owner upon such conditions as are reasonably determined to be necessary to ensure the public health, safety and welfare and which may include, but need not be limited to, requiring (1) that the animal be securely muzzled, leashed and under the control of a person eighteen years of age or older who is physically capable of restraining the animal whenever the animal is off the premises, (2) that the animal be confined on the owner’s premises in an enclosure approved by the chief of the animal control division, and (3) that the owner demonstrate financial responsibility by posting a bond or certificate of insurance for not less than ten thousand dollars. The owner shall agree that a violation of any of the conditions imposed upon the release of the animal may result in the animal being impounded and destroyed; or

    C.   Cause the animal to be destroyed if, in the opinion of the chief of the animal control division and the chief of the environmental health division, the release of such animal would create a significant threat to the public health, safety and welfare. (County code § 6-1.1004(a))

 

6.36.090 Disposition—Notice to owner.
    A.  The chief of the animal control division shall notify the owner of the animal of the intended disposition of the animal pursuant to Section 6.36.080 of this chapter within three days of such decision. In the event the chief of the animal control division determines pursuant to said Section 6.36.080 that the animal is to be destroyed, the notice shall be given at least five days in advance of the intended action and at least ten days in advance of such action if notice is given by mail. Such notice may be served personally or by mail. Service shall be deemed to be complete and effective upon deposit with the United States Postal Service.

    B.   The notice shall contain the following:

    1.   A summary of the facts upon which the chief of the animal control division has based the determination that the animal is a vicious animal;

    2.   The intended disposition of the animal and the reasons therefor;

    3.   A copy of the provisions of this chapter, if not already provided to the owner; and

    4.   Notice of the owner’s right to a hearing pursuant to Section 6.36.100 of this chapter.

    C.   If additional information is subsequently obtained, the chief of the animal control division shall not be limited to the facts, incidents and reasons set forth in the notice in any administrative or judicial proceeding reviewing the determinations and decisions made pursuant to this chapter. (County code § 6-1.1004(b))

 

6.36.100 Hearing—Request—Waiver.
    A.  The owner of the animal may appeal the decision of the chief of the animal control division pursuant to Sections 6.36.080 and 6.36.090 of this chapter by filing a written request for a hearing, including the grounds and reasons therefor, with the city clerk within five days after the date of the notice given by the chief of the animal control division pursuant to said Sections 6.36.080 and 6.36.090 if such notice is personally served, or within ten days if such notice is given by mail only. The city clerk shall thereupon transmit copies of the hearing request to the agricultural commissioner, the director of public health, and the presiding judge of the municipal court, or, in the event such judge has designated a hearing officer, the person so designated.

    B.   Any person who fails to request a hearing within the time specified in this section shall be deemed to have waived any right in or claim upon such animal or to claim any damages or other relief by reason of any action by the chief of the animal control division pursuant to this chapter. (County code § 6-1.1005)

 

6.36.110 Hearing—Procedure.
    In the event a request for a hearing is properly filed, a hearing shall be held pursuant to the provisions of this section and Sections 6.36.120 and 6.36.130.

    A.  The hearing shall be conducted by an individual who is designated by the presiding judge of the municipal court. The person may be an employee of the county who is not assigned to the animal control division or the environmental health division or who is not otherwise subordinate to the chief of the animal control division or the chief of the environmental health division. Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, the hearing shall be held within thirty days after the date the request for the hearing was properly filed.

    B.   The burden shall be upon the chief of the animal control division to prove that the animal is a vicious animal. If it is found or established that the animal is a vicious animal, the burden shall be upon the appellant to prove that the disposition ordered by the chief of the animal control division is unreasonable.

    C.   At the hearing the appellant and the animal control division may be represented by counsel, may present oral and written evidence, and may cross-examine witnesses. Strict rules of evidence shall not apply. Any relevant evidence may be admitted if it is the sort of evidence which responsible persons are accustomed to rely upon in the conduct of serious affairs. For good cause, the hearing may be continued. The hearing shall be tape recorded, and all documents presented as evidence shall be maintained as part of the record of the hearing.

    D.  In the event the appellant fails to appear at the time, date and place appointed for the hearing, the hearing shall be conducted in the absence of the appellant, and the hearing officer shall render a decision based upon evidence presented during the hearing. (County code § 6-1.1006 (part), (a), (b))

 

6.36.120 Hearing—Decision.
    A.  The hearing officer shall render a decision within ten days after the close of the hearing. The decision shall be supported by the weight of evidence. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final, Chapter 1.08 of this code notwithstanding.

    B.   The decision shall be in writing and shall include findings of fact and conclusions respecting the following:

    1.   Whether, based upon the evidence presented during the hearing, the animal is a vicious animal; and

    2.   If the animal is determined to be a vicious animal, what disposition should be made. The hearing officer shall formulate a disposition based upon all of the facts and circumstances revealed by the evidence and may:

    a.   Uphold the decision of the animal control division and order the decision carried out,

    b.   Order the return of the animal to its owner upon such conditions as may be reasonably necessary to ensure the public health, safety and welfare, including, but not limited to, those set forth in Sections 6.36.080 and 6.36.090 of this chapter, and subject to the further condition that the animal may be destroyed if any of such conditions is breached, and

    c.   Such other action as is found reasonably necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare, including a continuance of the impoundment of such animal for the purposes of observation for a period not to exceed thirty days after the date of the order.

    C.   The hearing officer shall promptly file the decision with the city clerk, who shall thereupon transmit copies to the parties. (County code § 6-1.1006(c))

 

6.36.130 Judicial review.
    Any action seeking a judicial review of a decision of the hearing officer shall be brought pursuant to Section 1094.5 of the Code of Civil Procedure of the state and shall be instituted within ninety days after the date the decision is filed with the city clerk. (County code § 6-1.1006(d))

 

6.36.140 Disposition of vicious animals.
    Except as otherwise provided in this section, in the event the hearing officer orders the destruction of an animal determined to be vicious, the chief of the animal control division shall continue to impound the animal and shall destroy the animal on the seventh day following the date of personal service upon the owner or deposit with the United States Postal Service of notice of the hearing officer’s decision. In the event the chief of the animal control division is personally served with a summons or other legal process in connection with a lawsuit which seeks a review of the hearing officer’s decision, the animal shall not be destroyed and shall continue to be impounded while the lawsuit is pending. (County code § 6-1.1007)

 

6.36.150 Fees.
    Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this code or a decision and order of the hearing officer to the contrary, the chief of the animal control division shall not release an animal which has been determined to be vicious pursuant to this chapter back to the owner until the owner has paid all fees and charges for impoundment. (County code § 6-1.1008)

 

6.36.160 Prohibited acts.
    A.  No person shall resist, delay, obstruct or impede any person in the enforcement of this chapter.

    B.   No person shall keep, harbor or maintain an animal determined to be vicious pursuant to Sections 6.36.040, 6.36.050 and 6.36.110 through 6.36.130 of this chapter, except as specifically authorized by law or by lawful order issued pursuant to this chapter. (County code § 6-1.1010)

Title 7 (RESERVED)

Title 8 HEALTH AND SAFETY
Chapter 8.03 HOTEL OPERATING STANDARDS
Chapter 8.06 PICTURE ARCADES
Chapter 8.08 REFUSE
Chapter 8.11 ALARM SYSTEMS
Chapter 8.12 FIREWORKS
Chapter 8.16 SMOKING
Chapter 8.18 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
Chapter 8.24 TREE PRESERVATION
Chapter 8.28 AGRICULTURE, RIGHT TO FARM
Chapter 8.32 DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED PROPERTY BY POLICE
Chapter 8.36 CAMPING WITHIN THE CITY LIMITS
Chapter 8.40 POLLUTION AND ANCHORAGE OF VESSELS
Chapter 8.44 UNATTENDED DONATION BOXES

Chapter 8.03 HOTEL OPERATING STANDARDS
8.03.010 Title.
    These regulations shall be known as the hotel operating standards of the city of West Sacramento. (Ord. 05-15 § 1)

 

8.03.020 Purpose.
    The general purpose of this chapter is to promote the health, safety, comfort, convenience, prosperity and general welfare by requiring that businesses that offer shelter to visitors, transient guests, and other residents provide a minimum level of cleanliness, quality and security. (Ord. 05-15 § 1)

 

8.03.030 Scope.
    This chapter shall apply to all hotels located within city limits. As used in this chapter, “hotel” means any business which is required to have posted a transient occupancy registration certificate from the city pursuant to Section 3.28.060 of this code. These provisions shall not apply to:

    A.  Residential care facilities or other facilities that are licensed and inspected by the state of California.

    B.   Hotels that are subject to and operated in compliance with a hotel operations agreement entered into with the city pursuant to Section 8.03.190 of this chapter. (Ord. 05-15 § 1)

 

8.03.040 Definitions.
    All terms in this chapter shall have the meaning set forth in Chapter 17.70 of the West Sacramento Municipal Code (WSMC), unless the term is specifically defined in this chapter or a different definition is apparent from the context of its use. The term “operator” shall have the meaning set forth in Section 3.28.020 of this code. (Ord. 05-15 § 1)

 

8.03.050 Management practices.
    A.  Room Rates. Room rates shall be posted in a prominent location in the guest rooms. Posting room rates in the reception area is strongly encouraged. Guests shall not be charged in excess of posted rates. A range of rates is acceptable.

    B.   Management Accessibility. A representative of the operator shall be accessible, in person or by telephone, on a twenty-four-hour basis. Contact information for the representative shall be posted in a prominent location in the guest rooms and in the reception area at all times.

    C.   Guest Complaints. The telephone number and address for city code enforcement shall be posted in a prominent location in the reception area/front desk.

    D.  Records. The operator of any hotel shall document in writing compliance with the requirements of this chapter relating to housekeeping (Section 8.03.090 of this chapter) and to maintenance of guest rooms and other hotel facilities and retain that documentation as required by Section 8.03.060(D) of this chapter. (Ord. 05-15 § 1)

 

8.03.060 Guest register.
    A.  The operator of any hotel shall keep a register on forms approved by or supplied by the city of the names and home or business addresses of the registrant to be accommodated with the length of stay indicated.

    B.   1. Except as otherwise provided in subsection C of this section, the operator or his or her employee shall, at the time of registration, verify the identification of the registrant by requesting to see, and copying onto the registration form, any of the following: the registrant’s valid driver’s license number, the number from a valid green card or a state identification card, the registrant’s valid passport number and country of issuance, a valid military photo identification, and/or a credit card verification of a credit card issued in the registrant’s name. The city manager or designee is authorized to allow the acceptance of other forms of verification. In such a case, the city manager shall notify hotel operators when and if alternate forms of verification are permitted.

    2.   The operator or his or her employee must also include on the registration forms required by this section the make, type and license number of the registrant’s automobile, trailer or other vehicle, and the state in which such vehicle is registered, for any vehicle operated by the registrant that is parked on the premises. Hotels that can demonstrate that they take sufficient reasonable steps to control access to and from parking areas on the premises shall not be required to include this information on the guest register forms. No person placing any information required by this law shall falsely or inaccurately state such information. The city shall develop forms for recording register information for all hotels that will conform to these requirements.

    C.   In the event that the hotel utilizes a prearrival registration or approval procedure that obviates the requirement for an arriving guest to go to the front desk and provide information typically required as part of the hotel’s customary registration process, the hotel shall not be required to comply with subsection B of this section; provided, however, that the hotel’s prearrival registration or approval procedure must be submitted to and approved by the city manager or designee, and the hotel must obtain such guest-related information of the type specified in subsection B of this section as the city manager might reasonably require.

    D.  If the owner or operator of any motel has been found to be in violation of this chapter through an administrative enforcement action or civil suit, or has been convicted of an infraction or misdemeanor violation of this chapter, then all guests to be accommodated must provide, at the time of registration, the information and identification as required of the registrant in accordance with subsections A and B of this section.

    E.   Retention of Records.

    1.   Guest registers shall be kept on the hotel site for a period of not less than four years. In the event that the hotel operates pursuant to a prearrival registration or approval procedure approved by the city manager pursuant to subsection C of this section, the information which is required to be obtained shall be retained on the hotel site or at such other location(s) as the city manager might designate, for a period of not less than four years.

    2.   Other records required to be kept by this chapter shall be retained for a period of not less than three years. Such records may be retained on- or off-site, but if maintained off-site, the records must be readily accessible to permit inspection, review and audit by the city in accordance with this chapter. (Ord. 05-15 § 1)

 

8.03.070 Inspection of records and facilities—Hotel inspection program.
    A.  Records and Hotel Facilities Subject to Inspection, Review, and Audit. The police chief or representative, or the fire chief or representative, the building official or representative, code enforcement officers and community services officers who have received a course of training pursuant to Section 832 of the Penal Code of the state, shall be permitted to enter and inspect a motel at any reasonable time, without charge or other restraint and in accordance with procedures required by law, for the purpose of ascertaining whether or not any of the provisions of this chapter are being violated.

    B.   Hotel Inspection Program.

    1.   The city shall conduct inspections of all businesses subject to the regulations specified in this chapter, hereinafter referred to as the “hotel inspection program.”

    2.   Upon completion of an inspection made pursuant to the hotel inspection program, city staff shall prepare a written evaluation for each facility subject to the regulations in this chapter. The evaluation criteria and grading rubric used for evaluations shall be approved by city council resolution, and may include criteria in addition to the standards set forth in this chapter.

    3.   Businesses will receive either a passing or failing grade as a result of the evaluation. A passing grade shall mean the business is being conducted within the minimum operating and cleanliness standards pursuant to this chapter. A failing grade shall mean the business does not meet the minimum operating and cleanliness standards pursuant to this chapter.

    4.   Businesses that receive a passing grade shall be subject to annual inspection. Businesses that receive a failing grade shall be subject to bi-annual inspection. A business receiving a failing grade may request re-evaluation before its next scheduled bi-annual inspection upon pre-prepayment of a re-inspection fee.

    5.   Following the evaluation, businesses will receive a “report card” with their grade. The “report card” shall be displayed in a conspicuous location of the business’s lobby, and must be clearly visible to customers entering the business. The grade must remain posted until the next hotel inspection, after which time program staff will issue a new grade based on existing conditions.

    6.   Any business disputing the grade received may appeal the determination to the city hearing officer pursuant to Chapter 1.08 of this code. The hearing officer’s decision shall be final.

    7.   The hotel inspection program is intended to function in parallel with the other enforcement mechanisms specified in this chapter. The city reserves the right to pursue all other civil, criminal, administrative, and code enforcement remedies available by law to ensure compliance with this chapter.

    C.   Independent Agency Inspections. The city manager or designee is authorized to promulgate administrative regulations to allow the acceptance of satisfactory ratings conferred by recognized, independent agencies in lieu of a city inspection, provided that the independent inspection is based upon performance and facility standards equal to or in excess of the standards commemorated in this chapter. (Ord. 17-5 § 2; Ord. 05-15 § 1)

 

8.03.080 Property security.
    A.  Guest Room Locks. On or after August 10, 2005, the following is required:

    1.   An operable dead bolt lock shall be installed and maintained on each main swinging entry door of a guest room. The dead bolt lock shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s specifications and shall comply with applicable state and local codes, including but not limited to those provisions relating to fire and life safety and accessibility for the disabled. When in the locked position, the bolt shall extend a minimum of 13/16 of an inch in length beyond the strike edge of the door and protrude into the doorjamb.

    2.   This section shall not apply to horizontal sliding doors. Existing dead bolts of at least one-half inch in length shall satisfy the requirements of this section.

    3.   Existing locks with a thumb-turn deadlock that have a strike plate attached to the doorjamb and a latch bolt that is held in a vertical position by a guard bolt, a plunger, or an auxiliary mechanism shall also satisfy the requirements of this section. These locks, however, shall be replaced with a dead bolt at least 13/16 of an inch in length the first time after August 10, 2005 that the lock requires repair or replacement.

    B.   Viewports. Each door shall have a viewport or window convenient to the door. Properties with fire resistive construction rated (fire rated) doors, at the time of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, are exempt from this provision to the extent that installing a viewport would negatively affect the fire rating.

    C.   Connecting Doors. Each door connecting two guest units that share a common wall shall be equipped with a functional deadbolt lock.

    D.  Window Locks. All windows designed to be opened shall have an operable window security or locking device. Louvered windows, casement windows, and all windows more than twelve feet vertically from the ground are excluded from this subdivision, except where the window is within eight feet horizontally of a roof or any other platform area. (Ord. 05-15 § 1)

 

8.03.090 Housekeeping conditions.
    Violation of any of the following obligations, along with any other housekeeping conditions, may be considered alone or in part in determining whether guest rooms or premises are in a clean, sanitary and nondefective condition, which is required by this chapter:

    A.  Mattress and All Bed Parts. Mattresses and all bed parts shall be free of stains, holes, rips or odors and maintained in a nondefective condition (e.g., without broken springs, indentations, sags, etc.).

    B.   Linens. Where provided by management, linens shall be free of stains, holes, rips or odors and shall be cleaned at change of occupancy or at least once a week when occupancy does not change. Linens shall be cleaned in hot water at least forty-three degrees Celsius (one hundred ten degrees Fahrenheit) for a minimum of twenty-five minutes.

    C.   Bathroom. Bathroom fixtures (e.g., toilet, bathtub, sink, mirror) shall be maintained without significant cracks, chips, or stains. Floors shall be washed with hot water and a sanitizer at change of occupancy or at least once a week when occupancy does not change.

    D.  Carpet. Carpeting shall be free of stains, holes, rips or odors and maintained in a nondefective condition.

    E.   Floors. Floor surfaces shall be made of nonabsorbent material. All surfaces and tile grouting shall be maintained without cracks, rips or missing elements. Floors shall be maintained in a nondefective condition.

    F.   Walls. Wall surfaces shall be maintained without spots, stains, flakes, chips, holes, etc.

    G.  Mold/Mildew. All surfaces, including carpeting and flooring, and fixtures shall be free from mold, mildew or bubbling conditions.

    H.  Electrical Equipment. For the purposes of this section, electrical equipment shall include furniture items installed by management, including televisions, lamps, etc. All electrical equipment shall be clean and in proper working order.

    I.    Water Leakage/Water Stains. All fixtures shall be maintained without leaks or drips. Water damage shall be immediately repaired.

    J.    Furniture. All furniture items provided by management shall be maintained in clean and proper working order.

    K.  Shades/Draperies/Blinds. Shades, draperies, blinds, etc., shall be free of stains, holes, rips or odors and maintained in a nondefective condition.

    L.   Vector Control. The entire hotel premises shall be kept clean in every part and free from garbage, rubbish, rodents, vermin and other offensive matter.

    M.  Heating. Each habitable guest room shall have independent control of the room temperature. (Ord. 06-13 § 1: Ord. 05-15 § 1)

 

8.03.100 Room furnishings.
    A.  Privacy. Privacy coverings such as shades, draperies or blinds shall be appropriately hung to cover all windows and shall be maintained in proper working order.

    B.   Room Light. An active, fully functional light switch shall be located at the main entry to the guest unit. Light fixtures shall be maintained in proper working order.

    C.   Bathroom Fixtures. Private bathrooms shall have a functioning water closet (e.g., toilet), lavatory (e.g., sink), shower receptor and/or bathtub. This should not be construed to prevent a sink from being placed in a guest room that does not have full bathroom facilities.

    D.  Shared Bathroom Facilities. Guests in facilities with shared bathrooms shall have access to a functioning water closet (e.g., toilet), lavatory (e.g., sink), shower receptor and/or bathtub. Showering or bathing areas shall be able to be securely locked from the inside. Separate facilities shall be provided for men and women or the facilities shall be able to be locked for individual use.

    E.   Hot/Cold Water. Hot and cold running water shall be provided for all plumbing facilities.

    F.   Telephone Rates. Telephone rates shall be posted in every room that has a private phone and be adhered to by management.

    G.  Emergency Telephone Access. Guests shall have twenty-four-hour emergency access to a telephone (a payphone is adequate) on the property. However, such telephone shall not be made generally available to the public so as to become a public nuisance.

    H.  Clothes Storage. Space shall be provided in good working order for hanging clothes and/or storing personal belongings. (Ord. 05-15 § 1)

 

8.03.110 Exterior of property.
    A.  Windows. Exterior window glass shall be without cracks, chips or holes.

    B.   Exterior Lighting. The exterior of the property, including adjacent public sidewalks and parking lots under the control of the operator, shall be illuminated during all hours of darkness during which the property is open for business in a manner so that persons standing in those areas at night identifiable from the street. However, the required illumination shall be placed so as to minimize interference with the quiet enjoyment of nearby residents of their property.

    C.   Landscaping. All areas on the property designated for landscaping, i.e., lawns, planter beds, and other unsurfaced locations, shall be maintained with properly trimmed living plant materials and without collecting litter or debris.

    D.  Directional Signs. Directional signs shall be posted as appropriate to ensure that emergency personnel can find guest rooms in a timely manner.

    E.   Exterior Trash/Garbage Storage. All containers used for the storage of trash, garbage, or recycled materials and placed on the exterior of the building(s) shall be screened from view from any public right-of-way. (Ord. 05-15 § 1)

 

8.03.120 Common areas.
    A.  Elevators. Guest service elevators need to be fully functional and pass appropriate agency inspections. The name and telephone of the inspection agency shall be posted in all of the elevators. Elevators shall be operational on a twenty-four-hour-a-day basis as of September 10, 2008.

    B.   Lobbies and Hallways. Any lobby area or other public space shall be maintained in a sanitary condition, free of garbage or debris and lit at a minimum of one footcandle at ground level. (Ord. 05-15 § 1)

 

8.03.130 Criminal and nuisance activity.
    A.  Nuisance Activity. The operation of the property shall not result in repeated nuisance activities on the property, including but not limited to disturbance of the peace, illegal drug activity, prostitution, public drunkenness, harassment of passersby, gambling, sale of stolen goods, public urination, theft, assaults, batteries, acts of vandalism, illegal parking, excessive loud noises, especially in the late night or early morning hours, traffic violations, curfew violations, lewd conduct, or police detentions and arrests.

    B.   Graffiti. All graffiti shall be removed on a continuous basis within forty-eight hours of application.

    C.   Litter. Litter shall be removed daily from the premises, including adjacent public sidewalks and parking lots under control of the operator. These areas shall be swept or cleaned, either mechanically or manually, on a weekly basis to control debris. (Ord. 05-15 § 1)

 

8.03.140 Duplicated regulation.
    Whenever any provisions of this chapter and any other provision of law, whether set forth in this code, or in any other law, ordinance, or resolution of any kind, imposes overlapping or contradictory regulations, or contains restrictions covering any same subject matter, that provision which is more restrictive or imposes higher standards shall control, except as otherwise expressly provided in these regulations. (Ord. 05-15 § 1)

 

8.03.150 Separate offenses.
    Each violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 05-15 § 1)

 

8.03.160 Enforcement by alternative methods of code enforcement.
    Violations of this chapter are also violations of Title 19 of the West Sacramento Municipal Code and are subject to enforcement in accordance with both provisions which may include progressive application of administrative proceedings, abatement, civil actions and civil penalties and may also be prosecuted as a misdemeanor or infraction depending on the nature and repetitiveness of the violations. Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to preclude or limit the city from seeking injunctive or other judicial relief. (Ord. 05-15 § 1)

 

8.03.170 Recovery of abatement costs.
    Costs for any abatement performed by, or on behalf of, the city, including the cost of extraordinary police services provided, shall be recoverable by the city in accordance with the procedures set forth in Title 19 of the WSMC. (Ord. 05-15 § 1)

 

8.03.180 Hotel operations agreements.
    A.  A business, otherwise subject to this chapter, may request and the city may agree to enter into a motel operations agreement for the purpose of establishing maintenance and operations standards for the business. Following approval of the agreement by the parties and recordation of a memorandum of the agreement, the business shall be exempt from compliance with the standards contained in this chapter for the duration of the agreement, provided the business remains in full compliance with the terms of the agreement.

    B.   The agreement shall include such terms and conditions as the city determines necessary to ensure that:

    1.   The property is maintained in good condition, in good repair, and in decent, safe, sanitary, and habitable condition for the benefit of guests;

    2.   Physical deterioration of the property, including without limitation interior living spaces and interior and exterior common areas, does not occur;

    3.   Adequate provision is made for the ongoing security of guests;

    4.   The property is managed and maintained in accordance with standards deemed appropriate for the motel, taking into account such matters as the motel’s history of compliance with the terms of this chapter, outstanding violations (if any) of this chapter or any other provision of law, and recommendations from other city departments;

    5.   The property is managed and maintained in conformance with all applicable state, federal, and local laws, ordinances, codes and regulations.

    C.   Other Terms; Enforcement.

    1.   The duration of each hotel operations agreement shall not exceed three years but may be extended by the mutual written consent of the parties.

    2.   The city shall have the right to inspect the operations and management of the business annually and at such other times as the city determines necessary in order to ensure compliance with the terms of the agreement.

    3.   The agreement shall provide that, in addition to any legal or equitable remedy available by law, violations of the terms of the agreement shall be considered violations of this chapter and Title 19 of the WSMC and shall be subject to enforcement in the same manner as provided in this chapter. The agreement may also provide for the expedited review of violations of the agreement and may establish financial and other penalties for failing to comply with the terms of the agreement. (Ord. 05-15 § 1)

Chapter 8.06 PICTURE ARCADES
8.06.010 Definitions.
    As used in this chapter:

    A.  “Picture arcade” means any place to which the public is admitted, or any public place, wherein one or more picture viewing devices are operated or maintained.

    B.   “Picture viewing device” means any coin or slug operated, or electronically or mechanically controlled, film or video tape viewing device which is operated, maintained or designed to show still or motion pictures or images to five or fewer persons per device at any one time. (Ord. 91-22 § 1(A); Ord. 90-30 § 3)

 

8.06.020 Visibility of interior and other requirements.
    A.  No picture arcade shall be maintained or operated unless all of the following requirements are met:

    1.   Each picture viewing device shall be visible from the main public entrance to the establishment.

    2.   The picture arcade shall be constructed such that each individual who views the still or motion pictures or images displayed on any picture viewing device is visible from head to toe from the main public entrance to the establishment and the manager station in the establishment.

    3.   It shall be the duty of the owners and operators of a picture arcade to ensure that at least one employee is on duty and situated in the manager’s station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises.

    4.   No partially or fully-enclosed booths or partially or fully-concealed booths shall be maintained in a picture arcade.

    5.   It shall be the duty of the owners and operators of a picture arcade, and it shall be the duty of any of their agents and/or employees present in the picture arcade to ensure that the view from each picture viewing device to the manager’s station and the main public entrance to the establishment, remains physically and visually unobstructed and unimpaired at all times.

    B.   For the purposes of this chapter, a person, place or thing shall be deemed visible only if the persons, place, or thing is visible by direct view with the retina of the unaided eye (except for the aid of corrective lenses). No alternative surveillance system or systems, such as use of mirrors or cameras, may be used to satisfy the visibility requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 91-22 § 1(C); Ord. 90-30 § 3)

 

8.06.030 Lighting.
    A.  During all hours of operation of the premises, all picture arcades and picture viewing devices shall be illuminated, exclusive of any illumination produced by any picture viewing device or other light providing appliance or spillover light from nonpicture arcade areas, with light having an intensity of not less than five foot candles at any location on any plane within the picture arcade.

    B.   No dimmer switches or other means of dimming shall be installed, used, or maintained in a picture arcade. Any switching devices installed in a picture arcade pursuant to Title 24, Part 2, Section 2-5319, Subsection (c) of the Code of California Regulations, or any successor provisions, shall not reduce the level of lighting below a minimum of five foot candles at any location on any plane in the picture arcade.

    C.   It shall be the duty of the owners and operators of any picture arcade, and it shall be the duty of any of their agents and/or employees present on the premises to ensure that the illumination described above, is maintained at all times that the picture arcade is open for business or a patron is on the premises. (Ord. 90-30 § 3)

 

8.06.040 Application.
    The applicability of this chapter shall not be affected by the utilization or maintenance of a membership or club format or any similar arrangement or form of doing business, if this chapter would otherwise be applicable. (Ord. 90-30 § 3)

 

8.06.050 Time for compliance.
    This chapter shall be applicable to any picture arcade which opens for business after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. Any picture arcade in existence prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, and made illegal hereby, shall conform to the provisions of this chapter within three months after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 90-30 § 3)

 

8.06.060 Penalties and enforcement.
    A.  Any person, partnership, corporation or other business association or entity or employee thereof violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. Each person, partnership, corporation or other business association or entity or employee thereof shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for every day or any portion thereof during which any violation of any provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person, firm or corporation or other business association or entity or employee thereof.

    B.   In addition to any other remedy provided by law, any premises upon which a picture arcade is maintained or operated in violation of this chapter is declared to be a public nuisance.

    C.   In addition to any other remedy provided by law, any or all aspects of this chapter and the various sections thereof may be enforced by the civil remedies of declaratory relief and injunction.

    D.  The remedies in this chapter and the various sections thereof are cumulative and in addition to all other remedies provided at law or equity. (Ord. 90-30 § 3)

 

8.06.070 Severability.
    This chapter and the various sections thereof are declared to be severable. Should any section of this chapter be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole, or any portion thereof other than the section so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. (Ord. 90-30 § 3)

 
Chapter 8.08 REFUSE
8.08.000 Chapter title.
    This chapter shall be referred to as the city of West Sacramento refuse and recycling ordinance. (Ord. 17-3 § 2)

 

8.08.010 Findings.
    The city council finds and declares that:

    A.  Orderly and effective removal of refuse, organic waste and recyclables from within the city by the city, its collector, or permit holders is essential to the health, safety, welfare and environment of the residents of the city in that, among other results, it ensures the regular collection of such wastes in a sanitary manner pursuant to unified procedures.

    B.   In order to meet these goals it is necessary that the city promotes the reduction of solid waste generated and reduces the quantity of solid waste going to landfills.

    C.   Under California law as embodied in the California Integrated Waste Management Act (California Public Resources Code Section 40000 et seq.), the city is required to prepare, adopt and implement source reduction and recycling elements to reach diversion goals, and is required to make substantial reductions in the volume of waste materials going to landfills, under the threat of penalties.

    D.  Debris from construction and demolition of buildings represents a large portion of the volume of wastes being generated in the city, and that much of the debris is suitable for recycling.

    E.   The city’s commitment to the diversion of waste and to compliance with state law requires the establishment of programs for waste reduction, recycling, and salvaging residential, commercial and construction and demolition materials. (Ord. 17-3 § 2)

 

8.08.020 Definitions.
    For purposes of this chapter the following definitions apply:

    “Biomedical waste” means any waste which may cause disease or reasonably be suspected of harboring pathogenic organisms; included are waste resulting from the operation of medical clinics, hospitals, and other facilities processing wastes which may consist of, but are not limited to, human and animal parts, contaminated bandages, pathological specimens, hypodermic needles, sharps, contaminated clothing and surgical gloves.

    “Bulky waste” means discarded furniture; carpets; mattresses; household appliances including refrigerators, ranges, washers, dryers, water heaters, and dishwashers and other similar items; large household goods including lawn and garden equipment (drained of fluids); tree and brush limbs with a diameter of not more than two feet and a length of not more than six feet in its longest dimension; bicycles, and other similar large personal items.

    “City” means the city of West Sacramento.

    “Collector” means the person under contract with the city to collect refuse, organic waste or recyclables.

    “Commercial service” means all refuse, recyclable and organic waste collection service that is not residential service.

    “Community development department” means the city department, which includes the planning, building, and development engineering divisions. The “building division” issues building permits and certificates of occupancy.

    “Construction and/or demolition” means all building, landscaping, remodeling, addition, removal or destruction involving the use or disposal of “designated recyclable and reusable materials.”

    “Construction and/or demolition debris” means discarded materials generally not considered water soluble, and nonhazardous in nature, including, but not limited to, steel, glass, brick, concrete, asphalt material, pipe, gypsum, wallboard, wood and lumber from the construction or destruction of a structure as part of a construction, renovation, demolition or landscaping project, and including rocks, soils, tree remains, green waste and bulky waste that normally results from land clearing, landscaping and development operations for a construction and demolition project.

    “Construction and demolition debris recycling plan” means a written plan, on a form prescribed by the city manager or designee, and submitted by a project applicant for the purpose of compliance with this chapter, including a goal to achieve a fifty percent diversion requirement.

    “Container” means the cart, bin, box or other receptacle approved by the city.

    “Covered project” means any residential and non-residential project required to comply with California Green Building Standards Code, Title 24, Part 11 (CALGreen) of the California Code of Regulations and any project which consists of one or more of the following:

    1.   Demolition of a building or structure; or

    2.   Demolition of a portion of a building or structure where a demolition permit is required by the City’s building official.

    “Designated recyclable and reusable materials” means:

    1.   Masonry building materials, including all products generally used in construction, including, but not limited to, asphalt, concrete, rock, stone and brick.

    2.   Wood materials, including any and all dimensional lumber, fencing or construction wood that is not chemically treated, creosoted, CCA pressure treated, contaminated or painted.

    3.   Vegetative materials, including trees, tree parts, shrubs, stumps, logs, brush or any other type of plants that are cleared from a site for construction and demolition or other use.

    4.   Metals, including all metal scrap such as, but not limited to, pipes, siding, window frames, door frames and fences.

    5.   Roofing materials, including wood shingles, as well as asphalt, stone- and slate-based roofing material.

    6.   Salvageable materials includes all salvageable materials and structures, including, but not limited to, wallboard, doors, windows, fixtures, toilets, sinks, bath tubs and appliances.

    “Drop box” or “debris box” means a receptacle of size to be classified as a roll-off container.

    “Food waste” means food scraps and trimmings and other putrescible waste that results from food production, preparation, storage, consumption or handling. “Food waste” includes, but is not limited to: meat, fish and dairy waste, fruit and vegetable waste, grain waste, and may also include compostable food packaging items such as pizza boxes, paper towels, and food contaminated paper products.

    “Garbage” means all putrescible and non-putrescible solid, semi-solid and associated liquid waste, as defined in California Public Resources Code Section 40191. Garbage does not include those items defined herein as recyclable materials, or organic waste that have been source-separated for purposes of diversion.

    “Green waste” means all tree and plant trimmings, grass cuttings, plants, weeds, leaves, branches, and other similar materials, other than bulky waste or garbage.

    “Hazardous waste” means any solid or liquid waste that is defined under Section 40141 of the California Public Resources Code, as amended periodically.

    “Inert fill” refers only to rubbish consisting of such materials as dirt, brick, concrete, used asphalt, clay, asbestos or asphalt pipe, or any other material which does not readily break down chemically or biologically when buried.

    “Organic waste” means food waste and green waste, either separate or commingled with each other, that has been separated at the source of generation from garbage and recyclable materials and contains less than three percent by volume contamination (garbage or other unacceptable materials), as determined by visual inspection.

    “Permit holder” means any person issued a hauling permit pursuant to Section 8.08.080, other than the collector, who loads, collects, hauls, or transports refuse, recyclable or organic waste that was generated by another person or its employees or subcontractors in the course of providing its principal service, or manufacturing or constructing or assembling its major product; by use of any means including, but not limited to, a dumpster truck, roll-off truck, or front-load truck, except those services that are exclusive services provided by the city’s collector.

    “Person” means any person, firm or corporation acting as principal, agent or officer, servant or employee, for him or herself or any other person, firm or corporation.

    “Property owner” means any person(s) owning a lot or parcel within the city.

    “Public works department” means the city department, which includes, the environmental services division.

    “Recyclable material (recyclables)” means any materials capable of being containerized and diverted from the landfill, including, but not limited to, magazines, newspapers, office paper, cardboard, chipboard, aluminum, tin and plastic beverage containers and other items that from time to time are classified as eligible for recycling. Recyclable material does not include refuse or hazardous materials..

    “Refuse” means garbage, rubbish, construction and/or demolition debris, or all of these.

    “Residential service” means all collection service provided to a single-family dwelling or each unit of a duplex, triplex, fourplex or other multiple-unit dwelling or mobile home receiving individual service.

    “Rubbish” means and includes all waste (other than garbage, green waste, organic waste, bulky waste, and construction/demolition debris), including, without limiting the generality of, the foregoing: rags, sawdust, sweepings, plaster, brick, window glass, cement, crockery, shells, metals, metal products, ashes, and all nonorganic accumulations from garden and/or yard areas, not including construction and/or demolition debris.

    “Scavenging” means the uncontrolled or unauthorized removal of refuse and/or recyclables.

    “Vectors” means insects or rodents which could act as carriers of infectious material which could cause disease. (Ord. 17-3 § 2)

 

8.08.030 City refuse collection service mandatory—Application required—Exclusive use.
    A.  It is unlawful for any person, other than the city, its collector, or hauling permit holder acting pursuant to a permit as provided in this chapter, to collect, remove or carry any refuse through any street or road in the city. Every owner of property at which refuse can be or is accumulated shall apply for the city refuse collection service provided by the city collector(s).

    B.   Each property owner must request service for each lot or parcel, accept the service required, and pay the proper charge for such service until the property owner notifies the city in writing to discontinue service by reason of vacancy, nonuse of the property, or transfer of ownership to another person.

    C.   No person, other than the property owner who requested service, shall deposit refuse into a container for the purpose of receiving service unless that person receives that property owner’s consent. (Ord. 17-3 § 2)

 

8.08.040 City recycling service.
    No person, other than the property owner who requested service, shall deposit recyclables into a container for the purpose of receiving service unless that person receives that property owner’s consent. (Ord. 17-3 § 2)

 

8.08.050 Unlawful disposal prohibited.
    A.  Scavenging is unlawful and is expressly prohibited.

    B.   Burying or burning of refuse, green or organic waste and/or recyclables is unlawful and is expressly prohibited.

    C.   It is unlawful for any person to place inert fill in any curbside container without the express permission of the city or its collector.

    D.  It is unlawful to have commercial service at residential units on a permanent basis. Temporary commercial service at residential units may be provided if there is compliance with city encroachment and/or hauling permit requirements. No service shall extend past ninety days in any twelve-month period. (Ord. 17-3 § 2)

 

8.08.060 Exceptions to mandatory city refuse collection service.
    Refuse may be collected and removed by persons other than the city’s collector or a permit holder only in the following circumstances:

    A.  A person may dispose of his or her own refuse without obtaining a city hauling permit as long as the refuse has been created on the property of the person and the refuse is being collected and/or removed without charge to any person by the person owning or managing the same property or by a full-time employee of that person who collects and/or removes refuse only as a portion of his or her duties and incidental thereto.

    B.   A person may collect and/or remove refuse for another person solely as a friendly, neighborly or filial gesture without a city hauling permit as long as the person collecting or removing it receives no compensation or consideration and such collection or removal occurs on a nonregular basis.

    C.   Green waste, bulky waste, and rubbish may be collected and removed by any person when that person has been hired or contracted solely to cut, trim, mow, or clean up the property on which such green waste, bulky waste, or rubbish has been created and when such collection and removal is done as part of, and incident to, such hiring or contracting. This exception does not apply to persons removing construction and/or demolition debris from the site; such persons must obtain a city hauling permit as provided in this chapter, regardless of the type or style of equipment and vehicle(s) used or the collection method employed.

    D.  Emergency work (demolition, construction, addition, or alteration performed in conjunction with an emergency due to a disaster or other reasonable cause for immediate action) shall not be subject to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 17-3 § 2)

 

8.08.070 Recycling of debris from covered projects.
    A.  Covered projects shall divert the amount of the construction and/or demolition debris generated from the project as required by the California Green Building Standards Code, Title 24, Part 11 (CALGreen) of the California Code of Regulations. All materials shall be diverted from disposal in solid waste landfills by using recycling, reuse, and other diversion programs.

    B.   No grading, building or demolition permit shall be issued for a covered project until the city has approved a “construction and demolition debris recycling plan” for the covered project. The plan shall be submitted to the department of community development, building division, at the time of permit application, in a format prescribed by the city manager or designee, as a component of the building or demolition process.

    C.   During the term of the construction or demolition project, the applicant shall recycle or divert the required percentage of materials, in accordance with the construction and demolition debris recycling plan and any procedures established by the city manager or designee, and keep records thereof, including the weight of the materials diverted.

    D.  No later than sixty days following the completion of the construction and/or demolition project, and prior to the city’s final inspection, the applicant shall submit a “recycling report” to the department of public works, which demonstrates compliance with the requirements of the above section. The report shall be in a format prescribed by the city manager or designee. The report shall show the amount of materials recycled, supported by written documentation of the records of measurement from recycling companies and organizations, deconstruction contractors, and/or landfill and disposal operators. Receipts and weight tags may be used to verify whether materials generated from the site have been or are to be recycled, reused, salvaged or otherwise disposed of. If a project involves both demolition and construction, the report and documentation for the demolition project must be submitted and approved by the department of public works before issuance of a building permit for the construction project. The city’s building official will not issue a certificate of occupancy or conduct a city final inspection until the city manager or designee determines that the recycling plan has been fulfilled. Nothing in this chapter shall limit the city manager or designee from requiring a progress report on the recycling practices at any time during the construction process.

    E.   Failure to comply with the requirements of the construction and demolition debris recycling plan may be grounds for issuance of a “stop work” order, and notwithstanding other remedies, will require a cash deposit of three percent of the value of the project for any future project submitted by the same applicant. (Ord. 17-3 § 2)

 

8.08.080 Hauling permit required.
    Persons who do not qualify for an exception to mandatory city refuse collection service pursuant to Section 8.08.060 of this chapter, and who are not collectors pursuant to contract with the city, may apply for a hauling permit from the city to collect, remove and/or dispose of refuse, organic waste and recyclable waste within the city so long as they comply with city standards approved by the city manager or designee and pay the franchise permit fee set by city council. City standards governing hauling permit approval shall be set by administrative policy pursuant to Section 8.08.300 of this chapter. (Ord. 17-3 § 2)

 

8.08.090 Recycling encouraged.
    Nothing in this chapter shall limit the right of an individual to donate, sell or otherwise dispose of recyclables, provided that such disposal is in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 17-3 § 2)

 

8.08.100 Proper disposal of refuse, recyclables and organics required.
    A.  All refuse, recycling and organic waste collected, removed and/or disposed pursuant to this chapter must be removed to a legal point of disposal and must be handled so that none of the material drops, falls or spills upon the ground or in any way constitutes a nuisance.

    B.   Removal of bulky waste to a legal point of disposal is the responsibility of the property owner. (Ord. 17-3 § 2)

 

8.08.110 Containment requirements.
    A.  All refuse, recyclables, and organic waste shall be kept in leak-proof containers, covered at all times except when loading or unloading.

    B.   Bins, drop boxes or debris boxes may be used by commercial services so long as any garbage is first placed in a plastic bag with a sealed top prior to placement in the container and so long as the container is leak-proof and has a cover that is closed at all times, except when loading or unloading.

    C.   For residential service, all refuse, recyclables and organic waste must be placed in containers provided by the city.

    D.  Each container lid must close tightly over the container, which shall not be overfilled.

    E.   No hazardous or biomedical waste shall be deposited into any container provided by the city. Hazardous or biomedical waste must be handled and disposed of in accordance with applicable state and federal regulations.

    F.   Recyclables and organic waste meant to be diverted from landfill disposal shall each be separated from refuse at the source of generation.

    G.  The city may adopt standards for the capacity and type of containers and enclosure to be used. In establishing standards, the city shall consider health and safety factors, the nature and extent of the activity conducted on the property, the type of solid waste produced or accumulated, and the location or other physical characteristics of the property. (Ord. 17-3 § 2)

 

8.08.120 Containers—Number.
    In all cases, a sufficient number/size of containers shall be ordered to contain any and all refuse and/or recyclables and organic waste accumulating on the owner’s property and shall be kept clean at all times and in a manner and place accessible to the collector so as not to create a public nuisance or to cause the breeding of vectors. If waste accumulated on a property creates a public nuisance or causes the breeding of vectors, the city manager or designee, may, at their discretion, increase the size/number of containers or collection frequency if an insufficient number/size of container is not ordered by the property owner. (Ord. 17-3 § 2)

 

8.08.130 Collection frequency.
    A.  Refuse, recyclables and/or organic waste shall be collected as directed by the city council, but no less frequently than once each week from containers serviced by automated front- or side-loader equipment.

    B.   For all other service types, including self-haul, refuse, recyclables and organic waste must be collected or hauled frequently enough to prevent a public nuisance. (Ord. 17-3 § 2)

 

8.08.140 Service location.
    A.  All containers for refuse, recyclables and organic waste from residential units shall be placed at the curb for collection before six a.m. on collection days, but not earlier than twelve noon, the day preceding the collection day.

    B.   The container(s) shall not be placed on the sidewalk or obstruct the right-of-way, traffic, ADA accessibility, driveways, drainage, or fire hydrants, shall not impede access by service personnel, and shall be placed at least three feet from parked vehicles and at least two feet from other containers.

    C.   Containers shall be returned to a location such that they will not be a public nuisance or in any degree offensive as soon as possible after collection, but no later than twenty-four hours after the time of collection.

    D.  For all service, all containers for refuse, recyclables and organic waste shall be placed in a public location accessible to the city or its collector.

    E.   The city retains the discretion to decide whether to enter onto private streets or easements for the purpose of collection of refuse, recyclables and organic waste. No refuse, recyclables and organic waste collection shall be provided on private roads unless those roads are designed to safely accommodate the weight and turning radius of service vehicles. The city may require the property owner to enter into a private road agreement with the city as a condition to providing service. (Ord. 17-3 § 2)

 

8.08.150 Rates—Charges—Adjustments.
    For the services of collecting and disposing of refuse, recyclables and organic waste, each person or owner of each place upon which refuse, recyclables and organic waste accumulates, and for whom collection service shall be provided by the city or its collector, shall be charged and shall pay the applicable rates set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 17-3 § 2)

 

8.08.160 Combined billing.
    Rates and charges for refuse, recyclables and organic waste services may be billed on the same bill and collected together with rates and charges for other city services. Whenever rates and charges for refuse, recyclables and organic waste services are billed together with rates and charges for other city services, the city may discontinue any or all the services for which the billing is rendered, in the manner hereinafter provided, if all or any part of such billing is not paid. (Ord. 17-3 § 2)

 

8.08.170 Billing period.
    The city shall issue bills for residential, commercial and all other forms of service rendered pursuant to this chapter at least every sixty days. The city may issue bills every thirty days for service rendered. In switching from one billing period to another billing period, the city may issue bills for a service period longer than thirty, but less than sixty days. Each bill shall specify the dates of the service period. (Ord. 17-3 § 2)

 

8.08.180 Direct billing—Liability.
    A.  The city shall bill the property owner directly for all service provided to the owner’s property.

    B.   The property owner shall be liable for payment of all city charges regardless of whether the bill is sent to the owner’s personal business or residential address or to the address of the owner’s property to which the service was supplied. (Ord. 17-3 § 2)

 

8.08.190 Date due, delinquent.
    The city’s bill for service rendered is due and payable when received. Each bill shall specify the date it is issued. A bill shall be delinquent if the city does not receive payment for the entire amount of the bill by the due date listed on the bill, unless the due date falls on a weekend day or holiday, in which case the due date become the next business day. (Ord. 17-3 § 2)

 

8.08.200 Delinquencies—Penalty.
    A.  A one-time basic penalty of ten percent of the rate for one month shall be added to each delinquent bill for the first month the bill is delinquent.

    B.   After assessing the basic penalty provided in subsection A of this section, thereafter an additional penalty of one-half percent per month for two months and thereafter one and one-half percent per month shall be added to all delinquent charges and basic penalties remaining unpaid, until the city council requests the city administrative services director to include the amount of all delinquencies on the bills for taxes levied against the appropriate premises as set forth in Section 8.08.180 of this chapter.

    C.   Basic penalty and additional penalty may be reduced in accordance with criteria authorized by the city council. (Ord. 17-3 § 2)

 

8.08.210 Delinquency—Payment/partial payment.
    Moneys paid where any portion of an account is delinquent shall first be credited to the delinquent portion of the bill and then to the current billing. (Ord. 17-3 § 2)

 

8.08.220 Delinquency—Liens.
    Delinquent charges remaining unpaid may be recorded as a lien with the county and, after recordation, shall constitute a lien upon all real property owned or thereafter acquired by the property owner in the county. The city shall include a statement to this effect on its bills to each property owner. The city may from time to time compile lists of such delinquent charges, and record them with the county recorder as liens. (Ord. 17-3 § 2)

 

8.08.230 Delinquency—Collection with taxes.
    All rates, charges, penalties and interest that remain delinquent as of June 30th of each year may be collected in the same manner as the general taxes for the city for the forthcoming fiscal year as follows:

    A.  The city shall prepare a written report, which shall be filed by the city clerk. The report shall describe each parcel of real property for which there are any delinquencies in any rates or charges for services rendered to each parcel during the preceding year, and the amount of the delinquency. The report of delinquent refuse charges may be combined with the report of any other delinquent charges, as long as the report identifies the delinquent charges for each service for each parcel.

    B.   The city clerk shall publish notice of the report’s filing and of the time and place of hearing on the report, prior to the date set for the hearing. The notice shall be published at least once a week for two weeks. The city clerk shall also mail written notice of the report’s filing to each property owner whose property or parcel is identified as being subject to delinquent charges, setting forth individually each property, and each of the services and charges due for that property.

    C.   At the time stated in the notice, the city council shall hear and consider all objections or protests, if any, to the report concerning the delinquencies. Thereafter, the city council may adopt, revise, change, reduce or modify any delinquency or overrule any or all objections thereto. The city council shall then make its determination on each delinquency identified in the report; the city council’s determination shall be final.

    D.  Following the city council’s hearing, on or before August 10th of each year, the city clerk shall file with the finance director a copy of the report, signed by the city clerk, stating the city council has adopted the report. The city clerk shall request the finance director to include the amount of delinquencies on the bills for taxes levied against the properties identified in the report. (Ord. 17-3 § 2)

 

8.08.240 Billing adjustments.
    The city manager may adjust or grant a rebate from the rates or fees provided in this chapter in the event of a dispute relating to a charge to a customer; provided, however, that all parties affected shall have a right to appeal the city manager’s determination to the city council within seven days after receipt of the city manager’s written decision. The decision of the city council thereon shall be final and binding on all parties. (Ord. 17-3 § 2)

 

8.08.250 Default—Recovery of costs.
    A.  In the event that any property owner fails to make any payment provided for in this chapter, the property owner and subject property shall be deemed to be in default, and the city may declare the balance, or any remaining balance, due and payable.

    B.   In the event the city is required to bring legal action to enforce any provision of this chapter, including, but not limited to, the collection of delinquent fees, penalties or other charges, the city shall be entitled to recover its reasonable attorney’s fees, interest, court costs and other costs incurred by the city to bring such action. (Ord. 17-3 § 2)

 

8.08.260 Payment for regular collection.
    Collection and/or removal of refuse by other than the collector, does not relieve a person of the responsibility to pay for regular collection by the collector. (Ord. 17-3 § 2)

 

8.08.270 Discontinuance, restoration of service.
    As an alternative method of enforcing the provisions of this chapter or of any other city ordinance, rule, regulation, or the city’s contract with its collector, the city shall have the authority to discontinue service to property in the following manner:

    A.  At least ten days before the proposed discontinuance, the city shall provide written notice to the customer and the property owner, if other than the customer, of the city’s intent to discontinue service and the procedure for, and the availability of, an opportunity to discuss the reasons for the proposed discontinuance of service.

    B.   Before discontinuing service, the customer or property owner shall have the opportunity to discuss the reason for the proposed discontinuance with an employee designated by the city manager who shall be empowered to review disputed bills, rectify any errors and settle controversies pertaining to the discontinuance of service.

    C.   When service has been discontinued as provided in this section, the customer or property owner shall pay all unpaid charges, including penalties and interest, plus all city expenses and charges for the discontinuance and restoration of service, prior to the restoration of the discontinued service.

    D.  No service shall be discontinued on any Saturday, Sunday, legal holiday or at any time during which the city’s offices are not open to the public. (Ord. 17-3 § 2)

 

8.08.280 Remedies deemed cumulative.
    All remedies set forth in this chapter for the collection and enforcement of charges, rates and penalties are cumulative and may be pursued alternatively or consecutively. (Ord. 17-3 § 2)

 

8.08.290 Standards for containers and for vehicles collecting and/or removing refuse.
    Every vehicle that the city, its collector, or hauling permit holder uses to collect and/or dispose of refuse in the city shall:

    A.  Be kept clean on the inside, and clean and well-painted on the outside;

    B.   Be in good repair, free of dents or other damage and in compliance with all safety standards;

    C.   Have a bed sufficiently tight so as not to leak and have proper covers so that the refuse shall not be offensive;

    D.  Have a sign on each side of such vehicle with appropriate words in letters not less than four inches in height indicating such vehicle is engaged in the work of sanitary service. The refuse shall be loaded so that none of it shall fall, drop or spill upon the ground; and

    E.   Have a sign on each container clearly marked with the name and phone number of the business. (Ord. 17-3 § 2)

 

8.08.300 Promulgation of regulations.
    The city manager or designee is authorized to promulgate and establish administrative rules and regulations not in conflict with this chapter and which are deemed necessary to provide the most efficient administration of this chapter. (Ord. 17-3 § 2)

 

8.08.310 Violation—Misdemeanor—Administrative penalties—Appeal—Remedies cumulative.
    A.  A violation of any provision of this chapter is a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars or by imprisonment in the County Jail not to exceed six months, or both. Each and every day, or part of a day, a violation of this chapter continues shall be deemed a separate offense under this chapter and shall be punishable as such.

    B.   Any person who violates any requirement of this chapter also may be assessed an administrative penalty of up to ten thousand dollars for a violation of Section 8.08.070, or up to five hundred dollars for a violation of any other provision of this chapter. The city manager or designee shall verify that noncompliance has occurred, contact the person to request compliance, and if that is unsuccessful, notify the person of the assessed penalty. The notice of violation shall be in writing and shall identify the amount of the penalty assessed, the nature of the violation, a deadline for compliance, and the right to an appeal hearing before the hearing officer to protest the validity of the notice and/or the amount of the assessed penalty. The notice shall be considered a final appealable decision. The hearing officer’s decision shall be final.

    C.   Appeals from a notice of violation shall be filed and conducted according to the procedures in Chapter 1.08, “Appeal and Hearing Procedure,” of this code.

    D.  Nothing in this chapter precludes the use of any other type of enforcement if administrative fines are imposed under this section.

    E.   In addition to the general penalty set forth above, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of this chapter shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated by the city in accordance with Title 19 of the municipal code, and other applicable provisions of law. (Ord. 17-3 § 2)

Chapter 8.11 ALARM SYSTEMS
8.11.010 Purpose.
    The purpose of this chapter is to encourage alarm users and alarm companies to properly use and maintain the operational effectiveness of alarm systems in order to improve the reliability of alarm systems and reduce or eliminate false alarms. (Ord. 12-8 § 2; Ord. 03-13 § 3)

 

8.11.020 Definitions.
    In this chapter the following terms and phrases shall have the following meanings:

    “Alarm administrator” means a person or persons designated by the city manager to administer, control and review false alarm reduction efforts and administer the provisions of this chapter, including, but not limited to, the collection of fees and fines.

    “Alarm company” means a person in the business of selling, providing, monitoring, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving or installing an alarm system in an alarm site. Such companies shall be licensed in accordance with the provisions of Business and Professions Code Section 7590 et seq.

    “Alarm dispatch request” means a notification to a law enforcement agency that an alarm, either manual or automatic, has been activated at a particular alarm site.

    “Alarm permit(s)” means authorization granted by the city to an alarm user to operate an alarm system.

    “Alarm site” means a single fixed premises or location served by an alarm system or systems. Each unit, if served by a separate alarm system in a multi-unit building or complex, shall be considered a separate alarm site.

    “Alarm system” means a device or series of devices, including, but not limited to, hardwired systems and systems interconnected with a radio frequency method such as cellular or private radio signals, which emit or transmit a remote or local audible, visual or electronic signal indicating an alarm condition and intended to summon law enforcement response, including local alarm systems. Alarm system does not include an alarm installed in a vehicle, or on someone’s personal (handheld/portable) safety device unless the vehicle or the personal alarm is permanently located at a site. Alarm devices installed on a temporary basis by the West Sacramento police department or other law enforcement agencies are not included under this definition.

    “Alarm user” means any person who has contracted for monitoring, repair, installation or maintenance service from an alarm company for an alarm system, or who owns or operates an alarm system which is not monitored, maintained or repaired under contract.

    “Arming station” means a device that allows control of an alarm system.

    “Automatic dialing device” means any electrical, electronic, mechanical, or other device capable of being programmed to send a prerecorded voice message, when activated, over a telephone line, radio or other communication system, to a law enforcement, public safety or emergency services agency requesting dispatch.

    “Cancellation or canceled” means the process where response is terminated when an alarm user or an alarm company (designated by the alarm user) for the alarm site notifies the responding law enforcement agency that there is not an existing situation at the alarm site requiring law enforcement agency response after an alarm dispatch request.

 

    “City” means the city of West Sacramento.

    “City manager” means the city manager of the city of West Sacramento or designee.

    “Days” means calendar days excluding city of West Sacramento sanctioned holidays.

    “False alarm” means an alarm dispatch request to the West Sacramento police department (which has not been canceled) when the responding law enforcement officer finds no evidence of a criminal offense or attempted criminal offense after having completed a timely investigation of the alarm site.

    “Hearing officer” means an individual or individuals appointed by the city manager, acting singularly or collectively, to hear matters as provided for and described in this chapter, in accordance with regulations that may be established by the city council.

    “License” means a license issued by the state of California to an alarm company to sell, install, monitor, repair, and/or replace alarm systems.

    “Local alarm system” means any alarm system, which is not monitored, that annunciates an alarm only at the alarm site.

    “Monitoring” means the process by which an alarm company receives signals from an alarm system and relays an alarm dispatch request to the West Sacramento police department for the purpose of summoning law enforcement to the alarm site.

    “One-year period” means the three hundred and sixty-five consecutive day period commencing on the date of issuance of a particular alarm permit or the anniversary date thereof.

    “Panic alarm” means an audible/silent alarm system signal generated by the manual activation of a device intended to signal a life threatening or emergency situation requiring law enforcement response.

    “Permit holder” means the alarm user to whom an alarm system permit is issued. For the purpose of this chapter, the term permit holder shall also include officers, agents, employees, independent contractors, and any other persons subject to the direct or indirect control of the permit holder.

    “Permit period” means the period of time when an alarm permit is active. For purposes of this chapter, an alarm permit is good for one year from the date issued unless suspended or revoked pursuant to this chapter.

    “Person” means an individual, corporation, partnership, association, organization, school district, government agency, and any other type of legal entity.

    “Responder” means an individual capable of reaching the alarm site within thirty minutes and having access to the alarm site, the code to the alarm system, and the authority to approve repairs to the alarm system.

    “Robbery alarm” means an alarm system activated in the event of a robbery.

    “Siren” means any audible noise similar to that which must be sounded by an authorized emergency vehicle under the conditions set forth in Section 21055 of the California Vehicle Code.

    “Verify” means an attempt by the alarm company, or its representative, to contact the alarm site by telephonic or other electronic means, whether or not actual contact with a person is made, to determine whether an alarm signal is valid before requesting law enforcement dispatch, in an attempt to avoid an unnecessary alarm dispatch request. (Ord. 12-8 § 2; Ord. 03-13 § 3)

 

8.11.030 Application.
    This chapter applies to all alarm systems installed, connected, operated or maintained prior to and after the date this chapter becomes effective. (Ord. 12-8 § 2; Ord. 03-13 § 3)

 

8.11.040 General requirements and prohibitions.
    A.  No alarm system that emits the sound of a siren shall be installed or connected. This section shall not be construed to prohibit the use of certain electronic horns or howlers that may be approved by the alarm administrator, provided such devices do not emit sounds similar to a police, fire, or other emergency response vehicle siren.

    B.   Any alarm system that is designed to generate an audible sound on the exterior of the structure in which the system is maintained shall have, as part of the alarm system, an automatic shutoff device that shuts off the alarm system within fifteen minutes of initial activation.

    C.   No automatic dialing device shall be interconnected to Yolo Emergency Communications Agency (YECA) or the West Sacramento police department. (Ord. 12-8 § 2; Ord. 03-13 § 3)

 

8.11.050 Duties of parties.
    A.  Duties of Alarm User.

    1.   An alarm user shall:

    a.   Obtain an alarm permit pursuant to Section 8.11.060;

    b.   Maintain the alarm site and the alarm system in a manner that will minimize or eliminate false alarms;

    c.   Make every reasonable effort to have a responder present at the alarm system’s location within thirty minutes when requested by the West Sacramento police department in order to:

    i.    Deactivate an alarm system,

    ii.   Provide access to the alarm site, and/or

    iii.  Provide alternative security for the alarm site;

    d.   Not activate an alarm system for any reason other than an occurrence of an event that the alarm system was intended to report;

    e.   Notify Yolo Emergency Communications Agency (YECA) of any impending service, test, or maintenance of the alarm system that may signal a false alarm. An alarm activated where such prior notice has been given shall not constitute a false alarm;

    f.    Not cause or allow an alarm system to be installed, connected, operated, or maintained upon any property located within the city of West Sacramento without first obtaining an alarm permit. A valid alarm permit must be maintained as long as the alarm system is operational;

    g.   Alarm users who have installed an alarm system prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter and who wish to continue to operate and/or maintain their system shall be required to obtain an alarm permit within thirty days of mailing of a notice from the alarm administrator, that a permit is required;

    h.   For nonresidential properties, a valid alarm permit shall be kept on the premises, in a visible location, where the alarm system is installed for use.

    B.   Duties of Alarm Company.

    1.   Each alarm company shall provide a copy of this chapter to each person with whom it signs a contract to install and/or monitor an alarm system upon the signing of the contract.

    2.   An alarm company may monitor an alarm system only after it has established that the alarm user has a valid permit for the alarm system. If the alarm administrator notifies an alarm company of a denial, non-renewal, suspension, revocation or of other conduct rendering it illegal for the alarm user to operate the alarm, the alarm company shall discontinue service to that alarm system within fifteen days of such notification. The alarm company shall immediately notify the city in writing that it has complied with this section.

    3.   Each alarm company shall provide to the alarm administrator a current list of the alarm company’s customers located within city limits. Such list shall be updated upon request of the alarm administrator.

    4.   Any alarm company that relays messages to the West Sacramento police department via Yolo Emergency Communications Agency (YECA), and requests the dispatch of police officers to an alarm system location, shall maintain and shall provide the following information to police dispatch at the time each message is relayed:

    a.   The name of the permit holder;

    b.   The address of the alarm system;

    c.   The alarm permit number;

    d.   Type of alarm, i.e., burglary/robbery/panic; and

    e.   Name of the “responding” person (if available) and estimated time of arrival. (Ord. 12-8 § 2; Ord. 03-13 § 3)

 

8.11.060 Permits.
    A.  Permit Application. Applications shall be submitted to the alarm administrator on forms provided by the alarm administrator. The alarm administrator shall prescribe the form of the application and request such information as is necessary to evaluate and act upon the permit application.

    B.   Multiple Alarms. Multiple alarms located at a single address may be installed and operated under a single permit or under multiple permits as specified below:

    1.   Any person who desires to operate or maintain more than one alarm system at any property may apply for a single alarm permit for all alarms to be operated at a single address. If a single permit is obtained for multiple alarm systems at a single address, false alarms by all alarm systems under the single permit will be cumulative.

    2.   Any person who desires to operate more than one alarm system at any property may apply for separate permits for each alarm system operated or maintained at such a location. If the applicant chooses to secure a separate permit for each alarm system, a separate application shall be submitted for each system. Where multiple permits are issued for multiple alarm systems at one address, false alarm fines will be charged only to the permit for the alarm system which resulted in the false alarm.

    C.   Permit Application Fee. Applicants for alarm permits shall pay a fee established by resolution of the city council and set forth in the city’s Book of Fees. The fee shall be calculated to cover the city’s costs of issuing the permit. Any person who fails to obtain an alarm permit as required by this chapter will be provided with a thirty-day written notice by the alarm administrator to obtain a permit (“cure and correct period”). If, during the course of the cure and correct period, the alarm user still does not obtain an alarm permit, the alarm user shall be subject to a fine in the amount established by resolution of the city council.

    D.  Issuance—Expiration—Renewal of Permit.

    1.   The alarm administrator shall investigate and verify information submitted by the applicant. After all requirements have been satisfied the alarm administrator may issue an alarm permit.

    2.   Alarm permits may be issued to the person who is the owner of or in possession of the property that the alarm system is designed to protect.

    3.   Each alarm permit expires two years after the date it is issued or renewed, unless the permit is revoked at an earlier time. The date of issuance or renewal is the date shown on the permit.

    4.   The application for renewal must be received by the alarm administrator thirty days prior to the permit’s expiration date.

    5.   Alarm permits may not be transferred to another person or alarm site. Permits are valid only for the permittee and address listed on the permit.

    E.   Denial of Permit.

    1.   An alarm permit shall be denied when reasonable evidence demonstrates:

    a.   That the permit will be used for illegal purposes; or

    b.   That the application contains misrepresentation or false statements.

    2.   The alarm administrator shall provide the permit applicant written notice of the denial of the application. The notice of denial shall be mailed not later than fifteen days following the decision. The notice shall include the grounds for denial.

    F.   Suspension or Revocation of Permit.

    1.   Suspension of Permit. The following shall constitute grounds for a suspension of an alarm permit:

    a.   Assessment of five or more fines for false alarms within a one-year period;

    b.   Assessment of a subsequent fine when payment of a previous fine is delinquent;

    c.   Violation of any provision of this chapter punishable as an infraction pursuant to Section 8.11.070(C);

    d.   Violation of any condition imposed by the alarm administrator upon a permit holder in accordance with subsection (H)(6) of this section.

    2.   Length of Suspension.

    a.   A suspension under subsections (F)(1)(a) and (b) of this section shall not exceed fifteen days.

    b.   A suspension under subsections (F)(1)(c) and (d) of this section shall not exceed ninety days.

    3.   Effect of Renewal of Permit on Suspension.

    a.   If any suspension extends beyond the expiration date of the permit, renewal of the permit shall not alter the length of the suspension.

    b.   Operation of an alarm under a renewed permit shall not commence until the suspension period has been fully served.

    4.   Restoration of Suspended Permit.

    a.   A reinstatement fee will be required prior to the end of the suspension period in order to reinstate the alarm permit. The fee will be in the amount set forth in a resolution approved by the city council and shall be in an amount to defray the administrative costs associated with investigating and re-issuing the permit.

    b.   On the day following the expiration of the suspension period, the alarm administrator shall restore the permit. The permit shall not be restored if any fee or fine remains delinquent.

    5.   Revocation of Permit.

    a.   An alarm permit may be revoked if the alarm user allows an alarm to remain operational after a suspension of the alarm permit.

    b.   An alarm permit may be revoked upon receipt of a second suspension within a three hundred sixty-five-consecutive-day period of a previous suspension.

    G.  Use of Alarm During Suspension or After Revocation of Alarm Permit.

    1.   An alarm user shall not allow an alarm to remain operational after the alarm user’s permit has been suspended or revoked.

    2.   Any alarm company shall not continue to send or permit the sending of an alarm user’s silent alarm emergency signal to the Yolo Emergency Communications Agency (YECA) after having been notified in writing that the user’s alarm system permit has been suspended or revoked.

    3.   Violation of subsections (G)(1) and (2) of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor.

    H.  Issuance of Permit after Revocation.

    1.   Any person whose alarm permit has been revoked may apply for a new permit in accordance with the provisions of this section.

    2.   All applications after revocation shall be submitted to the alarm administrator.

    3.   The alarm administrator shall conduct an investigation to determine whether the grounds for the prior revocation have been eliminated or are not likely to occur again in the foreseeable future. Such investigation may include, but shall not be limited to, an on-sight examination of the alarm system and any specifications, diagrams, or descriptions pertaining to the system.

    4.   If the alarm administrator determines that the grounds for the revocation have been eliminated or that such grounds are not likely to occur again in the future, an alarm permit may be issued.

    5.   No alarm permit will be issued until all previous fees and fines have been paid.

    6.   The alarm administrator may impose such conditions on the alarm permit as he or she deems reasonably necessary to insure that the alarm user will comply with the provisions of this chapter. Said conditions may include a probationary period during which the alarm shall not actuate false alarms.

    7.   A fee may be assessed for the issuance of a permit after revocation to cover the cost of the investigation and issuance of the permit in the amount set forth in a resolution approved by the city council.

    I.    Notice. The permittee shall be notified in writing of the decision to suspend or revoke a permit at least fifteen days prior to effective date of the suspension or revocation. The notice shall inform the permittee of the grounds upon which the proposed suspension or revocation is based and shall allow the permittee to request, in writing, that a reconsideration of the suspension be held in accordance with Section 8.11.080. Failure to request reconsideration within ten days of the date of the mailing of the notice of the proposed suspension or revocation of the permit shall constitute a waiver of the permittee’s right to challenge the revocation or suspension. (Ord. 18-3 § 2)

 

8.11.070 Violation of this chapter.
    A.  False Alarms.

    1.   General.

    a.   Alarm users may be fined for false alarms.

    2.   Special Alarms.

    a.   No person shall activate a robbery alarm system for any reason other than a robbery or an attempted robbery.

    b.   No person shall activate a panic alarm for any reason other than signifying an emergency.

    B.   Administrative Fines and Fees.

    1.   Alarm users may be assessed administrative fines and/or fees for violations of this chapter in the amounts set forth in a resolution approved by the city council.

    2.   The alarm administrator shall notify the alarm user and permit holder in writing after each false alarm. Notification shall include the amount of the administrative fine.

    3.   Alarm users shall be assessed an administrative fine upon the occurrence of the third false alarm within a one-year period. Each subsequent false alarm shall be assessed a new administrative fine in an amount determined by city council resolution.

    4.   An administrative fine or fee invoice shall be mailed to the alarm user and permit holder immediately following the assessment of the fine or fee. Fines and fees are due and owing not later than fifteen days after the date of mailing the invoice.

    5.   All fines and fees shall be paid to the alarm administrator.

    C.   Other Violations of this Chapter. Violations of this chapter shall be punishable as an infraction except as set forth in Section 8.11.060(G).

    D.  Effect of Violation. The conviction or punishment of any person for violating any provision of this chapter or for failing to secure a permit as required by this chapter shall not relieve such person(s) from paying the appropriate fee due and unpaid at the time of such conviction or punishment, nor shall payment of any fee bar any civil prosecution for a violation of any provision of this chapter and subject to fine. All remedies shall be cumulative and the use of one or more remedies by the city shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter and subject to fine. (Ord. 12-8 § 2; Ord. 03-13 § 3)

 

8.11.080 Request for reconsideration and appeals.
    A.  Request for Reconsideration.

    1.   Any person aggrieved by the determination of a false alarm, the assessment of a fine, or the denial/suspension/revocation of an alarm permit, may make a written request to the alarm administrator to reconsider said action.

    2.   Requests for reconsideration shall be submitted to the alarm administrator within ten days of the date of the mailing of the invoice or notice of determination of a false alarm, the assessment of a fine, or the denial/suspension/revocation of an alarm permit. The request shall include the reason(s) for requesting reconsideration and should be accompanied by any supporting documentation in the possession of the party requesting reconsideration, together with the fee described in the security alarms section of the city’s Book of Fees.

    3.   Upon written receipt of a request for reconsideration, the proposed fine/denial/suspension/revocation shall be stayed pending the conclusion of the reconsideration.

    4.   The requestor shall be notified in writing of the decision of the alarm administrator. If the request is denied, payment shall be due fifteen days after the date of mailing of the notice of the denial of reconsideration.

    B.   Appeals.

    1.   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the alarm administrator denying reconsideration may appeal such decision to a hearing officer.

    2.   Notice of appeal complying with Title 1, Chapter 1.08 of the West Sacramento Municipal Code shall be filed in writing with the city clerk not later than fifteen days after the date of mailing of the notice of the denial of the reconsideration. During the pendency of said appeal, the decision of the alarm administrator shall be stayed. Notice of the appeal shall also be mailed by the appellant to the alarm administrator.

    3.   The notice of appeal shall include the name, current address and phone number of the appellant, a statement of the action that is being appealed, and a statement of the facts and law on which the appeal is based. In addition, the appeal shall be accompanied by a copy of the relevant applications, renewals and requests submitted to the alarm administrator and all notices and decisions received from the alarm administrator, together with the applicable filing fee as required by Section 1.08.020 and described in the appeal fees section of the city’s Book of Fees.

    C.   Appeal Procedure.

    1.   The hearing officer shall conduct the hearing pursuant to the provisions of Title 1, Chapter 1.08, of the West Sacramento Municipal Code.

    2.   The decision of the hearing officer shall be final. (Ord. 18-3 § 2)

 

8.11.090 Miscellaneous.
    A.  Temporary Discontinuance of Response. The West Sacramento police department may temporarily discontinue responding to an alarm at any location if it has responded to two or more false alarms within a twenty-four hour period. The alarm user will be notified, if known, by the West Sacramento police department of this temporary discontinuance of response after the second false alarm. Such temporary discontinuance shall cease when the alarm user demonstrates to the department that the cause(s) for these false alarms has been corrected or, in any event, no later than upon expiration of the twenty-four-hour period.

    B.   False Alarm Exemption. If an alarm user presents sufficient proof that a particular false alarm falls into one of the following categories, said alarm shall not be counted against the alarm user in determining whether the alarm user should be assessed an administrative fine or subject to other action under this chapter:

    1.   False alarms which the alarm user can demonstrate were caused by violent acts of nature;

    2.   False alarms which the alarm user can demonstrate were actually caused by the act of some person other than:

    a.   The alarm user. For the purpose of this subsection the term alarm user shall include officers, agents, employees, independent contractors, and any other persons subject to the direct or indirect control of the alarm user,

    b.   The person who installed, connected, operated, maintained, or serviced the alarm system,

    c.   The manufacturer of the alarm system, including the manufacturer’s officers, agents, employees, independent contractors, and any other persons subject to the direct or indirect control of the manufacturer;

    3.   There will be no false alarm if a cancellation occurs prior to law enforcement arriving at the scene.

    C.   Fees as Debt. The amount of any fees or fine(s) due and owing shall be deemed a debt to the city of West Sacramento. An action may be commenced in the name of the city of West Sacramento in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of any delinquent fee or fine. All fees and/or fines shall be deemed delinquent thirty days from the date they are due and payable.

    D.  Government Immunity. An alarm permit is not intended to, nor will it, create a duty or obligation, either expressed or implied, of response. Any and all liability and consequential damage resulting from the failure to respond to a notification is hereby disclaimed and governmental immunity as provided by law is retained. By applying for an alarm permit, the alarm user acknowledges that law enforcement response may be influenced by factors such as the availability of police units, priority of calls, weather conditions, traffic conditions, emergency conditions, staffing levels and prior response history. (Ord. 12-8 § 2; Ord. 03-13 § 3)

Chapter 8.12 FIREWORKS
8.12.010 Title.
    This chapter shall be known as the West Sacramento Fireworks Code, and may be cited as such, and will be referred to herein as the “fireworks code.” (Ord. 11-2 § 2)

 

8.12.020 Enforcement.
    The fireworks code shall be enforced by the fire and police departments of the city of West Sacramento. (Ord. 11-2 § 2)

 

8.12.030 Definitions.
    The following words and phrases, as used in this chapter, are defined as follows:

    “Affiliated organizations” means one of the following:

    1.   Organizations incorporated under the same charter or organization and their auxiliaries if the auxiliary is incorporated under the same charter.

    2.   Organizations sharing the same officers and/or place of meetings and/or national parent organization.

    3.   Subdivisions and/or fractional divisions however named or delineated of organizations.

    “City manager” means the city manager of the city of West Sacramento or designee.

    “Fire code official” means the chief of the West Sacramento fire department or designee.

    “Fireworks stand” means any building, counter, or other structure of a temporary nature used in the sale, offering for sale, or display for sale of California State Fire Marshal approved safe and sane fireworks.

    “Nonprofit organization” means: (1) any nonprofit association, charity or corporation organized pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code or California Revenue and Taxation Code; or (2) a group which is an integral part of a recognized national organization having such tax-exempt status; or (3) an organization affiliated with and officially recognized by: (a) an elementary school, middle school, and/or high school and/or school district that serves, in whole or in part, the residents of the city of West Sacramento, or (b) a public and/or private community college, college and/or university which is located within the boundaries of the city of West Sacramento.

    “Police enforcement official” means the chief of the West Sacramento police department or designee.

    “Principal and permanent meeting place” includes a permanent structure, playing field, geographic area or service population which resides in or is located within the city of West Sacramento.

    “Qualified applicant” means any group or organization which has met all of the following criteria for a continuous period of not less than one full year preceding submittal of an application for a permit to sell fireworks required by this chapter and which continues to meet the criteria for the duration of any permit to sell fireworks issued by the city of West Sacramento pursuant to this chapter:

    1.   The organization shall be a nonprofit organization as defined by this chapter.

    2.   The organization must have its principal and permanent meeting place within the city.

    3.   The organization must have a demonstrated benefit or provide a service to the citizens of West Sacramento.

    4.   The organization must have a minimum bona fide membership of at least twenty members who either reside in the city or are owners or operators of a business or other establishment located in the city or attest that the otherwise qualified organization will have a minimum of twenty volunteers that reside in West Sacramento to staff a fireworks booth. The organization shall provide documentation demonstrating the minimum bona fide membership to the satisfaction of the city manager consistent with administrative regulations adopted pursuant to Section 8.12.180 of the city of West Sacramento Municipal Code.

    5.   The organization must not have been found by any court of competent jurisdiction or city administrative hearing officer to be in violation of any civil or criminal local, state or federal law within twenty-four calendar months prior to the organization’s submittal of an application for a permit to sell fireworks.

    6.   The organization must not have had a permit to sell fireworks revoked within twenty-four months prior to the organization’s submittal of an application for a permit to sell fireworks.

    7.   The organization must have evidence of a valid license to perform the acts indicated on the application consistent with state law.

    “Safe and sane fireworks” mean those fireworks approved and labeled by the California State Fire Marshal as “safe and sane” consistent with Health and Safety Code Sections 12529 and 12562. (Ord. 11-2 § 2)

 

8.12.040 General prohibition.
    Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person shall possess, manufacture, sell, use, display or explode any dangerous fireworks including, but not limited to, any rocket, firecracker, roman candle, squib, torpedo, wire core sparkler, wooden core sparkler, black cartridge, aerial shell or other combustible device or explosive substance or any kind of fireworks, by whatsoever name known, or any altered safe and sane fireworks within the city of West Sacramento. (Ord. 11-2 § 2)

 

8.12.050 Public displays.
    Public displays of fireworks may be given under permit issued by the fire code official consistent with state law where such displays will take place under the direction and supervision of a state of California licensed pyrotechnic operator. (Ord. 11-2 § 2)

 

8.12.060 Liability insurance.
    Any person, firm, organization or corporation applying for a public display or sales permit shall furnish to the fire code official proof of coverage by a policy of public liability and property damage insurance. The policy shall provide limits of bodily injury and property damage liability of not less than five million dollars combined single limits for each occurrence annually for payments of damages to persons or property which may result from or be caused by fireworks, or any negligence on the part of the licensee or his/her/its agents, servants, employees and/or subcontractors.

    Such policies shall contain a provision which includes the city as an additional insured and declares said insurance to be primary and that no other insurance carried by an insured party shall be called upon for contribution. Such policies shall also contain a provision requiring that the city receive written notice ten days prior to cancellation of such insurance. Such written notice shall be mailed via first class mail to the city clerk of the city of West Sacramento. (Ord. 11-2 § 2)

 

8.12.070 Safe and sane fireworks.
    It shall not be unlawful to possess, use, display or discharge, within the city, those fireworks that are defined and classified as safe and sane fireworks authorized and labeled by the California State Fire Marshal during the period of twelve noon on the 28th of June through twelve noon on the 6th of July of the same calendar year. Any person in violation of this section with amounts up to but not exceeding twenty-five pounds shall be cited for an infraction. (Ord. 11-2 § 2)

 

8.12.080 Sale of safe and sane fireworks.
    The sale of safe and sane fireworks authorized and labeled by the California State Fire Marshal, within the city, shall be permitted only between twelve noon and ten p.m. on the 28th of June of each year and nine a.m. through ten p.m. on June 29th through the 4th of July of the same calendar year. (Ord. 11-2 § 2)

 

8.12.090 Permits required.
    A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell safe and sane fireworks within the city without having first applied for and received a permit therefor, from the city.

    B.   The maximum number of permits which will be issued to qualified applicants pursuant to this chapter during any one calendar year shall be established by resolution of the city council.

    C.   Permits for the sale of safe and sane fireworks shall be issued only to qualified applicants.

    D.  No nonprofit organization or any of its affiliated organizations may receive more than one permit for fireworks sales during any one calendar year.

    E.   No nonprofit organization or any of its affiliated organizations may be awarded a permit for more than two consecutive calendar years.

    F.   Submission of applications by nonprofit organizations:

    1.   No nonprofit organization shall submit more than one application for a permit to sell fireworks within the city.

    2.   If more than one application is submitted on behalf of any nonprofit organization, including an affiliated organization, all such requests may be voidable at the discretion of the city manager in the event the city manager determines that such application was submitted due to an honest mistake.

    3.   If an organization is affiliated with a recognized educational institution as defined in Section 8.12.030, but maintains a separate tax exempt status with the Internal Revenue Service or the California Franchise Tax Board, said nonprofit organization shall be allowed a separate application.

    G.  All applications for permits to sell fireworks shall be submitted in writing to the city clerk on forms supplied by the city. Applications to sell fireworks will be reviewed by the police enforcement official and fire code official pursuant to Section 8.12.100. Permits to sell fireworks within the city shall be issued by the fire code official.

    H.  All applications shall be filed at a time so designated by resolution.

    I.    All applications shall be accompanied by written assurance that, if the permit is issued to the applicant, the applicant shall, at the time of receipt of such of permit, deliver to the city a certificate and endorsement evidencing insurance in the same manner as provided in Section 8.12.060.

    J.    Drawings for permits will occur at a time and place so designated by resolution.

    K.  Every application for a permit shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee established by resolution. This application fee shall be in addition to any fee imposed by this chapter.

    L.   Every approved application for a permit to sell fireworks in the city shall pay a firework sales permit fee established by resolution prior to issuance of a permit to sell fireworks.

    M.  Each year, one or more representatives from each organization that is granted a permit to sell fireworks shall attend a fireworks stand operator safety seminar. The seminar shall be conducted by the fireworks wholesaler and approved by the fire code official. Failure of an organization to have a responsible individual attend the seminar shall result in the revocation of the permit to sell fireworks. (Ord. 11-2 § 2)

 

8.12.100 Denial of permit and appeal process.
    A.  After conducting an investigation and preparing a report consistent with Health and Safety Code Section 12640 et seq., the fire code official shall issue a permit to a qualified applicant to sell safe and sane fireworks unless:

    1.   The fire code official finds, in writing, that the applicant has failed to provide sufficient plans, information or other data necessary to permit a determination respecting compliance with the requirements of this chapter.

    2.   The fire code official finds, in writing, that the applicant is not in compliance with any of the requirements of this chapter.

    B.   Any denial of a permit application or revocation of a permit to sell fireworks issued pursuant to the fireworks code may be appealed to the city council consistent with Health and Safety Code Section 12647 pursuant to the procedures set forth in Chapter 1.08 of the city of West Sacramento Municipal Code. (Ord. 11-2 § 2)

 

8.12.110 Temporary fireworks stand.
    All retail sales of “safe and sane fireworks” shall be conducted only from within a temporary fireworks stand, and the retail sales from any other building or structure is hereby prohibited. (Ord. 11-2 § 2)

 

8.12.120 Temporary fireworks stand, required features.
    A.  Each fireworks stand must post the following in a prominent place inside the fireworks stand:

    1.   City permit to sell fireworks.

    2.   California State Board of Equalization temporary sales tax permit.

    3.   California State Fire Marshal retail sales permit.

    4.   Proof of insurance.

    B.   Fireworks stands shall not be located closer than six hundred feet apart, unless separated by a major arterial roadway.

    C.   No fireworks shall be located within twenty-five feet of any other building or structure.

    D.  No fireworks shall be located within one hundred feet of a location where gasoline or any other flammable liquids are stored or dispensed.

    E.   Electrical wiring within the fireworks stand shall be prohibited.

    F.   All fireworks stands shall be inspected and approved by the fire code official prior to the sale of any fireworks.

    G.  All weeds and combustible material shall be cleared from the location of the fireworks stand, including a distance of at least twenty-five feet surrounding the stand.

    H.  No fireworks stand shall have a floor area in excess of five hundred square feet or a length greater the fifty feet.

    I.    Each fireworks stand shall have at least two exits. Each fireworks stand in excess of forty feet in length shall have at least three exits spaced approximately equidistant apart; provided however, that in no case shall the distance between exits exceed feet. Exit doors shall be not less than twenty-four inches wide and six feet in height and swing in the direction of exit travel.

    J.    “NO SMOKING” signs shall be prominently displayed on the fireworks stand. Smoking is prohibited within fifty feet of the fireworks stand.

    K.  Each fireworks stand shall be provided with two, two and one-half gallon pressurized water type fire extinguishers in good working order which are easily accessible in case of fire.

    L.   Each fireworks stand must have an adult watchman in attendance and in charge thereof when the stand is being used for sale or dispensing of fireworks.

    M.  No person may sleep in or remain in the fireworks stand after close of business.

    N.  When the fireworks stand is not being used for the sale and/or display of fireworks, all fireworks shall be stored in a manner consistent with one of the following:

    1.   Within a reinforced, heavy metal, fully-enclosed container, walk-in type drop box, or its equivalent, as approved by the fire code official.

    2.   Returned daily to the licensed fireworks wholesaler for storage at an approved location.

    O.  No fuel-powered generator or similar equipment shall be allowed within fifty feet of a fireworks stand. (Ord. 11-2 § 2)

 

8.12.130 Operation of fireworks stand.
    A.  No person shall knowingly sell fireworks to any person under the age of eighteen.

    B.   No person other than the individuals who are members of the permittee organization or the parents of members of the permittee shall operate the fireworks stand or otherwise participate in the sale inside such fireworks stand.

    C.   No person under the age of eighteen shall sell or participate in the sale of fireworks within such fireworks stand.

    D.  There shall be no drinking or possession of alcoholic beverages in or about the fireworks stand.

    E.   No person shall be paid any consideration by the permittee nonprofit organization(s) or any wholesaler/distributor of “safe and sane fireworks” for selling or otherwise participating in the sale of “safe and sane fireworks” at such fireworks stand; provided, however, that compensation may be paid for licensed security personnel during sale or non-sale hours and to the party authorizing the location of the fireworks stand on its property.

    F.   All fireworks shall be retained at the approved location. In no event shall unsold fireworks be removed from the approved location to any other place without written approval of the fire code official.

    G.  All unsold stocks of fireworks in the hands of the permittee after ten p.m. on the 4th day of July shall be returned to the distributor or wholesaler by twelve p.m. on July 6th of the same calendar year.

    H.  On closing of the “safe and sane fireworks” stand, all litter shall be removed from the premises.

    I.    Fireworks stands shall be removed from their temporary locations by twelve noon on July 10th of each calendar year. (Ord. 11-2 § 2)

 

8.12.140 Revocation of permit.
    The fire code official or police enforcement official may revoke the permit of any permittee who violates any provision of this chapter. Such revocation may be appealed pursuant to Section 8.12.100. (Ord. 11-2 § 2)

 

8.12.150 Supervision of minors.
    A.  Except as provided in subsection B of this section, it is unlawful for individuals under eighteen years of age to sell, purchase, possess, use or discharge fireworks.

    B.   It is unlawful for any person having the care, custody or control of a minor (under eighteen years old) to permit such minor to discharge, explode, fire or set off any “dangerous fireworks,” at any time, or to permit such minor to discharge or set off any “safe and sane fireworks” unless such minor does so under the direct supervision of a person over eighteen years of age and during the hours and on the days permitted by this chapter. (Ord. 11-2 § 2)

 

8.12.160 Seizure of fireworks.
    The fire code official or police enforcement official, may seize, take, remove or cause to be removed, at the expense of the permittee or licensed fireworks wholesaler, whichever is applicable, all stock of fireworks offered or exposed for sale, stored or held in violation of this chapter when such violation creates an imminent threat to public health or safety. (Ord. 11-2 § 2)

 

8.12.170 Public education.
    Each fireworks distributor/wholesaler who is supplying one or more of the West Sacramento nonprofit organizations who are permittees under this chapter, shall annually submit a public education plan to the city no later than five pm on June 1st. Said public education plan should outline the public safety and education efforts for that year that have been initiated, supported and/or delivered by each fireworks distributor/wholesaler within the city. (Ord. 11-2 § 2)

 

8.12.180 Administrative regulations.
    The city manager is authorized to promulgate administrative regulations and procedures necessary for the successful and effective implementation of this chapter including rules and procedures governing the submission and random selection of applications to sell safe and sane fireworks. (Ord. 11-2 § 2)

Chapter 8.16 SMOKING
Note
*      Prior history: County Code § 4-7.01(a) and Ords. 91-23, 93-8, 95-1 and 10-14.

 

8.16.010 Findings and purpose.
    The city council finds and declares that the purposes of this chapter are: (1) to protect the public health and welfare by regulating smoking in certain public places, except in designated smoking areas; and (2) to strike a reasonable balance between the need of smokers and the need of nonsmokers to breathe smoke-free air, and to recognize that, where these needs conflict, the need to breathe smoke-free air shall have priority; and (3) to prevent access to cigarettes or other smoking products by minors through machine or appliance, or any other device designed or used for vending purposes; and (4) as a matter of policy the city is striving to create a “smoke-free” environment. (Ord. 17-2 § 2)

 

8.16.020 Definitions.
    For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the following meaning:

    “Electronic smoking device” means any electronic and/or battery-operated device, which can be used to deliver an inhaled dose of nicotine or other substances. “Electronic smoking device” includes any such device, whether manufactured, distributed, marketed, or sold as an electronic cigarette, an electronic cigar, an electronic cigarillo, an electronic pipe, an electronic hookah, or any other product name or descriptor. Electronic smoking device does not include any product specifically approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for use in the mitigation, treatment, or prevention of disease.

    “Enclosed” means closed in by a roof and four or more connected floor-to-ceiling walls with appropriate openings for ingress and egress.

    “Smoke” or “smoking” means possessing a lighted or ignited tobacco, nicotine or marijuana product or paraphernalia; or engaging in an act that generates smoke (including, but not limited to, possessing a lighted or ignited pipe, hookah pipe, cigar, electronic cigarette or cigarette of any kind); or lighting or igniting a pipe, hookah pipe, cigar, electronic smoking device or a cigarette of any kind. Smoking includes the use of any product which emits smoke in the form of gases, particles, vapors or other byproducts released by electronic smoking devices, tobacco cigarettes, herbal cigarettes, marijuana cigarettes and any other type of cigarette, pipe or other implement for the purpose of inhalation of vapors, gases, particles or their byproducts released as a result of combustion or ignition.

    To the extent any of these definitions are inconsistent or conflict with provisions of zoning ordinances of the city, the provisions of the zoning ordinances shall control. (Ord. 17-2 § 2)

 

8.16.030 City facilities and parks and recreation areas.
    A.  Unless otherwise designated by clearly posted and visible signage, smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed and non-enclosed areas of any facility owned, leased, controlled, managed or operated by the city and accessible to the general public. Such facilities include, but are not limited to, City Hall, city offices, parks, recreation facilities, playgrounds, skate parks, picnic areas, sports areas, walking paths, gardens, hiking trails, bike paths, swimming pools, community centers, senior centers, meeting or conference facilities, and child care facilities, but shall not include streets. The prohibition on smoking at these facilities includes the facility and the public property on which it is located extending to and including parking lots and the adjacent portion of a public sidewalk.

    B.   No person shall dispose of smoking product or paraphernalia waste within the areas in which smoking is prohibited under subsection A of this section, except in a designated waste disposal container. (Ord. 17-2 § 2)

 

8.16.040 Public transportation stops.
    Smoking shall be prohibited in and within twenty feet of any formally designated shelter or outdoor area where people gather to wait for entry onto public transportation. (Ord. 17-2 § 2)

 

8.16.050 Posting of signs.
    “Smoking” or “No Smoking” signs, whichever is appropriate, with letters of not less than one inch in height or the international “No Smoking” symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a bar across it) shall be clearly, sufficiently and conspicuously posted in every building or other place where smoking is regulated by this chapter, by the owner, operator, manager or other person having control of such building or other place. (Ord. 17-2 § 2)

 

8.16.060 Prohibition on sale of smoking products from vending machines.
    No cigarette or other smoking product may be sold, offered for sale, or distributed by or from a vending machine or appliance, or any other device designed or used for vending purposes, except where minors are prohibited from entering without adult supervision. (Ord. 17-2 § 2)

 

8.16.070 Distribution of smoking products.
    The distribution of free samples of any smoking product to any person in any public area is prohibited. This also includes distributing vouchers or coupons for free smoking products in a public area. (Ord. 17-2 § 2)

 

8.16.080 Enforcement.
    A.  Any owner, manager, operator or employer of any establishment controlled by this chapter has the right and responsibility to inform persons violating this chapter of the appropriate provisions contained within the chapter.

    B.   Any citizen or employee may file a written complaint on any violation of this chapter. The written complaint should be given to the office of the code enforcement manager, community development department, during normal business hours, or to any police officer when code enforcement personnel are unavailable. Violations of this chapter are deemed an infraction and punishable under Sections 1.12.030 and 1.12.040 of this code.

    C.   The provisions of this chapter and Labor Code Section 6404.5 shall be enforced by the city’s police department and/or the code enforcement division of the department of community development. (Ord. 17-2 § 2)

 

8.16.090 No preemption.
    Nothing in this chapter is intended, nor shall it be construed, to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted by law. (Ord. 17-2 § 2)

Chapter 8.18 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
Article I. General Provisions
8.18.010 Purpose.
    It is the intent of the city council in adopting this chapter to establish the city as the administering agency for the hazardous materials program. (Ord. 11-3 § 2)

 

8.18.020 Responsibility for enforcement.
    Except as otherwise specified in this chapter, the fire department through its fire chief, shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. The fire chief and officials of other affected city departments shall mutually cooperate with each other to carry out the intent of this chapter. (Ord. 11-3 § 2)

 

8.18.030 Disclaimer.
    Grant of a permit under the provisions of this chapter does not constitute authorization to store or use hazardous materials at any establishment, if such storage and/or use violates a provision of this chapter or any other local, state or federal statute, code, ordinance, rule or regulation relating to hazardous materials, or if hazardous materials are stored in such a manner as to cause an unauthorized release of hazardous materials or to pose a significant risk of such unauthorized release. (Ord. 11-3 § 2)

 

8.18.040 Definitions.
    In addition to the general definitions applicable to this code, whenever used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth below:

    “Carcinogen” means any carcinogen listed in accordance with the California Health and Safety Code in Section 25249.8, as amended, or listed by the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC).

    “Chief” means the chief of the city of West Sacramento fire department or the chief’s designee.

    “City council” means the city council of the city of West Sacramento.

    “Establishment” means a single business operation conducted on the same or contiguous parcels of property under the same ownership or entitlement to use and the building or buildings’ appurtenant structures, and surrounding land area used by the establishment at that location or site.

    “Extremely hazardous material” means a substance or combination of substances which, if human exposure should occur, may likely result in death, disabling personal injury or serious illness caused by the substance or combination of substances because of its quantity, concentration or chemical characteristics, and as defined as a extremely hazardous waste in Section 66261.110 of Title 22 of the California Code of Regulations, as amended.

    “Fire code” means the California Fire Code (CFC) as adopted by the city of West Sacramento.

    “Hazard class” means explosives, flammable gases, nonflammable gases, flammable liquids, flammable solids, spontaneously combustibles, dangerous when wet, oxidizers, organic peroxides, poisons, infectious substances, radioactives, or corrosives. For purposes of this hazardous class scheme, the U.S. Department of Transportation (DOT) definition of 49 CFR Part 173, as amended, shall be utilized; however, whenever the definitions in 49 CFR Part 173 refer to hazards associated with transportation, they shall be deemed to refer, additionally, to storage or other regulated activities under this chapter.

    “Hazardous materials” mean those chemicals or substances which are physical hazards or health hazards as defined and classified in Chapter 27 of the CFC, whether the materials are in usable or waste condition.

    “MSDS” means a material safety data sheet prepared pursuant to Section 6390 of the California Labor Code or pursuant to the regulations of the Occupational Safety and Health Administration of the U.S. Department of Labor.

    “Permit” means any hazardous materials permit, including any addenda thereto, and any temporary permit issued pursuant to this chapter.

    “Permit quantity limit” means the maximum amount of hazardous material that can be stored in a storage facility. The chief shall set separate permit quantity limits for each storage facility for which a permit is obtained in accordance with the requirements of this chapter.

    “Permittee” means any person to whom a permit is issued pursuant to this chapter and any authorized representative, agent or designee of such person.

    “Person” means an individual, trust, firm, joint stock company, corporation including a government corporation, partnership, association, city, county, city and county, district, the state, any department or agency thereof, or the United States, to the extent authorized by federal law. For the purpose of the application of this chapter to the city, a person includes any office or department under any elected or appointed official or under any board or commission.

    “Pipe” means any pipeline or system of pipelines that is used in connection with the storage of hazardous materials exclusively within the confines of an establishment and which is not intended to transport hazardous materials in interstate or intrastate commerce or to transfer hazardous materials in bulk to or from a marine vessel.

    “Release” means any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, discharging, injecting, escaping, leaching, dumping or disposing of a hazardous material into the environment unless permitted or authorized by a regulatory agency.

    “Spill” means any uncontrolled release of a hazardous material.

    “Storage” means the storage, dispensing, containment, handling, use, generation, processing, production, packaging, emitting, discharging, disposal or treatment of hazardous materials.

    “Storage facility” means any one or combination of tanks, sumps, wet floors, waste treatment facilities, pipes, vaults or other portable or fixed containers, used, designed or intended to be used, for the use and/or storage of hazardous materials at an establishment.

    “Sump” means a pit or other subsurface container in which liquids collect.

    “Threatened release” means a condition creating a substantial probability of harm, when the probability and potential extent of harm make it reasonably necessary to take immediate action to prevent, reduce or mitigate damages to persons, the environment or property.

    “Unauthorized release” means any release of any hazardous material that does not conform to the provisions of this chapter or is not otherwise authorized by a governmental agency, including, but not limited to, Yolo County Air Quality Control Board and California Air Resources Board, the EPA, pursuant to a national pollutant discharge elimination system permit, the regional water quality control board, pursuant to the Porter-Cologne Water Quality Act, or the department of public works.

    “Waste” means either: (1) materials which are intended to be discarded; or (2) materials which are intended to be recycled.

    “Wet floor” means a floor which is routinely used to collect, contain or maintain standing liquids or to transmit standing liquids on a more or less continuous basis. (Ord. 11-3 § 2)

 

8.18.060 Permit fee.
    The permit fee for the hazardous materials program shall be reviewed annually. Any proposed changes shall be included in the annual update to the city’s book of fees. (Ord. 11-3 § 2)

 

8.18.070 Department to provide public information.
    The department shall provide educational information to the public on hazardous materials including, but not limited to, information on the identification, proper storage, handling, use and disposal of hazardous materials. (Ord. 11-3 § 2)

 

8.18.080 Materials regulated.
    A.  Hazardous materials regulated in this chapter shall include, but not be limited to, those materials enumerated in:

    1.   Regulations of the U.S. Department of Transportation published in 49 CFR Parts 100 through 199, as amended;

    2.   The director’s list, as amended, issued by the director of the California Department of Industrial Relations in Title 8 of the California Code of Regulations, Section 339;

    3.   Sections 66680 and 66723 of Title 22 of the California Code of Regulations, as amended, as a hazardous and/or extremely hazardous waste, whether such material is stored or handled in waste or nonwaste form;

    4.   The list of Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) pollutants, 40 CFR, Section 401.15, as amended;

    5.   A list of hazardous materials prepared by the chief pursuant to provisions of this chapter;

    6.   The hazardous materials definition of Section 2702.1, Chapter 27 of the California Fire Code (Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations).

    B.   Hazardous materials regulated in this chapter shall also include any material which has been determined to be hazardous based upon any appraisal or assessment by or on behalf of the party storing this material in compliance with the requirements of the EPA or the California Department of Health Services, or which should have been, but was not, determined to be hazardous due to deliberate failure of the party storing the material to comply with the requirements of the EPA and/or the Department of Health Services.

    C.   The department shall maintain, for public inspection, a copy of each of the regulations listed in subsection A of this section. (Ord. 11-3 § 2)

 

Article II. Permitting
8.18.160 Permit required.
    A.  Any person who stores any hazardous materials shall obtain and keep current a permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. One such permit shall be issued for a single establishment and include all of the storage facilities located on the establishment.

    B.   For each establishment, additional approvals shall be obtained for any storage facility thereafter connected, installed, constructed, repaired, substantially modified, replaced, closed or removed.

    C.   An addendum to the permit is required:

    1.   Prior to any change or addition which results in the storage of previously undisclosed hazardous materials at the establishment or an additional quantity of hazardous materials on the premises; provided, however, that a permittee shall have thirty working days from the date of the arrival of previously undisclosed hazardous materials or an additional quantity of hazardous materials to apply for an addendum to the permit, following the same procedures required for an application for a permit, for the storing of previously undisclosed hazardous materials with the same hazard class as stated on the existing permit approvals or an additional quantity of hazardous materials where such storage, in the opinion of the chief, does not increase health hazards and, in the opinion of the chief, does not increase fire hazards. Storage of previously undisclosed hazardous materials of a different hazard class or additional quantities of hazardous materials, not meeting all of these criteria, shall require an addendum to the permit prior to receipt of such previously undisclosed hazardous materials of a different hazard class or additional quantities of hazardous materials.

    2.   Whenever a change in the permittee’s operations occurs which requires a change in the application information submitted pursuant to Article II, Section 8.18.170, the permittee shall submit a copy of the revisions to the fire department within thirty days of the operational change. (Ord. 11-3 § 2)

 

8.18.170 Application for permit.
    Any person required to obtain a permit by this chapter shall make a written application to the fire department upon forms furnished for that purpose and certify that it meets the requirements of this chapter. No applications may be accepted unless and until the permit fee has been paid. The fire department shall furnish an application form containing the following:

    A.  General application information, which shall include, but not be limited to:

    1.   The name and address of the establishment and business telephone number of the applicant, the name and titles and twenty-four hour emergency telephone numbers of the primary response person and an alternate.

    2.   The name and address of the person who owns the establishment and, if different, the name and address of the person(s) who operate the establishment or any portion thereof. (Ord. 11-3 § 2)

 

8.18.190 Inspection required.
    The chief shall conduct an inspection of the establishment prior to the approval of a permit. (Ord. 11-3 § 2)

 

8.18.200 Approval and notice to other departments.
    Permit applications shall be referred to the chief for approval and no permit shall be issued without approval. Additionally, when, in order to meet the requirements of this chapter, the applicant is required to perform any installation, construction, alteration, conversion, change in use, repair, grading, moving or demolition of any structure requiring a building permit pursuant to the California Building Code, the chief shall not approve the permit until the applicant obtains the appropriate building permits. (Ord. 11-3 § 2)

 

8.18.220 Temporary permit.
    A.  The chief may grant a temporary permit to an applicant with a demonstrated need for a period not to exceed ninety days and subject to any conditions that the chief deems reasonably necessary to protect against the risk of fire or other health hazard.

    B.   The chief may approve temporary storage of such materials in storage facilities and under circumstances that do not comply with all the provisions of this code; provided, that the chief determines that such temporary storage does not present any increased risk of fire or health hazard.

    C.   The chief may grant a one-time extension of the temporary permit for an additional ninety days. At the expiration of the temporary permit, the chief shall grant or deny a full term permit in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 11-3 § 2)

 

8.18.230 Contents of permits and posting.
    A.  The permit shall contain the following information:

    1.   The name and address of the permittee for the purposes of notice and service process;

    2.   The street address of the establishment for which the permit is issued;

    3.   The date the permit is effective;

    4.   The date of expiration;

    5.   When applicable, a designation that the permit is temporary; and

    6.   Any special conditions of the permit.

    B.   The permittee shall post a notice, in a location open to public access at all times, at each establishment for which a permit is obtained. The notice shall contain a copy of the permit obtained pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 11-3 § 2)

 

8.18.240 Records.
    The fire department shall maintain a record of all applications filed, permits issued and all conditions attached thereto. (Ord. 11-3 § 2)

 

8.18.250 Term.
    A permit shall be issued for a term of one year, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. (Ord. 11-3 § 2)

 

8.18.260 Renewals and extensions.
    A.  Every application for the renewal of a permit or extension of a temporary permit shall be made at least thirty days prior to the expiration date of such permit. The application for renewal shall include a completed inventory form, the permit fee and a certification by the permittee that the permittee has reviewed the information submitted on the permit application and any addenda thereto and that any necessary changes to the permit application and addenda have been made. No permit may be renewed without the timely payment of the permit fee.

    B.   The chief shall inspect annually each establishment for which a permit renewal is sought. Any permit for which a properly completed application for renewal has been received by the chief prior to the expiration date shall remain in effect until a decision has been made on the application and all administrative appeals have been exhausted or the time therefor has expired. (Ord. 11-3 § 2)

 

8.18.270 General permit provisions.
    A permit does not take the place of any license required by state, federal, or local law, nor does the compliance with the permit requirements of this chapter relieve any party of compliance with any other applicable state, federal, or local law. (Ord. 11-3 § 2)

 

8.18.280 Determination.
    The chief shall grant or deny a permit, an addendum to a permit, a renewal of a permit, or a temporary permit pursuant to Article II, Section 8.18.220 within ninety days from the date that the completed application is received by the department. This time limit may be extended by written agreement executed by the chief and the applicant. (Ord. 11-3 § 2)

 

8.18.310 Refund of fees.
    Permit applicants shall not be entitled to a refund or rebate of a permit fee because the permit is denied or application withdrawn. Permit fees are not refundable if the permittee discontinues the activity or use of an establishment prior to the expiration of the term or if the permit is suspended or revoked prior to the expiration of the term. (Ord. 11-3 § 2)

 

8.18.320 Not exempted from paying other fees.
    Payment of a permit fee as provided in this chapter does not exempt the permittee from payment of any other charges which may be levied pursuant to other sections of the municipal code or written rules and regulations of any department relating to the permit. (Ord. 11-3 § 2)

 

8.18.330 Transfer of permit.
    The permit is not transferable to another address or owner. (Ord. 11-3 § 2)

 

8.18.340 Effective date of permit.
    No permit shall become effective until receipt of the chief’s signature is made. (Ord. 11-3 § 2)

 

8.18.350 Denial of application.
    The chief shall deny the application: (1) if the applicant fails to comply with any provisions of this chapter and the chief determines that the applicant does not qualify for a temporary permit as provided in this chapter; or (2) pursuant to the permit procedures set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 11-3 § 2)

 

8.18.360 Transmittal of decision of the chief.
    The decision to deny the application shall be given to the applicant in writing, setting forth the findings upon which the decision is based and mailed to the applicant by certified mail at the address specified in the application. The decision of the chief may be appealed in the manner prescribed in Article IV, Section 8.18.490 and shall be so indicated in the decision. (Ord. 11-3 § 2)

 

Article III. Enforcement
8.18.370 Violations.
    In addition to any other provisions of this chapter, the following acts or omissions of the permittee, either before or after a permit is issued shall constitute a violation of this chapter.

    A.  Fraud, willful misrepresentation, or any false statement in applying for a new or renewed permit;

    B.   Fraud, willful misrepresentation, or any false statement in any report required by this chapter;

    C.   Failure to correct conditions constituting an unreasonable risk of an unauthorized release of hazardous materials within a reasonable time after notice from a governmental entity other than the city. (Ord. 11-3 § 2)

 

8.18.380 Emergency powers.
    A.  Whenever the chief determines that a release or threatened release of hazardous materials exists within or in close proximity to any establishment or storage facility or part thereof, the chief is empowered to order the vacating or closing of such establishment, storage facility or part thereof, without a written notice or hearing, until the condition requiring such action has been abated.

    B.   Following any unauthorized release of any hazardous material at any establishment or storage facility within the city, including any establishment for which a permit has been obtained under this chapter, the chief is empowered to order any such establishment or storage facility secured from public and/or private access, including the ordering of the evacuation, closure or other isolation of any such establishment or storage facility so as to prevent any further public or private exposures to hazardous materials. The chief is also empowered to issue directives as to what monitoring must be done to assess the degree of contamination present and to evaluate what degree of clean-up shall be undertaken in order to assure safe reoccupancy of such establishments or storage facilities. The decision whether any such establishment or storage facility is safe for re-entry by the public following such order of the chief regarding evacuation, closures, etc., shall be made exclusively by the chief. (Ord. 11-3 § 2)

 

8.18.390 Enforcement against violations.
    The chief shall have the authority to enforce all provisions of this chapter. Pursuant to this authority the chief may take the following actions:

    A.  Serve written notice of violation requiring the correction of any violation of this chapter upon the permittee, property owner or operator of the establishment or storage facility that is the subject of the violation.

    B.   Perform or cause to be performed any remedial work necessary to abate the noncompliance, if in the judgment of the chief immediate action is necessary to remedy or prevent an imminent and substantial danger to the public health or the environment.

    1.   The permittee, property owner or operator of the establishment or storage facility that is the subject of the abatement action shall be strictly liable to the city for the reasonable cost actually incurred in taking the abatement action.

    C.   Refer the matter to the chief of police for commencement of summary abatement pursuant to Section 19.05.004 of the Municipal Code. (Ord. 11-3 § 2)

 

8.18.400 Revocation, suspension and modification of permit.
    A.  The chief, after notice and hearing pursuant to Article IV of this chapter, may take the following enforcement actions against a permittee for any violation of this chapter.

    1.   Revoke the permit for the establishment or for a storage facility;

    2.   Suspend the permit for the establishment or for a storage facility for a period not to exceed six months;

    3.   Modify or add conditions to the permit;

    4.   Revoke the permit with no reapplication permitted for a specified period not to exceed five years.

    B.   If the enforcement actions enumerated in subsection (A)(1), (2), (3) or (4) can be limited to one or more storage facilities at an establishment, then the enforcement action taken shall be limited to those storage facilities.

    C.   The fire department shall forward to the city department of finance and any other city department involved in the issuance of such permit, written notice of any revocation. (Ord. 11-3 § 2)

 

8.18.410 Transmittal of decision.
    Within ten days of the hearing, the chief shall tender a written opinion, stating the findings upon which the decision is based and the action taken, if any. The decision of the chief may be appealed in the manner prescribed in Article IV, Section 8.18.490 and shall be so indicated in the opinion. (Ord. 11-3 § 2)

 

8.18.420 Authority after suspension, revocation or expiration.
    The suspension, revocation or expiration of a permit issued under this chapter shall not prevent any proceedings to investigate such permit, any enforcement action against such permittee or any proceeding against such permittee. (Ord. 11-3 § 2)

 

8.18.430 Return of permit.
    In the event that a permit issued under the provisions of this chapter is suspended or revoked, the permittee shall forward it to the fire department not later than the end of the third business day after notification of such suspension or revocation. (Ord. 11-3 § 2)

 

Article IV. Hearing and Appeal Procedure
8.18.440 Notice of hearing.
    Whenever a notice of hearing is required by the chief, such notice shall be sent by certified mail to the permittee, property owner and operator. The notice of hearing sent to the permittee, property owner or operator by the chief shall set forth the time and place of the hearing, the pertinent chapter section or sections, the ground or grounds upon which the enforcement action is based, and a brief statement of the factual matters in support thereof. The notice shall be given at least fifteen days prior to the hearing. (Ord. 11-3 § 2)

 

8.18.450 Conduct of hearings.
    All hearings conducted pursuant to this chapter shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and Chapter 1.08 of this code. (Ord. 11-3 § 2)

 

8.18.480 Conduct of appeals.
    All appeals conducted pursuant to this chapter shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and Chapter 1.08 of this code. (Ord. 11-3 § 2)

 

8.18.490 Appeal from chief’s decision.
    Any applicant for a permit who is denied such permit or a permittee whose permit is revoked, suspended or modified by the chief may appeal to the board of appeals which shall have jurisdiction over such appeals in accordance with this section. (Ord. 11-3 § 2)

 

Article V. Unauthorized Release of Hazardous Materials
8.18.530 Reporting unauthorized release of hazardous materials.
    As soon as a permittee or employee thereof or any person who is required to have a permit, has reason to conclude that there may have occurred an unauthorized release of a hazardous material, such person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment and clean-up of such release and shall immediately notify the department of the occurrence. (Ord. 11-3 § 2)

 

8.18.540 Powers of the chief.
    The chief may verify that the hazardous material is being contained and appropriately disposed. Any time the chief has reason to believe that the permittee is not adequately containing and disposing of such hazardous material, the chief may undertake and direct an emergency response in order to protect the public health and safety. For any emergency response, the chief shall inform the clerk of the city council during regular business hours of the next business day. (Ord. 11-3 § 2)

 

8.18.550 Clean-up responsibilities.
    A.  Any person who stores hazardous materials and the owner, lessor and lessee of the property on which the hazardous materials are located (hereinafter “the responsible party”) is responsible for the clean-up of any unauthorized or uncontrolled release, shall institute and complete all actions necessary to remedy the effects of any unauthorized release, whether sudden or gradual.

    B.   In the event the chief determines immediate action is necessary and that the responsible party has not undertaken, cannot undertake, or will not undertake such necessary action, the chief may direct the institution of those remedial actions reasonably necessary under the circumstances to protect the health, safety and welfare of the community from the hazards attending the unauthorized release.

    C.   The responsible party shall be strictly liable to the city for the reimbursement of all costs incurred in the aforesaid remedial action, including, but not limited to, the costs of fighting fires. The lack of either negligence or willfulness of the responsible party in causing or allowing such discharge shall have no bearing on the liability imposed by this section.

    D.  The permittee and, if different, the person who owns or leases the property upon which the hazardous material is stored shall be both jointly and severally liable to the city for all costs incurred in any remedial action taken by the city pursuant to the provisions of this section. These costs shall constitute a debt payable to the city. (Ord. 11-3 § 2)

 

8.18.560 Notice of payment due.
    In those cases where the chief directed the institution or remedial action pursuant to Article V, Section 8.18.550 of this chapter, the chief, within ten days of the incident, shall send to the responsible party(ies) a notice of payment due. Payment shall be due within sixty days of the mailing date of the notice of payment due. (Ord. 11-3 § 2)

 

8.18.570 Contents of notice of payment due.
    The notice of payment due sent to the responsible party(ies) shall contain the following information:

    A.  A statement of the date and place of the unauthorized release.

    B.   The cost to the city to remedy the effects of the unauthorized release.

    C.   A notice advising the responsible party(ies) that he or she is liable for the costs in the amount listed in the notice and that payment to the city to reimburse these costs is due within sixty days of the mailing date of the notice.

    D.  A notice advising that a penalty of ten percent which may include interest at the rate of one percent per month on the outstanding balance shall be added to the costs from the date that payment is due.

    E.   A notice advising the responsible party(ies) that if payment costs are not received within ninety days of the due date, a lien may be imposed on the property of the responsible party(ies) pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 11-3 § 2)

 

8.18.580 Nonpayment—Additional request.
    If full payment of the costs is not received within sixty days after notice of payment due was sent pursuant to Article V, Section 8.18.570, an additional request for payment shall be sent to the responsible party(ies). The notice shall state that the responsible party(ies) is liable for the payment of the costs indicated on the notice and if payment of such costs is not received within thirty days of the mailing date of this notice, the chief shall follow the procedures indicated in Article V, Section 8.18.590. (Ord. 11-3 § 2)

 

8.18.590 Lien and assessment.
    If payment is not received within thirty days following mailing of the additional request, the chief shall report the delinquency to the city council. The entire unpaid balance of the costs, including penalty on the unpaid balance, shall be made, consistent with Section 38771 et seq., of the Government Code, either as a special assessment or an abatement lien against the responsible party’s(ies’) property. Such charges against delinquent accounts may at the discretion of the city council be exempted from this procedure because of the small amounts involved, or because another procedure is more appropriate. (Ord. 11-3 § 2)

 

8.18.600 Periodic inspection.
    The continued use of, and permit approval for, existing storage facilities may be subject to inspection whenever there has been any unauthorized release to determine whether continued storage in such storage facility is suitable or whether the permit should be subject to enforcement action. In making such a determination, the chief shall consider the age of the storage facility, the methods of containment, the concentration of the hazardous materials contained, the severity of potential unauthorized release, and the suitability of other long term preventive measures that meet the objectives of this chapter. Enforcement action may be taken by the chief as set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 11-3 § 2)

 

8.18.610 Indemnification.
    The permittee shall indemnify, hold harmless and defend the city against any claim, cause of action, disability, loss, liability, damage, cost or expense, howsoever arising, which occurs by reason of an unauthorized release in connection with permittee’s operations under this permit except as arises from the city’s sole willful act or active negligence. (Ord. 11-3 § 2)

 

Article VI. Inspections and Records
8.18.620 Inspection by the chief.
    The chief may enter any building or premises, for the purpose of making any inspection, or investigation which, under the provisions of this chapter, the chief deems necessary. This right of entry shall be exercised only at reasonable hours, and entry shall be made to any establishment only with the consent of the owner or tenant thereof, or with the written order of a competent court. The chief shall cause to be corrected any conditions which would constitute a violation of this chapter or any other statute, code rule or regulation affecting the storage of hazardous materials. (Ord. 11-3 § 2)

 

8.18.640 Inspection by permittee.
    The permittee shall conduct regular inspections of its own establishments to assure compliance with this chapter and shall maintain logs or file reports as required by the chief. The inspector conducting such inspections shall demonstrate expertise in proper storage of hazardous materials to the satisfaction of the chief in order to qualify as an inspector. (Ord. 11-3 § 2)

 

8.18.650 Special inspections.
    In addition to the inspections specified above, the chief may require the employment of inspectors to conduct an audit or assessment of a permittee’s establishment to make a hazardous material safety evaluation/inspection and to determine compliance with provisions of this chapter.

    A.  An inspector shall demonstrate expertise in proper storage of hazardous materials to the satisfaction of the chief in order to qualify as an inspector.

    B.   The special inspection report shall include an evaluation of the establishment and its storage facilities and recommendations consistent with the provisions of this chapter where appropriate. A copy of the report shall be filed with the fire department at the same time that it is submitted to the permittee.

    C.   The permittee shall, within thirty days of said report, file with the fire department a plan to implement all recommendations, or shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the chief why such recommendations shall not be implemented. (Ord. 11-3 § 2)

 

8.18.660 Substituted inspections.
    An inspection by an employee of any other public agency may be deemed by the chief as a substitute for any requirement of Article VI, Section 8.18.650 upon determination by the chief that said employee is qualified to make such an inspection. (Ord. 11-3 § 2)

 

8.18.670 Disclosure of information.
    The chief or any individual having administrative duties under this chapter may not disclose, in any manner whatsoever, information relating to the business affairs or operations of any person visited or examined in the discharge of official duty when said information was obtained by an investigation of records or equipment. Provided, however, in emergency situations, such disclosure may be made when necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 11-3 § 2)

 

8.18.680 Maintenance of records by permittee.
    All records required by this chapter shall be maintained by the permittee and said records shall be made available to the chief for inspection during normal working hours and upon reasonable notice. (Ord. 11-3 § 2)

Chapter 8.24 TREE PRESERVATION
8.24.010 Purpose.
    It is recognized that the preservation of trees enhances the natural beauty of the city, sustains long-term potential increases in property values, maintains the environment, tempers the affect of extreme temperatures, creates the identity and quality of the city which is necessary for successful business to continue, improves the attractiveness of the city to visitors and increases the oxygen output of the area which is needed to combat air pollution. For these reasons, the city council finds that in order to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of the city, while at the same time recognizing individual rights to develop private property in a manner which will not be prejudicial to the public interest nor prohibit development of private property, it is necessary to enact regulations governing the removal and preservation of certain trees on private and public property within the city in addition to the planning and maintenance of street trees within new and already established developments. (Ord. 04-01 § 3)

 

8.24.020 Definitions.
    As used in this chapter the following words and terms shall have the following meanings:

    “City manager” means the city manager or his or her designated representative.

    “Construction activity” means the incorporation of labor and materials to build any structure requiring a permanent or temporary location.

    “Development project” means any project undertaken for the purpose of development, to include projects involving the issuance of a permit for construction or reconstruction but not a permit to operate.

    “Drip line area” means the area measured from the trunk of the tree outward to a point at the perimeter of the outermost branch structure of the tree.

    “Emergency” means an imminently dangerous condition of a tree or trees, and if such condition were abated according to the procedures set forth in this chapter requiring notice and an opportunity for a hearing, may, during the pendency of those proceedings subject the public, occupants, or neighbors, or the property of these persons to potential harm of a serious nature.

    “Heritage tree” means any living tree with a trunk circumference of seventy-five inches or more or a native oak with a trunk circumference of fifty inches or more, both measured four feet six inches from ground level. The circumference of multi-trunk trees shall be based upon the sum of the circumference of each trunk.

    “Landmark tree” means any tree or stand of trees that is especially prominent, stately or which is of historical significance as designated by the city council.

    “Maintain” or “maintenance” means and includes major trimming or pruning and other similar acts which promotes the life, growth, health or beauty of trees, excepting only watering, unless specifically so stated. Major trimming and pruning means the removal of branches of five inches in diameter or greater.

    “Native oak tree” means a living tree of any species of the Quercus genus (all oaks, including the nine native California oaks); for example, the interior live oak (Quercus wislizenii), valley oak, California white oak (Quercus lobata), or blue oak (Quercus douglasii.)

    “Owner” means the legal owner of real property fronted upon any street shown on the last equalized assessment role.

    “Public street” means any improved street, road, avenue, boulevard or parkway located within the city and dedicated to the public.

    “Street tree” means and includes any tree growing or placed within the tree maintenance strip or public right-of-way.

    “Tree” means any wooden perennial plant having one or several structural bearing trunk stems commonly achieving nine feet or more in height.

    “Tree administrator” means the individual appointed by the city manager who, among other things, administers and enforces this chapter.

    “Tree maintenance strip” means a strip of land parallel to a public street and adjacent thereto which is twelve and one-half feet wide, measured from the back of the curb of the street, or the edge of the paved portion of the street if the street does not have a curb at that location.

    “Tree permit” means written authorization by the tree administrator to perform an activity on a street, heritage or landmark tree. (Ord. 04-01 § 3)

 

8.24.030 Responsibility.
    A.  It is the responsibility of the property owner to maintain, in a proper fashion, all trees on his or her property. The property owner must ensure that the trees on his or her property do not pose a danger to his or her own property or the property of others.

    B.   Street trees, except those in a street center median, are the responsibility of the property owner of the adjacent property.

    C.   Property owners that do not properly maintain trees on their property or street trees for which they are responsible and, as a result, create an emergency, will be subject to the provisions of Section 8.24.120. (Ord. 04-01 § 3)

 

8.24.040 Street trees—Maintenance—Permit required.
    Except as required in this chapter, it is unlawful for any person to perform any of the following acts with respect to street trees, without a tree permit issued by the tree administrator:

    A.  Plant any tree within a tree maintenance strip or public right-of-way, other than those species that are designated in the West Sacramento Landscape Development Guidelines;

    B.   Move, remove, cut down, poison, set fire to or permit fire to burn in proximity to or perform or fail to perform any act which results in the unnatural death or destruction of a street tree;

    C.   Perform any activity that will interfere with or retard the natural growth of any street tree;

    D.  Perform any work or permit any work to be performed within the drip line area of a street tree which would endanger the tree;

    E.   Trim or prune any branch of a street tree which is five inches in diameter or greater. (Ord. 04-01 § 3)

 

8.24.050 Street trees—Permit exceptions—Utility companies.
    A public utility shall not be prohibited from performing such acts with respect to street trees as may be necessary to make repairs, comply with applicable safety regulations or to avoid the interruption of services.

 

8.24.060 Landmark and heritage trees—Maintenance—Permit required.
    It is unlawful to perform any of the following acts with respect to a landmark or heritage tree within the city limits without a tree permit issued by the tree administrator.

    A.  Move, remove, cut down, poison, set fire to or permit fire to burn in proximity to or perform or fail to perform any act which results in the unnatural death or destruction of a landmark or heritage tree;

    B.   Perform any activity that will interfere with or retard the natural growth of any landmark or heritage tree;

    C.   Perform any work or permit any work to be performed within the drip line area of a landmark or heritage tree which would endanger the tree;

    D.  Trim or prune any branch of a landmark or heritage tree which is five inches in diameter or greater. (Ord. 04-01 § 3)

 

8.24.070 Landmark, heritage and street trees—Construction—Permit required.
    During construction activity on any property upon which a landmark, heritage or street tree is located, it is unlawful for any person to perform any of the following acts without a tree permit issued by the tree administrator, which permit shall not be denied if the activities are deemed necessary for the project and proper care is taken to protect any landmark , heritage or street tree:

    A.  Change the appropriate amount of irrigation or drainage water provided to any landmark, heritage or street tree;

    B.   Trench, grade pave or otherwise damage or disturb any exposed roots within one foot outside the drip line area of any landmark, heritage or street tree;

    C.   Park or operate any motor vehicle within one foot outside the drip line area of any landmark, heritage or street tree;

    D.  Place or store any equipment or construction materials within one foot outside the dripline area of any landmark, heritage or street tree;

    E.   Place, apply or attach any signs, ropes, cables or any other items to any landmark, heritage or street tree;

    F.   Cut or trim any branch of any landmark, heritage or street tree that is five inches in diameter or greater;

    G.  Place or allow to flow any oil, fuel, concrete mix or other deleterious substance into or over within one foot outside the drip area of any landmark, heritage or street tree. (Ord. 04-01 § 3)

 

8.24.080 Tree permit—Application—Process—Decision.
    A.  Any person seeking to perform any activity on a landmark, heritage or street tree shall contact the tree administrator to discuss to proposed activity and if deemed necessary, the tree administrator will inspect the site of the proposed activity. After initial consultation between the applicant and the tree administrator, the tree administrator shall confirm whether or not a permit is required. If it is determined that a permit is required, the applicant shall apply for a permit. The application shall be signed by the property owner or his or her authorized agent.

    B.   The application shall contain the following information:

    1.   Location, size and species of the tree;

    2.   The type of activity for which the permit is sought;

    3.   A statement of the reasons for the activity;

    4.   Funds for an arborists report if applicable;

    5.   For a development project the tree plan as provided by Section 8.24.100;

    6.   And such pertinent information as the tree administrator may require.

    C.   In reaching a decision to grant or deny a tree permit, the tree administrator shall take into account the following:

    7. 1. The condition of the tree with respect to disease, general health, damage public nuisance danger of falling, proximity to existing or proposed structures and interference with utility services, and whether or not the tree acts as host for a plant which is parasitic. If the removal of the tree is requested for this reason, a written evaluation of the health and status of the tree(s), by an I.S.A Certified Arborist, may be commissioned by the tree administrator. The person requesting removal of the tree shall be responsible for the cost of the arborist report.

    2.   The number of existing trees in the area and the effect of any proposed removal upon the public health and safety, or the prosperity, beauty and general welfare of the area.

    3.   Mitigation measures as proposed or replacement measures as required.

    4.   Steps to avoid or minimize removal and destruction of trees.

    5.   The adverse impacts on the future development of the site, including the increased costs of development and construction, the reduction in the size of the proposed structure or structures and other adverse economic impacts on the landowner or developer.

    6.   The zoning of the property and the immediate and future impacts based on the granting or denial of the permit.

    D.  The tree administrator shall render a decision granting or denying the application for a tree permit within thirty days from the date the completed application is received. As a condition of granting a tree permit the tree administrator may require that the work be performed by a person who, in the opinion of the tree administrator, is qualified by education or experience to perform the work and holds a valid business license issued by the city for such purpose. Decisions made by the tree administrator are subject to appeal pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 8.24.140. If the tree administrator fails to make a decision in thirty days, it will be assumed that the tree permit has been denied and the applicant will be granted an appeal hearing before the hearing officer at no cost to the applicant.

    E.   If a permit is granted to remove the tree(s), a copy of the tree permit shall be posted in a conspicuous location on the property near the tree during the removal of the tree. The tree contractor removing the tree(s) shall provide the tree administrator proof of current liability insurance prior to final issuance of the tree permit. (Ord. 04-01 § 3)

 

8.24.084 Removal of trees—Mitigation and replacement.
    A.  Heritage or Landmark Trees. When the tree administrator has granted a tree permit to remove a heritage or landmark tree said permit shall require the applicant to replace the tree with a living tree on the property or within the city of West Sacramento in a location approved by the tree administrator. Said location will be specified in the tree permit. The property owner will replace the tree and continue to replace the replacement tree if the tree dies any time within three years of the initial planting. Replacement shall not be required if a tree is in need of removal solely because it poses a risk to persons or property or if the tree acts as a host for a plant that is parasitic.

    Replacement trees will be planted at the rate of one inch diameter of replacement plant for every one inch diameter of tree removed. A diameter shall be measured at four feet six inches from ground level. Replacement trees may be a combination of fifteen gallon size trees, which are the equivalent of a one inch diameter tree or twenty-four inch box trees which are the equivalent of a three inch diameter tree.

    If the property owner is unable to replace the tree on his or her property or within an area approved by the tree administrator, the tree administrator shall require the property owner to pay an in-lieu fee to the city. An in-lieu fee payment shall not be required if the tree is in need of removal solely because it poses a risk to persons or property or if the tree acts as a host for a plant that is parasitic. Such fees shall be set by city council resolution and be used for the purpose of purchasing and planting trees elsewhere in the city of West Sacramento.

    B.   Street Trees. When the tree administrator has granted a tree permit to remove a street tree, said permit shall require the permittee to replace the tree. The permittee shall provide the replacement tree of a size and species pursuant to the city of West Sacramento Landscape Development Guidelines and plant said tree in the location specified by the tree administrator in the tree permit. The minimum replacement tree size should be at least fifteen gallons and shall be planted in accordance with the guidelines set forth in the West Sacramento Landscape Development Guidelines or as specified by an adopted planned development or specific plan landscape regulations pursuant to Section 17.35.020(A)(5).

    In the event a street tree also meets the definition of a heritage or landmark tree then the replacement guidelines shall be those specified for heritage and landmark trees.

    C.   Development. Trees removed as a result of a development project shall be replaced in accordance with the replacement schedule set forth for landmark, heritage and street trees. Tree plantings required for the replacement of removed trees shall be in addition to those required as a condition of a development project pursuant to the West Sacramento Landscape Development Guidelines or as specified by an adopted planned development or specific plan landscape regulations pursuant to Section 17.35.020(A)(5). (Ord. 11-6 § 1; Ord. 04-01 § 3)

 

8.24.090 Development projects—Tree plan.
    Any application for a development project shall be accompanied by a tree plan containing the following information:

    A.  Contour map showing the location, size, species and condition of all existing trees which are located on the property proposed for development;

    B.   Identification of those trees which the applicant proposes to preserve and those heritage, landmark and street trees which are proposed to be removed and the reason for such removal;

    C.   A description of measures to be followed to ensure survival of heritage, landmark and street trees during construction;

    D.  A program for the preservation of heritage, landmark and street trees during and after completion of the project which shall include the following:

    1.   Each tree or group of trees to be preserved shall be enclosed with a fence prior to any grading, movement of heavy equipment, approval of improvement plans or the issuance of any permits and such fence shall be removed following construction but prior to installation of landscaping material,

    2.   Fencing shall be located one foot outside of dripline of the tree or trees and shall be a minimum of six feet in height,

    3.   Signs shall be posted on all sides of fences surrounding each tree stating that each tree is to be preserved,

    4.   Any and all exposed roots shall be covered with a protective material during construction;

    E.   A program for the replacement of any trees proposed to be removed. Said program shall be in conformance with Section 8.24.084. (Ord. 04-01 § 3)

 

8.24.100 Liability.
    This chapter shall not be construed to impose any liability upon the city, its officers or employees for the performance of any act or the failure to perform any act under this chapter, and shall not relieve the owner from the duty to keep any tree upon his or her property in such condition as to prevent it from causing damage or constituting a nuisance. By enactment of this chapter the city is not assuming responsibility for the maintenance of heritage, landmark or street trees nor relieving the property owner of the duty to maintain such trees at his or her own expense. (Ord. 04-01 § 3)

 

8.24.110 Abatement of dangerous condition.
    A.  An owner is not precluded by this chapter from taking action, in the event of an emergency, which action would otherwise violate the terms of this chapter, if such action is necessary to minimize a dangerous condition. In the event such emergency action is taken, the owner shall notify the tree administrator the next working day.

    B.   In the event that an owner has not properly maintained trees for which the owner is responsible and the trees pose an imminent danger to persons and/or property, constituting an emergency the tree administrator shall refer the matter to the chief of police for commencement of summary abatement pursuant to Section 19.05.003 of the municipal code. At the owner’s expense, cause the tree to be removed or have the dangerous condition otherwise rectified.

    C.   In the event that an owner has not properly maintained trees for which the owner is responsible and the trees and the condition does not pose an imminent threat to persons and/or property but has the potential to pose such a threat, the tree administrator shall give the owner thirty days to eliminate the potentially dangerous condition. If the condition has not changed in thirty days the tree administrator shall refer the matter to the chief of police for the commencement of abatement pursuant to Section 19.05.004 of the municipal code. (Ord. 04-01 § 3)

 

8.24.120 Stop work order.
    Whenever the tree administrator determines that an action being taken is in conflict with this chapter he or she shall cause there to be issued a stop work order, which shall prohibit such action. Such stop work order shall set forth the alleged violations and may list remedies to be taken to correct the violations. The person receiving the stop work order shall be required to report in writing to the tree administrator within forty-eight hours regarding the steps to be taken to correct the violations or to appeal the posting of the stop work order. The stop work order shall remain in effect until a finding is made that the circumstances giving the rise to its order no longer exist. Any party receiving a stop work order may appeal through the process outlined in Section 8.24.140. (Ord. 04-01 § 3)

 

8.24.130 Appeals.
    Any person dissatisfied with any decision of the tree administrator made under this chapter may appeal such decision to the city’s hearing officer. The process for appeal is set forth in Chapter 1.08 of the Municipal Code. (Ord. 04-01 § 3)

 

8.24.140 Violation—Penalty.
    Any person, corporation or other legal entity that violates or fails to comply with any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. Any person, corporation or other legal entity convicted of a misdemeanor for violation of this chapter is punishable for a fine of not more than one thousand dollars, or by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or both. Each person, corporation or other legal entity is guilty of a separate offense for each and every tree each and every day, during any portion of which violation of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by any such person, corporation or legal entity; and such person, corporation or legal entity shall be punished accordingly.

    In addition to the general penalty set forth above, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of this chapter shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated by the city in accordance with Title 19 of the Municipal Code, and other applicable provisions of law. Each day such condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense. In any abatement action the remedies ordered may include, but need not be limited to, compliance with the mitigation and replacement requirements as set forth in Section 8.24.084. (Ord. 04-01 § 3)

Chapter 8.28 AGRICULTURE, RIGHT TO FARM
8.28.010 Definitions.
    As used in this chapter the following words and terms shall have the following meanings:

    “Agricultural land” means those land areas of the city specifically classed and zoned as agricultural general (A-1) as defined in the city zoning ordinance and those land areas currently in agricultural operation at the time of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

    “Agricultural operation” means and includes, but is not limited to, the cultivation and tillage of the soil; the production, irrigation, frost protection, cultivation, growing, harvesting and processing of any commercial agricultural commodity, including farming, dairying, pasturage, agriculture, horticulture, floriculture, viticulture, animal and poultry husbandry, and timber; the raising of livestock, fur-bearing animals, fish or poultry, and any practices performed by a farmer and on a farm incidental to or in conjunction with such operations, including preparation for market, delivery to storage or to market, or to carriers for transportation to market, and all activities or facilities related thereto. (Ord. 92-5 § 2)

 

8.28.020 Properly operated farm not a nuisance.
    A.  No agricultural operation, or appurtenances thereof, conducted or maintained on agricultural lands for commercial purposes, and in a manner consistent with proper and accepted customs and standards, as established and followed by similar agricultural operations in the same locality, shall be or become a nuisance, private or public, due to any changed condition to a nonagricultural use in or about the locality, after the same has been in operation and if it was not a nuisance at the time it began.

    B.   Subsection A shall not apply if the agricultural operation, or appurtenance thereof obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, river, bay, stream, canal or basin, or any public park, square, street or highway.

    C.   This section shall not invalidate any provision contained in the Health and Safety Code, city weed abatement ordinance, Fish and Game Code, Food and Agricultural Code, or Division 7 (commencing with Section 13000) of the Water Code if the agricultural operation, or appurtenance thereof, constitute a nuisance, public or private, as specifically defined or described in any such provision.

    D.  Notwithstanding any provision of this section, no action, alleging that an agricultural operation in the city has interfered with private property within the city or personal wellbeing, shall be maintained unless the plaintiff has sought and obtained a decision of the city’s hearing officer as provided in Section 8.28.050 of this chapter, or a decision has been sought but no decision is rendered within the time limits provided in said section. This subsection shall not prevent a public agency from enforcing the provisions of other applicable laws without first resorting to the grievance procedure. (Ord. 03-21 § 1 (part); Ord. 92-5 § 2)

 

8.28.030 Notice to purchasers of property near agricultural operations.
    A.  Upon any subdivision or later transfer of real property adjacent to or within one thousand feet of the exterior boundary of agricultural land by map, sale, exchange, installment land sale contract, lease with an option to purchase, any other option to purchase, ground lease coupled with improvements, or residential stock cooperative, the party requesting recording of a subdivision map and any transferor shall require that a statement of the form described in subsection B be recorded with the map or be signed by the purchaser or lessee and recorded with the county recorder in conjunction with the deed or lease conveying the interest in real property.

    B.   The disclosure required by subsection A shall be made in a form substantially similar to the following:

 

Real Estate Transfer

Disclosure Statement

 

    This disclosure statement concerns the real property located in the City of West Sacramento, State of California, described as __________. This statement is a disclosure of the condition of the above described property in compliance with Section 8.28.030 of the West Sacramento Municipal Code. it is not a warranty of any kind by the seller(s) or any agent(s) representing any principal(s) in this transaction, and is not a substitute for any inspection or warranties the principal(s) may wish to obtain.

    I.    Seller’s Information

    The seller discloses the following information with the knowledge that even though it is not a warranty, prospective buyers may rely upon this information in deciding whether and on what terms to purchase the subject property. Seller hereby authorizes any agent(s) representing any principal(s) in this transaction to provide a copy of this statement to any person or entity in connection with any actual or anticipated sale of the property.

    The following are representations made by the seller as required by the City of West Sacramento and are not the representations of the agent(s), if any. This information is a disclosure and is not intended to be part of any contract between the buyer and seller.

    The City of West Sacramento supports operation of properly conducted agricultural operations within the City. If your property is adjacent to or near property used for agricultural operations, or on agricultural lands, you may be subject to inconveniences or discomforts arising from such operations, including but not limited to noise, odors, fumes, smoke, dust, the operation of machinery of any kind during any 24-hour period (including aircraft), the storage and disposal of manure, and the ground or aerial application of fertilizers, soil amendments, herbicides and pesticides. The City has determined that the use of real property for agricultural operations shall be protected in accordance with the General Plan and will not consider to be a nuisance those inconveniences or discomforts arising from such agricultural operations, if such operations are consistent with accepted customs and standards. The City has established a grievance process to assist in the resolution of any disputes which might arise between residents and farmers in the City regarding agricultural operations.

    Seller certifies that the information herein is true and correct to the best of Seller’s knowledge as of the date by the Seller.

 

    Seller _______________    Date __________

    Seller _______________    Date __________

 

    II.   Buyer(s) and Seller(s) May Wish to Obtain Professional Advice and/or Inspections of the Property

    I/we acknowledge receipt of a copy of this statement.

    Seller _______________    Date __________

    Seller _______________    Date __________

    Buyer _______________   Date __________

    Buyer _______________   Date __________

 

    Agent (Broker Representing Seller):

    ______________   By _______________

    (Broker)                (Signature)

    Date __________

 

    Agent (Broker Obtaining Offer):

    _____________     By _______________

    (Broker)                (Signature)

    Date __________

 

    A real estate broker is qualified to advise on real estate. If you desire legal advice, consult your attorney.

 

(Ord. 92-5 2)

 

8.28.040 Refusal to sign disclosure statement.
    If a buyer refuses to sign the disclosure statement set forth in Section 8.28.030, the transferor may comply with the requirements of this chapter by delivery of the statement to the buyer as provided in Section 8.28.030 and affixing and signing the following declaration to the statement prior to recording it:

 

Real Estate Transfer

Declaration—Refusal To Sign

 

    I, __________ (transferor’s name), have delivered a copy of the foregoing disclosure statement as required by law to __________ (buyer’s name), who has refused to sign.

    I declare the foregoing to be true.

    Date: _____

    Signature: _______________

    Print Name: _______________

 

(Ord. 92-5 2)

 

8.28.050 Resolution of disputes.
    A.  Should any controversy arise regarding any inconvenience or discomfort occasioned by agricultural operations which cannot be settled by direct negotiation of the parties involved, the parties shall submit the controversy to the city’s hearing officer as set forth in subsection B in an attempt to resolve the matter prior to the filing of any court action.

    B.   Any controversy between the parties shall be submitted in writing to the city’s hearing officer within thirty days of the date of the occurrence of the particular activity giving rise to the controversy or of the date a party became aware of the occurrence. The written grievance shall state in detail the basis for such grievance and identify the properties and owner(s) involved. The party filing the written grievance shall provide a copy of the grievance to all other parties by certified mail, within five working days of the date the grievance is filed. The effectiveness of the city’s hearing officer as a forum for resolution of disputes is dependent upon full discussion and complete presentation of all pertinent facts concerning the dispute in order to eliminate any misunderstandings. The parties are encouraged to cooperate in the exchange of pertinent information concerning the controversy.

    C.   Upon receipt of a written grievance, the city’s hearing officer shall investigate the facts of the controversy but must, within thirty days, hold a meeting to consider the merits of the matter and within twenty days after the meeting, render a written decision to the parties. At the time of the meeting both parties shall have an opportunity to present what each considers to be pertinent facts. No party bringing a complaint to the city’s hearing officer for settlement or resolution may be represented by counsel unless the opposing party is also represented by counsel.

    D.  A decision of the city’s hearing officer pursuant to this section shall be advisory only, nonbinding, but final in all other respects notwithstanding any other provision of this code. Service of the decision shall be made in the same manner as provided in Section 8.04.240 of this title.

    E.   Any reasonable costs associated with the functioning of the city’s hearing officer process shall be borne by the participants. The city council may, by resolution, prescribe fees to recover these costs.

    F.   Except as provided herein, the city’s hearing officer shall be appointed, function, and otherwise operate as provided in Sections 8.04.100, 8.04.150, 8.04.170, 8.04.180, 8.04.190, 8.04.210, and 8.04.220 (Sections 8.04.110, 8.04.120, 8.04.130, 8.04.140, 8.04.160, 8.04.200, 8.04.230, 8.04.240, 8.04.250 and 8.04.260 intentionally omitted) of this title and shall be given additional jurisdiction over the matters set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 92-5 2)

 

8.28.060 Willful damage to agricultural property.
    Any person found by a criminal or civil court to have willfully or deliberately caused damage or injury to agricultural property, including, but not limited to, vandalism to or theft of farm machinery, irrigation equipment, fences and buildings, death, injury or illness to livestock, may be held liable to the owner of such property for an award of three times the actual monetary damage suffered by the owner of such agricultural property. (Ord. 92-5 2)

Chapter 8.32 DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED PROPERTY BY POLICE
8.32.010 Purpose of chapter.
    The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the care, restitution, sale or destruction of unclaimed property in the possession of the police department. (Ord. 93-9 3)

 

8.32.020 Length of time property held by police.
    Unclaimed property shall be held by the police department for a period of at least three months. (Ord. 93-9 3)

 

8.32.030 Sale of property at public auction.
    After holding property for the period described in Section 8.32.020, such property may be sold at public auction to the highest bidder, and the proceeds therefrom shall be deposited in the city’s general fund. (Ord. 93-9 3)

 

8.32.040 Notice of auction.
    Notice of such sale shall be given by the police department, at least five days before the time fixed therefor, by publication once in a newspaper of general circulation published in the county. (Ord. 93-9 3)

 

8.32.050 Restoration of property to owner prior to sale.
    Upon demand prior to sale, accompanied by such proof of ownership as the police department may require, the police department shall restore such property to the owner. (Ord. 93-9 3)

 

8.32.060 Sales receipt to be valid title.
    The receipt for the sale price signed by the police department shall be valid title to the purchaser of property so sold. (Ord. 93-9 3)

 

8.32.070 Disposition of unsold property.
    Property remaining unsold in the possession of the police department after being offered at public auction may be destroyed or otherwise disposed of by the police department. (Ord. 93-9 3)

 

8.32.080 Transfer of property to police purchasing agent for sale at public auction or retention by the city for public use.
    As an alternative to the disposition of unclaimed property pursuant to Sections 8.32.030 through 8.32.070, after holding property for the period prescribed in Section 8.32.020, the police department may transfer such property to the police purchasing agent. If property is transferred to the police purchasing agent pursuant to this section, such property shall not be redeemable by the owner or other person entitled to possession. If the police purchasing agent determines that any such property transferred to the police department is needed for a public use, such property may be retained by the city and need not be sold otherwise. The police purchasing agent may dispose of its property in the manner described in Section 8.32.030. For purposes of this chapter, the chief of police shall be designated as the police purchasing agent. (Ord. 93-9 3)

Chapter 8.36 CAMPING WITHIN THE CITY LIMITS
8.36.010 Authority and purpose.
    The purpose of this chapter is to protect public and private property within the city from the detrimental impacts that accompany unauthorized camping on public and private property. It also is enacted to ensure that proper health and safety accommodations be provided to those who do camp. It is enacted to prevent degradation of public and private lands and assure that such lands can be utilized for their intended purpose. The city council enacts this chapter in accordance with the authority granted to cities by Article XI, Section 11 of the California Constitution.

    In enacting this chapter, the city is cognizant that unauthorized camping may be used by homeless persons as a form of housing. The city also recognizes that homeless persons are entitled to be treated with the same human dignity as all city residents. It is, therefore, the city’s goal, when circumstances permit, to implement a coordinated approach to addressing unauthorized camping under this chapter, which may include offering referrals to housing alternatives and social services available within the city and Yolo County prior to or concurrent with initiating enforcement activities under this chapter. (Ord. 16-8 § 2; Ord. 95-13 § 1)

 

8.36.020 Definitions.
    For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases as used in this chapter are defined in this section.

    “Camp” means to place, pitch or occupy camp facilities, or to use camp paraphernalia at any time of day or night, when it reasonably appears, in light of all the circumstances, that a person or persons intend to use or is using public or private property as a temporary or permanent living accommodation.

    “Camp facilities” include, but are not limited to, tents, huts, vehicles, vehicle camping outfits or temporary shelters.

    “Camp paraphernalia” includes, but is not limited to, bedrolls, tarpaulins, cots, beds, mattresses, sleeping bags, hammocks or cooking facilities and similar equipment.

    “Store” means to put aside or accumulate for use when needed, to put for safekeeping, to place or leave in a location. (Ord. 16-8 § 2; Ord. 95-13 § 1)

 

8.36.030 Camping on public property.
    Except as may be permitted within parks and community facilities by the parks and recreation director, it is unlawful to camp on any public property owned by the city, Port of West Sacramento, or state of California, including, without limitation, upon streets, easements, parks, dump sites, creek beds, electric utility substations, parking lots or corporation yards. Violation of this section shall be charged as a misdemeanor. (Ord. 16-8 § 2; Ord. 95-13 § 1)

 

8.36.040 Camping on private property.
    A.  Except as otherwise provided in this section, it is unlawful to camp upon private property within the city. Violation of this section shall be charged as a misdemeanor.

    B.   Exceptions.

    1.   This section shall not apply to persons camping upon their own land or camping with the owner of the land, or to persons camping with the written consent of the owner of the land, if all of the following conditions are met:

    a.   Such use of the property is allowed under the city’s zoning ordinance;

    b.   The written consent of the property owner is in the possession of the camper at all times and is shown upon demand of any peace officer;

    c.   Camping is limited to not more than seven consecutive days in any one month period, with any portion of a day counting as a full camping day; and

    d.   All applicable local ordinances of the city and county, and all Health Code sections of the state, are complied with.

    2.   This section shall not apply to persons lawfully camping within campgrounds or trailer parks specifically designated and/or approved for such use pursuant to the zoning ordinance of the city. (Ord. 16-8 § 2; Ord. 95-13 § 1)

 

8.36.050 Campfires.
    A.  No person shall kindle or maintain an open campfire or bonfire.

    B.   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to permit fires otherwise prohibited by law or to negate the requirement for burning permits otherwise required by law. (Ord. 16-8 § 2; Ord. 95-13 § 1)

 

8.36.060 Storage of personal property on public and private property.
    It is unlawful for any person to store personal property, including, but not limited to, camp facilities and camp paraphernalia, in the following areas, except as otherwise designated by the city:

    A.  Any public property owned by the city, Port of West Sacramento, or state of California, including, without limitation, upon streets, easements, parks, dump sites, creek beds, electric utility substations, parking lots or corporation yards; or

    B.   Any private property without the written consent of the owner.

    Violation of this section shall be charged as a misdemeanor. (Ord. 16-8 § 2)

Chapter 8.40 POLLUTION AND ANCHORAGE OF VESSELS
8.40.010 Pollution—Anchoring and mooring.
    It is unlawful for any person to do any of the following within the territorial jurisdiction of the city of West Sacramento:

    A.  Dump, throw or discharge sewage, garbage or any other material defined by any state or federal law as one which poses a risk to human health or safety into any waterway;

    B.   Pump or otherwise discharge the content of the bilge of any vessel into any waterway;

    C.   Anchor or moor any vessel that is not seaworthy on any waterway, or attach to any vessel that is anchored or moored on any waterway another vessel that is not seaworthy. Determinations of seaworthiness shall be made by the West Sacramento police department and/or the United States Coast Guard.

    D.  Anchor or moor any vessel, or continue to anchor or moor a vessel, on any waterway forty-eight hours after receiving notice that, due to threat of flooding, high water or other public safety reasons, the vessel must be removed from the location or waterway:

    1.   Notices to move shall be posted upon the vessel and a copy mailed to the registered owner, if actually known. The notice shall: (a) advise the owner/occupant that the vessel must be moved within forty-eight hours of posting, (b) explain the reason why the vessel must be moved, and (c) state that if the vessel is not moved, it will be towed and impounded at the owner’s expense.

    2.   Any vessel not in compliance with the notice and order to move will be subject to immediate removal by the West Sacramento police department.

    3.   Nothing contained in this chapter shall limit the city’s authority to summarily abate any condition if the city determines that the condition poses an immediate threat to public health or safety. (Ord. 00-4 § 4)

 

8.40.020 Vessels in emergency situations or conditions.
    If any vessel on any waterway is in an emergency situation or condition, the owner or operator of the vessel shall immediately report the situation or condition to the West Sacramento police department. The owner or operator of the vessel shall be subject to the police department’s directives and shall immediately move and/or secure the vessel as instructed. It is unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to comply with the department’s orders or directions with regard to the disposition of the vessel.

    In the event that the owner or operator of a vessel in an emergency situation or condition fails to comply with the directives of the department, the department shall forthwith move and/or secure the vessel at the owner’s expense.

    Vessels that are in an emergency situation or condition shall remain anchored, moored or attached only until the emergency situation or condition has been resolved, but in no event for more than seventy-two hours. (Ord. 00-4 § 4)

 

8.40.030 Long-term anchorage permit required.
    It is unlawful for any person to anchor or moor any vessel on any waterway in one location for more than six hours a day for a total of thirty or more days in any ninety-day period without a valid long-term anchorage permit (“permit”) issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. This requirement shall not apply to vessels moored to a pier or dock with permission of the owner of the pier or dock. (Ord. 00-4 § 4)

 

8.40.040 Exemptions.
    This chapter shall not apply to vessels operated by the United States, the state of California, or any government entity, its agencies, or instrumentalities. (Ord. 00-4 § 4)

 

8.40.050 Permit applications.
    Permit applications may be obtained from the West Sacramento police department. Only vessels in compliance with the conditions set forth in Section 8.40.060 shall be eligible for a permit. (Ord. 00-4 § 4)

 

8.40.060 Conditions for issuance of permit.
    A permit will be issued for a vessel if the West Sacramento police department determines, after investigation and inspection of the vessel, that:

    A.  The vessel is equipped with an operable sanitation device designed to receive, retain, and lawfully discharge sewage.

    B.   Occupancy of the vessel will not create a hazard to health, welfare or safety of the occupants thereof, other vessels, or the community in general. (Ord. 00-4 § 4)

 

8.40.070 Display of permit.
    A permit shall be posted on the vessel in a position that is clearly visible from the exterior of the vessel. (Ord. 00-4 § 4)

 

8.40.080 Sanitation.
    Vessels possessing a valid permit shall discharge sewage at an authorized pump-out station at least every four days in a manner that complies fully with all applicable regulations. (Ord. 00-4 § 4)

 

8.40.090 Sanitation log.
    Vessels possessing a valid permit shall submit a sanitation log documenting compliance with this chapter to the West Sacramento police department upon request. (Ord. 00-4 § 4)

 

8.40.100 Attached vessels.
    A vessel possessing a valid permit, while anchored in any waterway, may have no more than one other vessel attached to it; provided, however, that additional vessels may be attached if otherwise permitted by law and if each additional vessel possesses a valid permit. (Ord. 00-4 § 4)

 

8.40.110 Permit fee.
    Applications for permits shall be accompanied by a fee established by the city council based on the cost of administering the permit program. (Ord. 00-4 § 4)

 

8.40.120 Duration of permit—Renewal.
    Permits shall expire ninety days from the date of issuance. Permits may be renewed by applying for a new permit in accordance with the procedure set forth herein. (Ord. 00-4 § 4)

 

8.40.130 Revocation.
    A permit may be revoked upon a finding by the West Sacramento police department that the permittee or occupant of the vessel is in violation of the terms of the permit or this chapter. Appeal from any such revocation may be taken to the city’s hearing officer or hearing examiner as specified in Chapter 1.08. (Ord. 00-4 § 4)

 

8.40.140 Violation—Penalty.
    All violations of the provisions of this chapter are misdemeanors, punishable as set forth in Chapter 1.12. In addition, violations of this chapter are declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated pursuant to Title 19. (Ord. 09-17 § 2; Ord. 00-4 § 4)

 

8.40.150 Definitions.
    As used in this chapter, the term “West Sacramento police department” means the West Sacramento police department or the city’s agent. (Ord. 00-4 § 4)

Chapter 8.44 UNATTENDED DONATION BOXES
8.44.010 Purpose and intent.
    The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the placement of unattended donation boxes within the city. The procedures and requirements of this chapter are enacted to:

    A.  Promote the community’s health, safety, and welfare by regulating unattended donation boxes for clothing or other salvageable personal property within the city;

    B.   Ensure that unattended donation boxes do not pose a hazard to pedestrian and vehicular traffic;

    C.   Ensure that material is not allowed to accumulate outside of the unattended donation boxes where it can be scattered by adverse weather conditions, animal contact, or human activities; and

    D.  Establish criteria that avoid attracting vermin, unsightliness, and public health or safety hazards. (Ord. 12-4 § 2)

 

8.44.020 Definitions.
    “Director” means the director of the community development department of the city of West Sacramento or designee.

    “Operator” means a person, entity, association or organization that places, maintains or operates unattended donation box(es) to solicit donations of clothing or other salvageable personal property.

    “Permittee” means the property owner who is issued a permit authorizing placement of unattended donation box(es).

    “Property owner” means the person, entity, association or organization who owns the real property where the unattended donation box(es) is/are proposed to be located.

    “Residential district” includes residential zoning districts as established pursuant to Title 17 of the West Sacramento Municipal Code, and adopted specific plans with applicable residential zoning districts.

    “Unattended donation box” means any unattended container, receptacle, or similar device that is located on any property within the city, used for soliciting and collecting donations of clothing or other salvageable personal property. This term does not include recycle bins for the collection of recyclable materials governed or regulated pursuant to Title 17 of the West Sacramento Municipal Code. (Ord. 12-4 § 2)

 

8.44.030 Permits.
    A.  Unless otherwise exempt, it shall be unlawful and a public nuisance for any property owner or operator to place, operate, maintain or allow unattended donation boxes on real property unless the property owner first obtains a permit pursuant to this chapter and the unattended donation box is placed, operated, and maintained in accordance with all provisions in this chapter.

    B.   The permit application shall be made on a form provided by the director and shall include the following information:

    1.   The name, address, e-mail, website (if available) and telephone number of the operator;

    2.   Written proof sufficient to establish that the operator who will utilize the unattended donation box is qualified to solicit donations of salvageable personal property pursuant to Section 148.3 of the California Welfare and Institutions Code, as amended;

    3.   The text of the disclosures that will be made on the unattended donation box as required in Section 8.44.050(A)(3); and

 

    4.   The physical address of the property owner’s real property and a drawing sufficient to indicate the proposed location of the unattended donation box on the property owner’s real property, as well as the size of the proposed unattended donation box, and consent of the property owner to place the unattended donation box(es) on its real property.

    C.   Each application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee in the amount established by resolution by the city council. This fee shall be in addition to any fee or tax imposed by the city pursuant to any other provision of this code.

    D.  Applications shall be filed with the director.

    E.   Within thirty days of receiving a completed application, the director shall issue a permit or deny the issuance of a permit.

    F.   The director shall not issue a permit unless:

    1.   The property owner has submitted a complete and accurate application accompanied by the applicable fee;

    2.   Written consent of the property owner is provided;

    3.   The operator who will maintain or operate the unattended donation box is qualified to solicit donations of salvageable personal property pursuant to Section 148.3 of the California Welfare and Institutions Code, as amended;

    4.   The proposed location and placement of the unattended donation box on the property owner’s real property is in compliance with all applicable laws.

    G.  If the director denies an application, the director shall provide the property owner, in writing, the specific reasons for the denial.

    H.  A permit issued hereunder shall be valid for one unattended donation box. Each unattended donation box shall have its own individual permit.

    I.    The term of the permit shall expire one year from the date of issuance.

    J.    No person or operator to whom a permit has been issued shall transfer, assign, or convey such permit to another person or operator.

    K.  Prior to expiration of the permit, the permittee may voluntarily cancel the permit by notifying the director in writing of the intent to cancel the permit. The permit shall become void upon the director’s receipt of a written notice of intent to cancel the permit. (Ord. 12-4 § 2)

 

8.44.040 Renewal of permits.
    A.  A permittee may apply for permit renewal by submitting to the director, before the expiration of the permit, a renewal application and a nonrefundable renewal fee in an amount set by resolution of the city council.

    B.   The director shall either approve or deny the renewal of a permit within thirty days of receipt of the complete renewal application and payment of the renewal fee.

    C.   The director shall approve the renewal of a permit if he or she finds that no circumstances existed during the term of the permit, existed at the time of submission of an application for renewal, or existed at any time during the review of the application for renewal, that are inconsistent with any finding required for approval of a new permit as specified in Section 8.44.030 or that would justify the revocation of the permit as specified in Section 8.44.060. (Ord. 12-4 § 2)

 

8.44.050 Requirements and maintenance.
    A.  The permittee shall be responsible for operating and maintaining, or causing to be operated and maintained, all unattended donation boxes located in the city as follows:

    1.   Unattended donation boxes shall be maintained in good condition and appearance with no structural damage, holes, or visible rust, and shall be free of graffiti;

    2.   Unattended donation boxes shall be locked or otherwise secured;

    3.   Unattended donation boxes shall contain the following contact information in two-inch type visible from the front of each unattended donation box: the name, address, email, and phone number of both the permittee and operator;

    4.   The permittee and operator shall place a copy of the permit in a prominent and visible location in the front of the box in plain view for inspection by the public and city officials;

    5.   Unattended donation boxes shall be serviced and emptied as needed, but at least once per month, or within five business days of a request by the director; and

    6.   Unattended donation boxes shall be no more than eighty-two inches high, fifty-six inches wide and forty-nine inches deep.

    B.   The permittee shall be responsible for maintaining, or causing to be maintained, the area surrounding the unattended donation boxes free of any junk, garbage, trash, debris or other refuse material.

    C.   The permittee shall be responsible for abating and removing all junk, garbage, trash, debris and other refuse material in the area surrounding the unattended donation boxes within twenty-four hours of written or verbal notice from the city.

    D.  The permittee shall be responsible for all costs for abating and removing any junk, garbage, trash, debris and other refuse material from the area surrounding the unattended donation boxes.

    E.   It shall be unlawful for any property owner or operator to place an unattended donation box in any residential district.

    F.   No unattended donation box shall be placed within four hundred feet from another unattended donation box.

    G.  No unattended donation box shall be placed on required parking spaces, required landscaping, or within the clear vision triangle as defined in Title 17 of the West Sacramento Municipal Code.

    H.  No more than one unattended donation box shall be placed on each parcel of real property. (Ord. 12-4 § 2)

 

8.44.060 Revocation of permit, removal of unattended donation boxes and liability.
    The director shall have the right to revoke any permit issued hereunder if any of the grounds to refuse issuance of the initial permit exists. In addition, the failure of the permittee to comply with the provisions of this chapter, or other provisions of this code or other law, shall also constitute grounds for revocation of the permit. The director shall provide a written notification to the permittee stating the specific grounds for revocation. Upon revocation, the unattended donation box shall be removed from the permittee’s real property within thirty calendar days and, if not removed within this time period, the city may remove, store and dispose of the unattended donation box at the permittee’s sole cost and expense. Upon revocation, a permittee shall be prohibited from applying for a permit for a period of one year. (Ord. 12-4 § 2)

 

8.44.070 Appeals.
    Any person aggrieved by the decision rendered by the director in granting or denying an application for a permit under this chapter or in revoking a permit issued under this chapter may appeal the decision to the hearing officer in accordance with Chapter 1.08 of the city’s municipal code. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final. (Ord. 12-4 § 2)

 

8.44.080 Violations.
    Any violation of the provisions of this chapter is a public nuisance and shall be subject to enforcement remedies, penalties and abatement provided by Title 19 of the West Sacramento Municipal Code. Each violation and each day is subject to separate misdemeanor violations when applying penalties. (Ord. 12-4 § 2)

 

8.44.090 Administrative fees.
    The city manager may establish reasonable fees and deposits to defray the cost of processing applications and proposals and for the administration of this chapter. (Ord. 12-4 § 2)

 

8.44.100 Exemption.
    Unattended donation boxes located entirely within the interior of a building are exempt from the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 12-4 § 2)

Title 9 PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE
Chapter 9.04 OFFENSES BY OR AGAINST PUBLIC OFFICERS AND GOVERNMENT
Chapter 9.08 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Chapter 9.12 FIREARMS
Chapter 9.16 LOITERING
Chapter 9.20 NUDITY
Chapter 9.24 CARDROOMS AND GAMING CLUBS
Chapter 9.28 AGGRESSIVE SOLICITATION
Chapter 9.30 LIMITATIONS TO ACCESS TO TOBACCO PRODUCTS

Chapter 9.04 OFFENSES BY OR AGAINST PUBLIC OFFICERS AND GOVERNMENT
9.04.010 False reports.
    A.  Statements. It is unlawful for any person to knowingly falsify or conceal any fact or make any false or fraudulent statement or misrepresentation in any matter or proceeding within the jurisdiction of any department or agency of the city.

    B.   Writings and Documents. It is unlawful for any person to knowingly use any false or misleading writing or document in any matter or proceeding within the jurisdiction of any department or agency of the city. (County code § 5-3.01)

Chapter 9.08 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
9.08.010 Definitions.
    As used in this chapter:

    “Alcoholic beverage” means and includes alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer and every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer, and which contains one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume, and which is fit for beverage purposes, either alone or when diluted, mixed or combined with other substances.

    “Open container” means a bottle, can or other receptacle which has been opened, or a seal broken or the contents partially removed.

    “Public park, street, alley, highway or other public property” means and refers only to those public parks, streets, alleys, highways or other public property within the corporate limits of the city. (Ord. 88-6 § 2; county code § 5-4.51)

 

9.08.020 Consumption from or possession of open container on public property.
    It is unlawful for any person or persons to drink any alcoholic beverage or possess any open container containing any alcoholic beverage in or upon any public park, street, alley, highway or other public property, or in the entranceway to any building, which entranceway is open to view from the public street, except in or upon those public places where the drinking or consuming of alcoholic beverages is expressly permitted by law. (Ord. 88-6 § 2; county code § 5-4.52)

 

9.08.030 Consumption from or possession of open container on private parking lot
    No person may drink any alcoholic beverage or possess an open container of any alcoholic beverage while upon a privately owned parking lot to which the public is invited and permitted and which is open to view from the public street unless an exception exists under Section 9.08.050. (Ord. 88-6 § 2; county code § 5-4.53)

 

9.08.040 Offering or furnishing alcoholic beverage for consumption.
    It is unlawful for any person or persons while in or upon any highway, or other public property, or in an entranceway or parking lot as described in Sections 9.08.020 and 9.08.030, except in or upon those public places where the drinking or consuming of alcoholic beverages is expressly permitted by law, to offer or furnish or give, or cause to be offered or furnished or given, any alcoholic beverage to any other person or persons with the intention that such other person or persons shall drink or consume alcoholic beverages while such other person or persons are in or upon such premises, except in or upon those public places where the drinking or consumption of alcoholic beverages is expressly permitted by law. (Ord. 88-6 § 2; county code § 5-4.54)

 

9.08.050 Exceptions.
    The drinking or consumption and the offering, giving or furnishing of alcoholic beverages may be expressly permitted by written authorization from the city manager or designee in any building, facility, park, street or other place owned, leased, operated or under the management and control of the city for special events, meetings, conferences or conventions; provided, that such authorization shall be requested in writing and, if granted, shall be subject to conditions and all rules, regulations and ordinances of the city; and further provided, that such permit may be modified or summarily revoked at any time by the city manager or chief of police. (Ord. 88-6 § 2; county code § 5-4.55)

 

9.08.060 Violation—Penalty.
    It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this chapter. Any person violating or failing to comply with any requirement of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 88-6 § 2; county code § 5-4.56)

Chapter 9.12 FIREARMS
9.12.010 Discharge within city limits unlawful.
    Except as otherwise provided by law or this chapter, it is unlawful to discharge or fire any firearm projecting, by any means, lead or any other missiles within any portion of the incorporated area of the city. (Ord. 88-5 § 1)

 

9.12.020 Exceptions.
    The provisions of this chapter do not apply to:

    A.  Persons set forth in subsections (b), (c) or (d) of Section 12031 of the Penal Code of the state;

    B.   The discharge of a firearm by persons on land owned by the United States of America, the state or the county unless prohibited by such entities;

    C.   Persons necessarily acting in the lawful defense of persons or property; and

    D.  The discharge of firearms on the premises of any lawful shooting gallery, practice range, skeet field or other similar place conducted at a fixed location, either indoors or outdoors, with respect to which adequate safeguards have been provided to protect persons and property from injuries, and for which all required permits, if any, have been obtained. (Ord. 88-5 § 2)

 

9.12.030 Construction.
    Nothing in this chapter shall be construed or applied to necessarily require or excuse noncompliance with any provision of the laws of the state of California or to the laws of the United States. This chapter, and the penalties prescribed for violation thereof, shall not supersede, but shall supplement all statutes of the state or of the United States in which similar conduct may be prohibited or regulated. (Ord. 88-5 § 3)

 

9.12.040 Violation—Penalty.
    Any violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars, or by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or both, for each violation. (Ord. 88-5 § 4)

Chapter 9.16 LOITERING
Note
*      Prior ordinance history: County code §§ 5-5.01—5-5.05; Ord. 89-14.

 

9.16.010 Public highways and sidewalks.
    It is unlawful for any person to loiter or stand or sit in or upon any public highway, alley, sidewalk or crosswalk within the city so as to, in any manner, hinder or obstruct the free passage therein or thereon of persons or vehicles passing along the same. (Ord. 07-5)

 

9.16.020 Places of public assemblage.
    It is unlawful for any person to loiter or stand or sit in or at the entrance of any church, hall, theater or other place of public assemblage within the corporate limits of the city so as to in any manner obstruct such entrance. (Ord. 07-5)

 

9.16.030 Minors—Curfew—Definitions.
    For purposes of Sections 9.16.030 through 9.16.060:

    “Curfew hours” means the period from eleven p.m. any evening of the week, until six a.m. the following day.

    “Emergency” means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action.

    “Establishment” means any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited, including but not limited to, any place of amusement or entertainment and/or where food is served.

    “Guardian” means (1) a person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or (2) a public or private agency with which a court has placed a minor.

    “Knowingly” means, with respect to a conduct or to a circumstance described by a provision of law defining an offense, that a person is aware that his or her conduct is of that nature or that the circumstance exists; when knowledge of the existence of a particular fact is an element of an offense, that knowledge is established if a person is aware of a substantial probability of its existence, unless the person actually believes it does not exist.

    “Minor” means any person under eighteen years of age.

    “Parent” means the mother, father, stepparent, foster parent or grandparent of another person. Parent may also mean an individual who has filed a Declaration of Domestic Partnership with the Secretary of State and is so registered and has a child or children in his or her care, custody or control.

    “Public place” means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access, and includes but is not limited to streets, highways, roads, sidewalks, bridges, alleys, plazas, parks, playgrounds, wharves, docks, vacant lots, driveways, parking lots, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities, and shops.

    “Remain” means to (1) to linger or stay; or (2) to fail to leave the premises or establishment when requested to do so by a police officer or the owner, operator, or other person in control of the premises or establishment.

    “Responsible adult” means a person at least eighteen years of age who has been entrusted by the parent of minor to care for the minor.

    “Serious bodily injury” means bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ. (Ord. 07-5)

 

9.16.040 Minors—Curfew—Restrictions.
    A.  It is unlawful for any minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city of West Sacramento during curfew hours.

    B.   It is unlawful for any parent or guardian of a minor to knowingly permit, or by insufficient control to allow, a minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city of West Sacramento during curfew hours. (Ord. 07-5)

 

9.16.050 Minors—Curfew—Exceptions.
    A.  The provisions of Section 9.16.040(A) and/or (B) do not apply and may be a defense to prosecution if the minor was:

    1.   Accompanied by his or her parent or guardian or a responsible adult as defined in Section 9.16.030;

    2.   On an errand at the written direction of his or her parent or guardian, or responsible adult, without any detour or stop (written direction must be signed, timed and dated by the parent or guardian and must indicate the specific errand);

    3.   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;

    4.   Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;

    5.   Involved in an emergency;

    6.   On the public right-of-way immediately abutting the minor’s residence or immediately abutting the residence of a next-door neighbor, if the neighbor did not complain to the police department about the minor’s presence;

    7.   Attending, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city of West Sacramento, a school, civic organization or other similar entity ;

    8.   Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right of assembly; or

    9.   Emancipated pursuant to law.

    B.   Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a police officer shall ask the apparent offender’s age and reason for being in the public place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any responses and other circumstances, none of the exceptions in this section is present. (Ord. 07-5)

 

9.16.060 Minors—Violation—Penalty.
    A.  Minors. Any minor violating the provisions of Section 9.16.030 of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be dealt with in accordance with juvenile court law and procedure.

    B.   Parents. Any parent as defined herein who violates the provisions of this chapter, is guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as set forth in Chapter 1.12 of this code. (Ord. 07-5)

Chapter 9.20 NUDITY
9.20.010 Display of female breasts in business establishments.
    Every female is guilty of a misdemeanor who, while participating in any live act, demonstration, exhibition or otherwise employed in any establishment which is licensed by the state to sell alcohol or is doing business within the city:

    A.  Exposes any portion of the areola or nipple of either breast;

    B.   Employs any device or covering which is intended to simulate the areola or nipple of the breast; or

    C.   Wears any type of clothing so that any portion of the areola or nipple of the breast may be observed. (Ord. 94-5 § 1; Ord. 89-19 § 3(C); Ord. 89-11 § 3(C); county code § 5-13.01)

 

9.20.020 Display of genitalia in liquor establishments or other business establishments.
    Every person is guilty of a misdemeanor who, while participating in any live act, demonstration, exhibition or otherwise employed in any establishment which is licensed by the state to sell alcohol or is doing business within the city:

    A.  Exposes his or her genitalia, or employs any device or covering which is intended to simulate the genitalia or pubic hair of such person;

    B.   Permits, procures or assists any person to so expose him or herself, or to employ any such device. (Ord. 94-5 § 1; Ord. 89-19 § 3(C); Ord. 89-11 § 3(C); county code § 5-13.02)

Chapter 9.24 CARDROOMS AND GAMING CLUBS
9.24.010 Definitions.
    A.  “Cardroom” means any place where games of cards and similar games are played, and to which the public is invited to participate in such games with or without the payment of consideration.

    B.   “Gaming” means any card game played for currency, check, credit or any other thing of value which is not already prohibited and made unlawful by Chapter 9 or Chapter 10 of Title 9 of Part 1 of the Penal Code of California.

    C.   “Gaming club” means any establishment where gaming as defined in subsection B of this section is conducted. (Ord. 90-27 § 4(part))

 

9.24.020 Cardrooms and gaming clubs prohibited.
    Cardrooms and gaming clubs shall be unlawful uses of property. No cardrooms or gaming club as defined in this chapter shall be operated as a business for fees or charges, either independently or as a use incidental to any other business. (Ord. 90-27 § 4(part))

Chapter 9.28 AGGRESSIVE SOLICITATION
9.28.010 Legislative findings.
    A.  The city council finds that the increase in aggressive solicitation throughout the city has become extremely disturbing and disruptive to residents and businesses, and has contributed not only to the loss of access to and enjoyment of public places, but also to an enhanced sense of fear, intimidation and disorder.

    B.   The city council also finds that solicitation at major intersections in the city and near freeway on and off-ramps poses a dangerous condition for the solicitor and motorists in the area.

    C.   Aggressive solicitation usually includes approaching or following pedestrians, repetitive soliciting despite refusals, the use of abusive or profane language to cause fear and intimidation, unwanted physical contact, or the intentional blocking of pedestrian and vehicular traffic. The city council further finds that the presence of individuals who solicit money from persons at or near banks, automated teller machines, or in public transportation vehicles is especially troublesome because of the enhanced fear of crime in those confined environments. Motorists also find themselves confronted by persons seeking money who, without permission, wash their automobile windows at traffic intersections, despite explicit instructions by drivers not to do so. People driving or parking on city streets frequently find themselves faced with persons seeking money by offering to open car doors or locate parking spaces. Such activities carry with them an implicit threat to both persons and property.

    D.  The city council is enacting this chapter pursuant to its police power, as stated in Article XI, Section 7 of the California Constitution, in addition to the power set forth in Section 647(c) of the state of California Penal Code. This law is timely and appropriate because current laws and city regulations are insufficient to address the aforementioned problems.

    E.   The law is not intended to limit any persons from exercising their constitutional right to solicit funds, picket, protest or engage in other constitutionally protected activity. Rather, its goal is to protect citizens from the fear and intimidation accompanying certain kinds of solicitation that have become an unwelcome and overwhelming presence in the city. (Ord. 96-17 § 2)

 

9.28.020 Definitions.
    As used in this chapter:

    “Solicit” means to request an immediate donation of money or other thing of value from another person, regardless of the solicitor’s purpose or intended use of the money or other thing of value. The solicitation may be, without limitation, by the spoken, written, or printed word, or by other means of communication.

    “Aggressive manner” means and includes:

    1.   Intentionally or recklessly making any physical contact with or touching another person in the course of the solicitation without the person’s consent;

    2.   Following the person being solicited, if that conduct is: (i) intended to or is likely to cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property in the person’s possession; or (ii) is intended to or is reasonably likely to intimidate the person being solicited into responding affirmatively to the solicitation;

    3.   Continuing to solicit within the immediate area of the person being solicited after the person has made a negative response, if continuing the solicitation is: (i) intended to or is likely to cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property in the person’s possession; or (ii) is intended to or is reasonably likely to intimidate the person being solicited into responding affirmatively to the solicitation;

    4.   Intentionally or recklessly blocking the safe or free passage of the person being solicited or requiring the person, or the driver of a vehicle, to take evasive action to avoid physical contact with the person making the solicitation. Acts authorized as an exercise of one’s constitutional right to picket or legally protest, and acts authorized by a permit issued pursuant to Section 5.04.220 of the West Sacramento Municipal Code, shall not constitute obstruction of pedestrian or vehicular traffic;

    5.   Intentionally or recklessly using obscene or abusive language or gestures: (i) intended to or likely to cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property in the person’s possession; or (ii) words intended to or reasonably likely to intimidate the person into responding affirmatively to the solicitation; or

    6.   Approaching the person being solicited in a manner that: (i) is intended to or is likely to cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property in the person’s possession; or (ii) is intended to or is reasonably likely to intimidate the person being solicited into responding affirmatively to the solicitation.

    “Automated teller machine” means a device, linked to a financial institution’s account records, which is able to carry out transactions, including, but not limited to: account transfers, deposits, cash withdrawals, balance inquiries, and mortgage and loan payments.

    “Automated teller machine facility” means the area comprised of one or more automatic teller machines, and any adjacent space which is made available to banking customers after regular banking hours.

    “Bank” means any banking corporation, savings and loan association, or credit union chartered under the laws of this state or the United States.

    “Check cashing business” means any person duly licensed by the superintendent of banks to engage in the business of cashing checks, drafts or money orders for consideration pursuant to the provisions of the banking laws.

    “Public area” means an area to which the public or a substantial group of persons has access, and includes, but is not limited to, alleys, bridges, buildings, driveways, parking lots, parks, playgrounds, plazas, sidewalks, and streets open to the general public, and the doorways and entrances to buildings and dwellings, and the grounds enclosing them. (Ord. 96-17 § 2)

 

9.28.030 Prohibited acts.
    It is unlawful for any person to solicit money or other things of value, or to solicit the sale of goods or services:

    A.  In an aggressive manner in a public area;

    B.   In any public transportation vehicle, or bus station or stop;

    C.   Within fifteen feet of any entrance or exit of any bank or check cashing businesses or within fifteen feet of any automated teller machine during the hours of operation of such bank, automated teller machine or check cashing business without the consent of the owner or other person legally in possession of such facilities. When an automated teller machine is located within an automated teller machine facility, such distance shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the automated teller machine facility;

    D.  On private property if the owner, tenant, or lawful occupant has asked the person not to solicit on the property, or has posted a sign clearly indicating that solicitations are not welcome on the property; or

    E.   From any operator of a motor vehicle that is in traffic on a public street, including, but not limited to major intersections in the city and near freeway on and off-ramps, whether in exchange for cleaning the vehicle’s windows, or for blocking, occupying, or reserving a public parking space, or directing the occupant to a public parking space; this paragraph shall not apply to services rendered in connection with emergency repairs requested by the operator or passengers of such vehicle. (Ord. 96-17 § 2)

 

9.28.040 Penalties.
    A.  Any violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars, or by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or both, for each violation.

    B.   In lieu of, or in addition to the penalty provided in this section, a person in violation of this chapter may be required to perform community service work as described by the court. (Ord. 96-17 § 2)

 

9.28.050 Construction and severability.
    A.  If any section, sentence, clause, or phrase of this chapter is held invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, then such judgment shall in no way affect or impair the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter.

    B.   This chapter is not intended to prescribe any demand for payment for services rendered or goods delivered.

    C.   This chapter is not intended to create a result through enforcement that is absurd, impossible or unreasonable. The chapter should be held inapplicable in any such cases where its application would be unconstitutional under the Constitution of the state of California or the Constitution of the United States of America. (Ord. 96-17 § 2)

Chapter 9.30 LIMITATIONS TO ACCESS TO TOBACCO PRODUCTS
9.30.010 Purpose.
    The purpose of this chapter is to discourage violations of tobacco-related laws, particularly those which prohibit or discourage the sale or distribution of tobacco products and tobacco paraphernalia to minors by requiring all tobacco retailers to obtain city permits. (Ord. 09-20 § 3; Ord. 01-17 § 1)

 

9.30.020 Findings.
    A.  Each year four hundred thousand Americans die prematurely from tobacco related illnesses. Tobacco use has been linked to cancer, emphysema, heart disease and a variety of other life threatening problems.

    B.   These health problems create a burden for local communities and more specifically for the city of West Sacramento. In addition to the health care costs for these diseases, there is the lost human and economic contribution of each individual who suffers from the preventable effects of tobacco use.

    C.   The 1994 National Household Survey on Drug Abuse showed that ninety percent of tobacco users start well before the age of eighteen, the average child smoker started at age thirteen, while the average age for smokeless tobacco initiation is nine years. According to the California State Department of Health Services Tobacco Control System, while adult tobacco use has been declining, the use by youth has been rising.

    D.  All fifty states, and the District of Columbia, prohibit the sale of tobacco products to minors. California State Penal Code Sections 308(a) and 308(b) prohibit the sale of tobacco products and paraphernalia to minors and possession of tobacco by a minor, yet over twenty-nine million packs of cigarettes are sold to California children annually.

    E.   The Synar Amendment to the 1992 Alcohol, Drug Abuse and Mental Health Reorganization Act requires that states reduce sales of cigarettes to minors to below twenty percent by the year 2000 or lose federal drug and alcohol funding.

    F.   California’s rate of sales of cigarettes to minors is still twenty-one percent. Studies show that over forty percent of grade school students who smoked daily have shoplifted cigarettes, at some time, from self service displays and that sales to minors drop by between forty percent and eighty percent after enactment ordinances requiring vendor-assisted sales of tobacco products.

    G.  Similar legislation in other counties and cities in California have reduced youth access to tobacco products without negatively affecting businesses.

    H.  From 2013 to 2015, an estimated fifteen percent of ninth and eleventh grade students in California reported using electronic smoking devices. (California Department of Public Health California Tobacco Control Program. California Tobacco Facts and Figures 2016. Sacramento, CA: California Department of Public Health. 2016.)

    I.    Nine and three-tenths percent of high school students in California reported buying their own electronic cigarette from a store. (Kann L, McManus T, Harris WA, et al. Youth Risk Behavior Surveillance—United States, 2017; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Youth Risk Behavior Surveillance—United States, 2017. Supplementary Tables 52-93.)

    J.    In 2016, an estimated eighty-two percent of tobacco retailers in California sold flavored non-cigarette tobacco products, over ninety percent of tobacco retailers sold menthol cigarettes, and eight out of ten tobacco retailers near schools sold flavored non-cigarette tobacco products. (California Department of Public Health California Tobacco Control Program. 2016 Healthy Stores for a Healthy Community Survey Results—all counties. 2016.)

    K.  Mentholated and flavored products have been shown to be “starter” products for youth who begin using tobacco and these products help establish tobacco habits that can lead to long-term addiction. (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Preventing Tobacco Use Among Youth and Young Adults: A Report of the Surgeon General. Atlanta, GA: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, Office on Smoking and Health. 2012; Hersey JC, Ng SW, Nonnemaker JM, et al. Are menthol cigarettes a starter product for youth? Nicotine Tob Res. 2006; Wackowski O, Delnevo CD. Menthol cigarettes and indicators of tobacco dependence among adolescents. Addict Behav. 2007; Oliver AJ, Jensen JA, Vogel RI, Anderson AJ, Hatsukami DK. Flavored and nonflavored smokeless tobacco products: rate, pattern of use, and effects. Nicotine Tob Res. 2013.)

    L.   Between 2004 and 2014, use of non-menthol cigarettes decreased among all populations, but overall use of menthol cigarettes increased among young adults (eighteen to twenty-five years of age) and adults (over twenty-six years of age). (Villanti AC, Mowery PD, Delnevo CD, Niaura RS, Abrams DB, Giovino GA. Changes in the prevalence and correlates of menthol cigarette use in the USA, 2004-2014. Tob Control. 2016.)

    M.  Unlike cigarette use that has steadily declined among youth, the prevalence of the use of non-cigarette tobacco products has remained statistically unchanged and, in some cases, increased among youth. (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Preventing Tobacco Use Among Youth and Young Adults: A Report of the Surgeon General. Atlanta, GA: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, Office on Smoking and Health. 2012; Johnston LD, O’Malley PM, Bachman JG, Schulenberg JE, Miech RA. Monitoring the Future national survey results on drug use, 1975–2013: Volume I, Secondary school students. Ann Arbor, MI: Institute for Social Research, The University of Michigan. 2014; Harrell PT, Naqvi SMH, Plunk AD, Ji M, Martins SS. Patterns of youth tobacco and polytobacco usage: The shift to alternative tobacco products. Am J Drug Alcohol Abuse. 2017; Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. Results from the 2010 National Survey on Drug Use and Health: Summary of National Findings. Rockville, MD: Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. 2011; Wang TW, Gentzke A, Sharapova S, Cullen KA, Ambrose BK, Jamal A. Tobacco Product Use Among Middle and High School Students—United States, 2011-2017; Cobb C, Ward KD, Maziak W, Shihadeh AL, Eissenberg T. Waterpipe Tobacco Smoking: An Emerging Health Crisis in the United States. American Journal of Health Behavior. 2010.)

    N.  Flavored tobacco has significant public health implications for youth and people of color as a result of targeted industry marketing strategies and product manipulation. (United States v. Philip Morris USA, Inc., 449 F. Supp. 2d 1 (D.D.C. 2006); U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Preventing Tobacco Use Among Youth and Young Adults: A Report of the Surgeon General. Atlanta, GA: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, Office on Smoking and Health. 2012; Yerger VB, Przewoznik J, Malone RE. Racialized geography, corporate activity, and health disparities: tobacco industry targeting of inner cities. J Health Care Poor Underserved. 2007; Kreslake JM, Wayne GF, Alpert HR, Koh HK, Connolly GN. Tobacco industry control of menthol in cigarettes and targeting of adolescents and young adults. Am J Public Health. 2008.)

    O.  The density and proximity of tobacco retailers influence smoking behaviors, including the number of cigarettes smoked per day. (Chuang YC, Cubbin C, Ahn D, Winkleby MA. Effects of neighborhood socioeconomic status and convenience store concentration on individual level smoking. J Epidemiol Community Health. 2005.)

    P.   Adults who smoke have a harder time quitting when density is higher. (Reitzel LR, Cromley EK, Li Y, et al. The effect of tobacco outlet density and proximity on smoking cessation. Am J Public Health. 2011; Cantrell J, Anesetti-Rothermel A, Pearson JL, Xiao H, Vallone D, Kirchner TR. The impact of the tobacco retail outlet environment on adult cessation and differences by neighborhood poverty. Addiction. 2015.)

    Q.  Policies to reduce tobacco retailer density have been shown to be effective and may reduce or eliminate inequities in the location and distribution of tobacco retailers. (Ribisl KM, Luke DA, Bohannon DL, Sorg AA, Moreland-Russell S. Reducing Disparities in Tobacco Retailer Density by Banning Tobacco Product Sales Near Schools. Nicotine Tob Res. 2017; Myers AE, Hall MG, Isgett LF, Ribisl KM. A comparison of three policy approaches for tobacco retailer reduction. Prev Med. 2015; Luke DA, Hammond RA, Combs T, et al. Tobacco Town: Computational Modeling of Policy Options to Reduce Tobacco Retailer Density. Am J Public Health. 2017.) (Ord. 20-1 § 2; Ord. 01-17 § 1)

 

9.30.030 Adoption of Yolo County Code relating to enforcement of tobacco retail permits
    A.  Title 6, Chapter 15 of the Yolo County Code, pertaining to tobacco retailer permits, is hereby incorporated, in its entirety, with the exception of Sections 6-15.03, 6-15.04, 16-15.08, and 16-15.09, by reference into this code and shall be enforced within the limits of the city.

    B.   All references to the term “unincorporated areas of the County of Yolo” in Title 6, Chapter 15 of the Yolo County Code shall be to the term “city limits.” All references to the term “Yolo County Code” in Title 6, Chapter 15 of the Yolo County Code shall be to the “city of West Sacramento Municipal Code.” The reference to the term “County of Yolo” in Section 6-15.15 (f) of the Yolo County Code shall be to the term “city.” The reference to the term “board of supervisors of the county of Yolo” in Section 6-15.16 of the Yolo County Code shall be to the term “city council of the city of West Sacramento.” All references to the term of “eighteen years of age” in Title 6, Chapter 15 of the Yolo County Code shall be to the term “twenty-one years of age.”

    C.   Section 16-15.11 (a) in Title 6, Chapter 15 of the Yolo County Code is incorporated with the following amendment, such that it will additionally state: “Compliance and enforcement with this chapter shall also be the responsibility of the city of West Sacramento.” (Ord. 20-1 § 2)

 

9.30.040 Identification required.
    No retailer or vendor shall sell or permit to be sold cigarettes or other tobacco products to an individual without requesting and examining photographic identification establishing the purchaser’s age as twenty-one years or greater, unless the vendor or employee has a reasonable basis in fact to know the buyer is over the age of twenty-one. (Ord. 20-1 § 3; Ord. 01-17 § 1)

 

9.30.060 Out-of-package sales.
    No person, business, tobacco retailer, or other establishment in the city of West Sacramento shall sell or offer for sale cigarettes or other tobacco products not in the original packaging provided by the manufacturer and with all required health warnings. This section shall not apply to cigars dispensed from bulk packaging. (Ord. 01-17 § 1)

 

9.30.070 Posting of signs.
    Any person, business, tobacco retailer, or other establishment in the city of West Sacramento, which sells tobacco products, shall post plainly visible signs at the point of purchase of tobacco products, which comply with California State Business and Professions Code Section 22952 (STAKE Act). All letters of said sign shall be at least one-half inch high or larger. (Ord. 01-17 § 1)

 

9.30.080 Severability.
    If any portion of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, the invalidity, shall not affect the other provisions or applications of this chapter which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this chapter are severable. (Ord. 01-17 § 1)

 

9.30.090 Tobacco paraphernalia sales.
    No retailer or vendor shall sell or permit to be sold tobacco paraphernalia to an individual without requesting and examining photographic identification establishing the purchaser’s age as twenty-one years or greater, unless the vendor or employee has reasonable grounds for believing, based upon appearance, that the buyer is over the age of thirty. (Ord. 20-1 § 3; Ord. 12-10 § 3; Ord. 12-9 § 4; Ord. 09-20 § 5)

 

9.30.100 Tobacco retailer permit required.
    It is unlawful for any person to act as a tobacco retailer without first obtaining and maintaining a valid tobacco retailer permit pursuant to this section for each location at which tobacco products or paraphernalia are sold. A tobacco retailer without a valid permit shall not sell any tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia. Until a tobacco retailer obtains a valid permit, the tobacco retailer shall also not display any advertisement relating to tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia and all tobacco products and tobacco paraphernalia must remain out of public view.

    A.  No permit may be issued to any tobacco retailer other than a single, fixed location. Tobacco permits are non-transferable to any location other than the location to which the permit was issued and may not be transferred from one person to another at that same location.

    B.   The term of a tobacco retailer permit is one year and becomes invalid after the date of expiration. Subsequent to expiration, a renewal request must be submitted in order to renew a permit. (Ord. 12-10 § 3; Ord. 12-9 § 4; Ord. 09-20 § 5)

 

9.30.130 Authority.
    California case law, including Bravo Vending v. City of Rancho Mirage (1993) 16 Cal.App.4th 383, has affirmed the power of local jurisdictions, including general law cities, to regulate business activity in order to discourage violations of the law. (Ord. 20-1 § 2; Ord. 12-10 § 3; Ord. 12-9 § 4; Ord. 09-20 § 5)

 

9.30.140 Reserved.
(Ord. 12-10 § 3; Ord. 12-9 § 4; Ord. 09-20 § 5)

 

9.30.180 Public education.
    The West Sacramento police department may request the assistance of the director of Yolo County health department shall engage in a continuing program to explain and clarify the purpose and requirements of this section to citizens and businesses affected by it, and to guide owners, operators and managers in their compliance with it. Such program may include publication of a brochure for affected businesses and individuals explaining the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 09-20 § 5)

 

9.30.190 Flavored tobacco products.
    It is a violation of a permit for a permittee or his or her agents or employees to sell or offer for sale any flavored tobacco product. There is a rebuttable presumption that a tobacco product is a flavored tobacco product if a manufacturer or its agents or employees has made a public statement or claim that the tobacco product has or produces a characterizing flavor, including, but not limited to, text, color, or images on the product’s labeling or packaging that are used to expressly or impliedly communicate that a tobacco product has a characterizing flavor. (Ord. 20-1 § 2)

 

9.30.200 Temporary restriction upon new tobacco permits.
    As of January 15th, 2020, no new tobacco permits will be issued in the city of West Sacramento for a period of three years. This temporary restriction shall automatically expire without any further action by the city on January 15th, 2023. (Ord. 20-1 § 2)

 

9.30.210 Existing permits, restriction upon transfer of existing permits.
    Tobacco permits which have already been issued prior to January 15th, 2020, (“Existing Permits”) shall remain valid. Existing permits may be renewed subject to the requirements of this chapter., including Section 9.30.100. Existing or renewed existing permits are subject to the restrictions upon transfer set forth in this chapter, including those set forth in Section 9.30.100. (Ord. 20-1 § 2)

Title 10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Chapter 10.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 10.08 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Chapter 10.12 TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
Chapter 10.16 SPEED REGULATIONS
Chapter 10.18 SPEED LIMITS
Chapter 10.20 MISCELLANEOUS DRIVING REGULATIONS
Chapter 10.24 STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
Chapter 10.26 PARKING METERS
Chapter 10.28 PEDESTRIANS
Chapter 10.32 BICYCLES
Chapter 10.34 SHARED MICRO MOBILITY
Chapter 10.36 TRUCKS
Chapter 10.40 INTERSTATE TRUCK TERMINAL ACCESS ROUTES
Chapter 10.44 PREFERENTIAL PERMIT PARKING

Chapter 10.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS
10.04.010 Title.
    The ordinance codified in this title shall be known as the “Uniform Traffic Code” and may be cited as such, and will be referred to herein as “this title.” (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 88-17 Art. I § 1)

 

10.04.020 Purpose.
    It is the intent of the city council in adopting this title to provide a comprehensive method for the identification and enforcement of the traffic and parking regulations within the city. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 88-17 Art. I § 2(a))

 

10.04.030 Construction.
    Provisions of this title are supplementary and complementary to all of the provisions of this code, state law, and any law cognizable at common law or in equity, and nothing in this title shall be read, interpreted or construed in any manner so as to limit any existing right or power of the city to enforce traffic laws or regulations. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 88-17 Art. I § 2(b))

 

10.04.040 Applicability.
    The provisions of this title apply generally to all property throughout the city wherein any of the conditions hereinafter specified are found to exist; provided, however, that any condition which would constitute a violation of this title, but which is duly authorized under any city, state or federal law, shall not be deemed to violate this title. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 88-17 Art. I § 3)

 

10.04.050 Exemptions.
    The provisions of this title regulating the operation, parking and standing of vehicles shall not apply to any vehicle of the police or fire department, any public ambulance, or any public utility vehicle or any private ambulance, which public utility vehicle or private ambulance has qualified as an authorized emergency vehicle, when any vehicle mentioned in this section is operated in the manner specified in the Vehicle Code in response to an emergency call. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 88-17 Art. IV § 3)

 

10.04.060 Definitions.
    A.  The following words and phrases, when used in this title, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section:

    “City manager” means the city manager or designee.

    “Commercial vehicle” means as defined by Section 260 of the Vehicle Code of the state of California, excluding any vehicle that is operated primarily for agricultural production purposes. This exclusion shall not be construed to include commercial vehicles used for the transportation of agricultural products.

    “Council” means the city council of the city of West Sacramento.

    “Curb” means the lateral boundary of the roadway, whether such curb is marked by curbing construction, or not so marked. The word “curb” as used in this title does not include the line dividing the roadway of a street from parking strips in the center of the street, nor the tracks or right-of-way of public utility companies.

    “Emergency” means those conditions described in the Vehicle Code or Municipal Code as emergencies.

    “Loading zone” means the space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials.

    “Micro-mobility device” means a device available to persons for renting on a self-service basis, including bicycles, electric bicycles, scooters, motorized scooters, or other transportation devices, excluding transportation devices that must be registered with the California Department of Motor Vehicles.

    Official Time Standard. Whenever certain hours are named in this title, they mean standard time or daylight-saving time as may be in current use in the city.

    “Ordinance” means the ordinance, rule or regulation adopted by the city relating to the movement of traffic, and enforcement thereof.

    “Parking meter” means any mechanical device or meter not inconsistent with this title placed or erected for the control or regulation of parking by the authority of this title.

    “Parking meter space” means any space within a parking meter zone, adjacent to a parking meter or controlled by a pay-by-space or pay-and-display machine, which is duly designated for the parking of a single vehicle by lines painted or otherwise durably marked on the curb or on the surface of the street.

    “Passenger loading zone” means the space reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles while receiving or discharging passengers.

    “Pay-by-space/pay-and-display machine” means any mechanical/electronic device or mechanism not inconsistent with this title placed or erected for the control or regulation of multiple parking meter spaces by the authority of this title.

    “Police officer” means every officer of the police department of the city, or any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or make arrests for violations of traffic regulations.

    “Railroad train” means a steam engine, electric or other motor, with or without cars coupled thereto, operated upon rails, except streetcars.

    “Streetcar” means any device traveling exclusively upon rails.

    “Traffic control device” means any sign, road marking, signal or light placed for the purpose of directing and controlling the flow of vehicle, pedestrian or bicycle traffic.

    “Traffic enforcement division” means that division within the police department of the city.

    “Traffic engineering division” means that division within the community development department of the city.

    “Vehicle Code” means the Vehicle Code of the state of California.

    B.   Whenever any words and phrases used in this title are not defined herein but are defined in the Vehicle Code of the state of California and amendments thereto, such definitions shall apply.

    C.   Masculine pronouns, such as “he” and “him,” are utilized in the text of this title for the sake of brevity, and are intended to refer to persons of either sex. (Ord. 19-3 § 4; Ord. 17-1 § 2; Ord. 09-17 § 2; Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 95-1 § 1; Ord. 88-17 Art. II)

Chapter 10.08 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
10.08.010 Traffic enforcement division—Established.
    There is established in the police department of the city a traffic enforcement division to be under the control of a supervising officer of police appointed by and directly responsible to the chief of police. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 88-17 Art. III § 1)

 

10.08.020 Traffic enforcement division—Duties.
    It shall be the duty of the traffic enforcement division, with such aid as may be rendered by other members of the police department, to enforce the street traffic regulations of the city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in the city, to make arrests for traffic violations, to investigate traffic accidents and to cooperate with the other officers of the city in the administration of the traffic laws and in developing ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out those duties specially imposed upon the division by this title. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 88-17 Art. III § 2)

 

10.08.030 City traffic administrator—Position established.
    The position of city traffic administrator is established. The city traffic administrator shall be the city manager. He or she shall exercise the powers and duties as provided in this title. He or she shall be responsible for all traffic engineering division functions of the city. (Ord. 09-17 § 2; Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 88-17 Art. III § 3)

 

10.08.040 City traffic administrator—Powers and duties.
    It shall be the general duty of the city traffic administrator to determine the installation and proper timing and maintenance of traffic-control devices and signals, conduct engineering analyses of traffic accidents, devise remedial measures, conduct engineering and traffic surveys of traffic conditions, cooperate with other city officials in the development of ways and means to improve traffic conditions and carry out the additional powers and duties imposed by ordinances of the city.

    B.   Whenever the city traffic administrator is required or authorized to place or maintain official traffic-control devices or signals, he or she may cause such devices or signals to be placed or maintained.

    C.   Whenever, by the provisions of this title, a power is granted to the city traffic administrator or a duty imposed upon him or her, the power may be exercised or the duty performed by a person authorized by him. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 88-17 Art. III § 4)

 

10.08.050 Traffic accident studies.
    Whenever the accidents at any particular location become numerous, the traffic enforcement division shall assist with the city traffic administrator in conducting studies of such accidents and determining remedial measures. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 88-17 Art. III § 5)

 

10.08.060 Traffic accident reports.
    The traffic enforcement division and the traffic engineering division shall maintain a suitable system of filing traffic accident reports. Such reports shall be available for the use and information of the supervising officer of the traffic enforcement division and the city traffic administrator. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 88-17 Art. III § 6)

 

10.08.070 Emergency and experimental regulations.
    A.  The chief of police is empowered to make and enforce temporary or experimental regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions.

    B.   The city traffic administrator may test traffic control devices under actual conditions of traffic.

    C.   The chief of police may authorize the temporary placing of official traffic-control devices when required by an emergency. The chief of police shall notify the city traffic administrator of his or her action as soon thereafter as is practicable. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 88-17 Art. III § 7)

 

10.08.080 Traffic committee—Established—Organization.
    A traffic committee shall be established consisting of the chief of police, or his or her representative, the director of public works, or his or her representative, and the fire chief, or his or her representative. Each department head sitting on the traffic committee may appoint one representative per year. Thereafter, replacement of department representatives shall be approved by the city manager. Only the department head or department heads representative may vote on the traffic committee. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 88-17 Art. III § 8)

 

10.08.090 Traffic committee—Powers and duties.
    It shall be the authority of the traffic committee to oversee the duties of the city traffic administrator and chief of police as related to the authority granted to them by this title; to suggest the most practicable means for coordinating the activities of all officers and agencies of the city having authority with respect to the administration and enforcement of traffic regulations; to initiate and assist in the preparation and review of traffic studies; to receive and respond to complaints regarding traffic matters; and to recommend to the city council of the city, to the supervising officer of the traffic enforcement division, to the city traffic administrator and to other city officials, ways and means for improving traffic conditions and the administration and enforcement of regulations. The traffic committee shall review and, except where city council approval is required, authorize the placement of certain traffic control devices, and signs as defined in this title. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 88-17 Art. III § 9).

 

10.08.100 Authority of police and fire department officials.
    Officers of the police department and such persons as are assigned by the chief of police are authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand, audible or other signal in conformance with traffic laws, except that in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department or members of the fire department may direct traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions to the contrary contained in this title or the Vehicle Code. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 88-17 Art. IV § 1)

 

10.08.110 Enforcement—Statutory authority.
    A.  Any violation of this code shall be prosecuted in accordance with the provisions of Division 17 of the Vehicle Code this code, and other applicable laws.

    B.   The chief of police, any police officer, any community services officer, and any code enforcement officer of the city who has received a course of training pursuant to Section 832 of the Penal Code of the state of California shall be authorized to enforce the provisions of this title in accordance with Section 836.5 of the Penal Code. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 96-12 § 2; Ord. 88-17 Art. IV 2)

 

10.08.120 Unauthorized persons shall not direct traffic.
    No person other than an officer of the police department, or members of the fire department, or a person authorized by the chief of police, or a person authorized by law shall direct or attempt to direct traffic by voice, hand or other signal; except that a person may operate, when and as provided in this title, any mechanical pushbutton signal erected by order of the city traffic administrator. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 88-17 Art. IV § 4)

 

10.08.130 Obstruction or interference with police or authorized officers.
    No person shall interfere with or obstruct in any way any police officer or other officer or employee of the city in his or her enforcement of the provisions of this title. The removal, obliteration, concealment of or tampering with any chalk mark or other distinguishing mark or method used by any police officer or other employee or officer of the city in connection with the enforcement of any regulation of this title shall, if done for the purpose of evading the provisions of this title, constitute such interference or obstruction. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 88-17 Art. IV § 5)

 

10.08.140 Street construction—Authorization—Traffic control.
    No person shall perform work within the public right-of-way of any street without first obtaining a permit from the city traffic administrator authorizing the work. Traffic control for street construction work shall be in accordance with the conditions of the permit and as directed by the city traffic administrator and, as a minimum, with the requirements of the latest edition of the California Department of Transportation Traffic Manual. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 88-17 Art. IV § 6)

Chapter 10.12 TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
10.12.010 Placement and maintenance authority.
    The city traffic administrator, subject to the review and approval of the traffic committee, and city council where indicated is authorized to place and maintain or cause to be placed and maintained official traffic-control devices upon streets and highways to effect the provisions of this title or the Vehicle Code. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 88-17 Art. V § 1)

 

10.12.020 Placement prerequisite to enforcement.
    No provision of the Vehicle Code or of this title for which official traffic-control devices are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator unless appropriate official traffic-control devices are in place giving notice of such provisions of the traffic laws. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 88-17 Art. V § 2)

 

10.12.030 Obedience required.
    The driver of a vehicle, the person in charge of animals and the motorman of a streetcar shall obey the instructions of any official traffic-control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with this title unless otherwise directed by a police officer, subject to the exemption granted by Section 10.04.050 of this title. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 88-17 Art. V § 10)

 

10.12.040 Installation.
    A.  The city traffic administrator, subject to the review of the traffic committee and approval of the city council, is authorized to install and maintain official traffic signals at those intersections and other places where traffic conditions are such as to require that the flow of traffic be alternately interrupted and released in order to prevent or relieve traffic congestion or to protect life or property from exceptional hazard.

    B.   The city traffic administrator, shall ascertain and determine the locations where such signals are required by an engineering and traffic survey, and his or her determinations shall be made in accordance with those traffic engineering and safety standards and instructions set forth in the Department of Transportation Traffic Manual.

    C.   The city traffic administrator shall erect and maintain at each signal-controlled intersection street name signs clearly visible to traffic approaching from all directions. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 88-17 Art. V § 3)

 

10.12.050 Safety zones.
    The city traffic administrator has the authority to establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such places as he or she may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 88-17 Art. V § 4)

 

10.12.060 Traffic lanes.
    The city traffic administrator has the authority to mark traffic lanes upon the roadway of any street or highway where a regular alignment of traffic is necessary. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 88-17 Art. V § 5)

 

10.12.070 Distinctive roadway markings.
    The city traffic administrator, is authorized to place and maintain upon highways distinctive roadway markings as described in the Vehicle Code. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 88-17 Art. V § 6)

 

10.12.080 Removal or relocation of devices.
    The city traffic administrator, subject to the review and approval of the traffic committee, and where indicated the city council is authorized to remove, relocate or discontinue the operation of any traffic-control device not specifically required by the Vehicle Code or this title whenever he or she determines in any particular case that the conditions which warranted or required the installation no longer exist. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 88-17 Art. V § 7)

 

10.12.090 Hours of operation.
    The city traffic administrator, is authorized to determine the hours and days during which any traffic-control device shall be in operation or in effect, except in those cases where such hours or days are specified in this title. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 88-17 Art. V § 8)

 

10.12.100 Unauthorized painting of curbs.
    No person or agency, unless authorized by the city traffic administrator, shall paint any street or curb surface; including the painting of address numbers on curb faces. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 88-17 Art. V § 9)

Chapter 10.16 SPEED REGULATIONS
10.16.010 Applicability of state laws.
    The state traffic laws regulating the speed of vehicles shall be applicable upon all streets within the city except where the city council, upon the basis of an engineering and traffic survey, determines that other speed limit shall be applicable on specified streets or in certain areas, other than a state highway, as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 98-14 § 1: Ord. 87-17 Art. VI § 1)

 

10.16.020 Changes in speed limits.
    A.  Speed Limit Increases. Whenever the city council determines upon the basis of an engineering and traffic survey that a speed greater than twenty-five miles per hour would facilitate the orderly movement of vehicular traffic and would be reasonable and safe upon any street other than state highway otherwise subject to a prima facie speed limit of twenty-five miles per hour, the city council may, by ordinance, declare a prima facie maximum speed limit of thirty, thirty-five, forty, forty-five, fifty, fifty-five, sixty or a maximum of sixty-five miles per hour, whichever is found the most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of vehicular traffic and is reasonable and safe.

    B.   Speed Limit Decreases.

    1.   Whenever the city council determines upon the basis of an engineering and traffic survey that the limit of sixty-five miles per hour is more than is reasonable or safe upon any portion of any street other than a state highway where the limit of sixty-five miles per hour is applicable, the city council may, by ordinance, declare a prima facie speed limit of sixty, fifty-five, fifty, forty-five, forty, thirty-five, thirty or twenty-five miles per hour, whichever is found the most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of vehicular traffic and is reasonable and safe.

    2.   Whenever the city council determines upon the basis of an engineering and traffic survey that the limit of sixty-five miles per hour is more than is reasonable or safe upon any portion of a highway other than a state highway for a distance of not exceeding two thousand feet in length between districts, either business or residence, the city council may declare a reasonable and safe prima facie limit thereon lower than sixty-five miles per hour, but not less than twenty-five miles per hour.

    3.   Whenever the city council determines upon the basis of an engineering and traffic survey that the speed limit of twenty-five miles per hour in a business or residence district or in a public park on any street having a roadway not exceeding twenty-five feet in width, other than a state highway, is more than is reasonable or safe, the city council may, by ordinance or resolution, determine and declare a prima facie speed limit of twenty or fifteen miles per hour, whichever is found most appropriate and is reasonable and safe.

    4.   Whenever the city council determines upon the basis of an engineering and traffic survey that the speed limit of twenty-five miles per hour when passing school buildings or grounds as established by Vehicle Code Section 22352 is more than is reasonable or safe, the city council may, by ordinance or resolution, determine and declare a prima facie speed limit of twenty or fifteen miles per hour, whichever is justified as the appropriate speed limit by such survey.

    C.   Speed limits established pursuant to this section shall be effective when appropriate signs giving notice thereof are erected upon said street or highway. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 98-14 § 2)

 

10.16.030 Regulation of speed by traffic signals.
    The city traffic administrator is authorized to regulate the timing of traffic signals so as to permit the movement of traffic in an orderly and safe manner at speeds slightly at variance from the speeds otherwise applicable within the district or at intersections, and may erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 87-17 Art. VI § 3)

 

10.16.040 Speed limits on specified city streets.
    The city clerk shall maintain a listing of the speed limit, street name and location for each speed limit changed pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 98-14 § 3)

Chapter 10.18 SPEED LIMITS
10.18.010 Findings.
    A.  Pursuant to Chapter 10.16 of the West Sacramento Municipal Code, on March 21, 2007, the city council of the city of West Sacramento reviewed and considered the engineering and traffic survey, and related information, attached hereto and incorporated by reference.

    B.   Based upon the review of the survey and related information, the city council finds that the following streets shall have the following posted speed limits:

 

Street

From/To

Recommended Speed Limit

Antioch Avenue

Harmon Road to Bevan Road

35

Boatman Avenue

Industrial Boulevard to Terminal Street

25

C Street

6th Street to City Limit

25

Carlin Drive

Oates Drive to Ramco Street

25

Cebrian Street

Del Monte Street to Stone Boulevard

35

Channel Drive

Seaport Boulevard to West End

35

Commerce Drive

West end to East end

25

Davis Road

Seymour Avenue to Jefferson Boulevard

35

Davis Road

Jefferson Boulevard to Antioch Avenue

40

Davis Road

Antioch Avenue to South River Road

40

Del Monte Street

Harbor Boulevard to Cebrian Street

30

Duluth Street

Galveston Street to Harbor Boulevard

35

Embarcadero Drive

Riverside Parkway (N) to Riverside Parkway (S)

30

Enterprise Boulevard

West Capital Avenue to Seaport Blvd.

40

Enterprise Boulevard

Seaport Boulevard to Channel Drive

35

Evergreen Avenue

Pine Street to Harbor Boulevard

25

Evergreen Avenue

Harbor Boulevard to Coke Street

25

F Street

Jefferson Boulevard to 8th Street

25

F Street

8th Street to 2nd Street

25

First Street

Sutter Street to West end

25

Front Street

Shore Street to Terminal Street

30

Galveston Street

Duluth Street to Houston Street

25

Golden Gate Drive

Oakland Bay Drive to Promenade Street

35

Golden Gate Drive

Promenade Street to Marshall Road

35

Gregory Avenue

Jefferson Boulevard to Bevan Road

45

Gregory Avenue

Bevan Road to South River Road

40

Harbor Boulevard

Reed Avenue to Rice Avenue

35

Harbor Boulevard

Rice Avenue to West Capitol Avenue

35

Harbor Boulevard

West Capitol Avenue to Industrial Boulevard

35

Harmon Road

Jefferson Boulevard to Antioch Avenue

40

Houston Street

West Capitol Avenue to Duluth Street

25

Higgins Road

Hard Avenue to Jefferson Boulevard

25

Industrial Boulevard

Enterprise Boulevard to Parkway Boulevard

45

Industrial Boulevard

Parkway Boulevard to Harbor Boulevard

45

Industrial Boulevard

Harbor Boulevard to Stone Boulevard

45

Jefferson Boulevard

Sacramento Avenue to West Capitol Avenue

40

Jefferson Boulevard

West Capitol Avenue to 15th Street

35

Jefferson Boulevard

15th Street to Stone Boulevard

45

Jefferson Boulevard

Stone Boulevard to Lake Washington Boulevard

45

Jefferson Boulevard

Lake Washington Boulevard to Linden Road (S)

45

Jefferson Boulevard

Linden Road (S) to Davis Road

45

Jefferson Boulevard

Davis Road to Southport Parkway

55

Jefferson Boulevard

Southport Parkway to City Limits

55

Lake Washington Boulevard

Stone Boulevard to Jefferson Boulevard

45

Lake Washington Boulevard

Jefferson Boulevard to Stonegate Drive

45

Lake Washington Boulevard

Stonegate Drive to Village Parkway

35

Lighthouse Drive

Fountain Drive to A Street

35

Lighthouse Drive

Kegle Drive to Fountain Drive

25

Linden Road (N)

Summerfield Drive to Jefferson Boulevard

35

Linden Road (S)

Summerfield Drive to Jefferson Boulevard

35

Linden Road (N)

Jefferson Boulevard to Stonegate Drive

35

Linden Road (N)

Stonegate Drive to Alder Way

35

Linden Road (N)

Alder Way to South River Road

35

Marshall Road

Southport Parkway to Seymour Avenue

35

Marshall Road

Seymour Avenue to Jefferson Boulevard

25

Merkley Avenue

Sycamore Avenue to Westacre Road

25

Merkley Avenue

Westacre Road to Jefferson Boulevard

25

Middle Street

First Street to North end

25

North Harbor Boulevard

Riverbank Road to Reed Avenue

35

North Harbor Boulevard

City Limit to Riverbank Road

45

Northport Drive

Commerce Drive to West Capitol Avenue

30

Oakland Bay Drive

Southport Parkway to Golden Gate Drive (E)

35

Oates Street

Carlin Drive to Ramos Drive

35

Park Boulevard

Jefferson Boulevard to Stone Boulevard

25

Parkway Boulevard

Industrial Boulevard to South end

35

Port Street

Shore Street to Terminal Street

25

Promenade Way

Ramos Drive to Golden Gate Drive

35

Ramco Street

North end to Promenade Way

35

Ramco Drive

Oates Street to Promenade Way

35

Reed Avenue

Riverside Parkway to Sunset Avenue

40

Rice Avenue

Harbor Boulevard to East end

30

Riske Lane

West Capitol Avenue to South River Road

35

Riverbank Road

North Harbor Road to Bryte Avenue

25

Riverside Parkway

Reed Avenue to Stillwater Road

40

Sacramento Avenue

Sunset Avenue to Kegle Drive

40

Sacramento Avenue

Kegle Drive to 6th Street

35

Seaport Boulevard

West end to Parkway Boulevard

35

Shore Street

Front Street to Del Monte Street

30

South River Road

West Capitol Avenue to Riske Lane

35

South River Road

Riske Lane to 15th Street

35

South River Road

15th Street to end (S)

35

South River Road

South River Road at Jefferson to Linden Road

40

South River Road

Linden Road to Davis Road

40

South River Road

Davis Road to Gregory Avenue

40

South River Road

Gregory Avenue to City Limits

45

Southport Parkway

Ramco Street to Lake Washington Boulevard

45

Southport Parkway

Ramco Street to Promenade Street

45

Southport Parkway

Promenade Street to Marshall Road

45

Southport Parkway

Marshall Road to Jefferson Boulevard

35

Stillwater Road

Reed Avenue to Riverside Parkway

40

Stonegate Drive

Lake Washington Boulevard to Village Parkway

30

Sunset Street

North Harbor Boulevard to Sacramento Avenue

35

Sutter Street

West Capitol Avenue to North end

25

Terminal Street

Front Street to Industrial Boulevard

30

West Capitol Avenue

Enterprise Boulevard to Northport Drive

40

West Capitol Avenue

Northport Drive to Harbor Boulevard

40

West Capitol Avenue

Harbor Boulevard to Sycamore Street

35

West Capitol Avenue

Sycamore Street to Jefferson Boulevard

35

West Capitol Avenue

Jefferson Boulevard to Riske Lane

35

West Capitol Avenue

Riske Lane to 3rd Street

35

3rd Street

B Street to West Capitol Avenue

25

5th Street

A Street to West Capitol Avenue

35

15th Street

Jefferson Boulevard to South River Road

25

 

    C.   Based on this review of the survey, the city council further finds that the most appropriate speed limit to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic that is reasonable and safe for the above listed streets and roads is set forth in this section. (Ord. 07-9 § 3)

 

10.18.020 Direction to city traffic administrator.
    On or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the city traffic administrator is directed to clearly post speed limit signs effectuating Section 10.18.010, to give notice that this chapter is in effect. (Ord. 99-16 § 2)

 

10.18.030 No mandatory duty of care.
    This chapter is not intended to and shall not be construed or given effect in a manner that imposes upon the city or any officer or employee thereof a mandatory duty of care towards persons and property within or without the city so as to provide a basis of civil liability for damages, except as otherwise imposed by law. (Ord. 99-16 § 3)

Chapter 10.20 MISCELLANEOUS DRIVING REGULATIONS
10.20.010 Placement of devices altering normal course.
    The city traffic administrator, subject to the review and approval of the traffic committee, is authorized to place official traffic-control devices within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections, and such course to be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 88-17 Art. VII § 1)

 

10.20.020 Placement of signs restricting turns.
    The city traffic administrator, subject to the review and approval of the traffic committee, is authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left or U-turn, and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs, or they may be removed when such turns are permitted. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 88-17 Art. VII § 2)

 

10.20.030 Restriction of right turns at signal-controlled intersections.
    The city traffic administrator, subject to the review and approval of the traffic committee, is authorized to erect appropriate signs prohibiting a right turn against a red or “Stop” signal at any intersection. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 88-17 Art. VII § 3)

 

10.20.040 Turning markers.
    A.  The city traffic administrator may place markers, buttons or signs within, or adjacent to, intersections, indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections.

    B.   When authorized markers, buttons or other indications are placed within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of such indications. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 88-17 Art. VII § 4)

 

10.20.050 Obstructing visibility at intersections.
    Whenever the city traffic administrator finds that any hedge, shrubbery or tree obstructs the view of any intersection or any traffic-control device, the city traffic administrator may cause the hedge, shrubbery or tree to be removed or trimmed to remove the obstruction. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 88-17 Art. XX § 1)

 

10.20.060 Designation of one-way streets and alleys.
    The city traffic administrator, subject to the review of the traffic committee, and approval of the city council, is authorized to determine and designate one-way streets or alleys and shall place and maintain official traffic-control devices giving notice thereof. No such designation shall be effective unless such devices are in place. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 88-17 Art. VIII § 1)

 

10.20.070 Restriction of direction of movement during certain periods.
    The city traffic administrator, subject to the review of the traffic committee, and approval of the city council, is authorized to determine and designate streets, parts of streets or specific lanes thereon upon which vehicular traffic shall proceed in one direction during one period and the opposite direction during another period of the day, and shall place and maintain appropriate markings, signs, barriers or other devices to give notice thereof. The city traffic administrator may erect signs temporarily designating lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless of the centerline of the roadway. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 88-17 Art. VIII § 2)

 

10.20.080 Placement of stop and yield signs.
    The city traffic administrator, subject to the review and approval of the traffic committee, is authorized to erect and maintain stop signs, yield signs or other official traffic-control devices to designate through streets, intersections or other roadway junctions at which vehicular traffic on one or more of the roadways should yield or stop before entering the intersection or junction. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 88-17 Art. IX § 1)

 

10.20.090 Stop when traffic obstructed.
    No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he or she is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding the indication from a traffic-control signal to proceed. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 88-17 Art. X § 1)

 

10.20.100 Interference with fire apparatus.
    A.  No driver of a vehicle shall follow any fire apparatus answering a fire alarm, closer than five hundred feet, or park any vehicle within five hundred feet of a fire, or operate or park any vehicle in such manner as to interfere with any fire apparatus or line of fire hose when in use at a fire, or when placed for use in response to a fire alarm.

    B.   No streetcar or vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of the fire department when laid down on any street, private driveway or streetcar track, to be used at any fire or alarm of fire without the consent of the officials of the fire department in command. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 88-17 Art. X § 2)

 

10.20.110 Funeral or other procession—Driving through prohibited.
    No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while the vehicles are in motion and when such vehicles are conspicuously designated as required in this title. This provision does not apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals or police officers. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 88-17 Art. X § 3)

 

10.20.120 Funeral or other procession—Procedure.
    Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the right-hand edge of the roadway as practicable and shall follow the vehicle ahead as close as is practicable and safe. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 88-17 Art. X § 4)

 

10.20.130 Clinging to moving vehicle.
    No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates or any moving device shall attach him or herself to any streetcar or moving vehicle upon any roadway. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 88-17 Art. X § 5)

 

10.20.140 Driving on sidewalk.
    The driver of a vehicle shall not drive within any sidewalk area or any parkway, except at a permanent or temporary driveway. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 88-17 Art. X § 6)

 

10.20.150 Driving on new pavement or markings.
    No person shall ride or drive any animal, or any vehicle or device, over or across any newly made pavement or freshly painted marking in any street when a barrier or sign is in place warning persons not to drive over or across such pavement or marking, or when a sign is in place stating that the street or any portion thereof is closed. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 88-17 Art. X § 7)

 

10.20.160 Animal-drawn vehicles.
    No person shall drive any animal-drawn vehicle along any street within a business or residence district, as defined by Sections 235 and 515 of the Vehicle Code, respectively, at any time, except when it is part of a parade held and conducted with a city permit. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 88-17 Art. X § 8)

 

10.20.170 Trains—Boarding or alighting while in motion.
    No person shall board or alight from any railroad train or similar vehicle while such train or similar vehicle is in motion. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 88-17 Art. XI § 1)

 

10.20.180 Trains—Riding in cars not intended for passengers.
    No person shall ride any railroad train or similar vehicle or upon any portion thereof not designed or intended for the use of passengers. This provision does not apply to an employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty, or to persons riding within truck bodies in space intended for merchandise. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 88-17 Art. XI § 2)

 

10.20.190 Trains—Blocking roadway crossings.
    No person or agency shall operate any train in such a manner as to prevent vehicular use of any roadway for a period of time in excess of five consecutive minutes except:

    A.  When necessary to comply with signals affecting the safety of the movement of trains;

    B.   When necessary to avoid striking any object or person on the track;

    C.   When the train is in motion except while engaged in switching operations;

    D.  When the train is disabled;

    E.   When there is no vehicular traffic waiting to use the crossing; or

    F.   When necessary to comply with a governmental safety regulation. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 88-17 Art. XI § 3)

Chapter 10.24 STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
10.24.010 Designation of no-parking zones.
    The city traffic administrator, subject to the review and approval of the traffic committee, is authorized to establish the location of no-parking zones and shall place and maintain appropriate signs or markings indicating the place and time to which this chapter applies. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 88-17 Art. XV § 1)

 

10.24.020 Stopping or parking—Where prohibited.
    No person shall stop, park or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or to comply with the direction of a peace officer or official traffic-control device, in any of the following places:

    A.  In any area established as a no-parking area when such place is indicated by appropriate signs or marking, except that a bus may stop at a designated bus stop;

    B.   On any street or highway where the use of such street or highway or a portion thereof is necessary for the cleaning, repair or construction of the street or highway or the installation of underground utilities, or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is authorized for a purpose other than the normal flow of traffic, or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is necessary for the movement of equipment, articles or structures of unusual size, and the parking of such vehicle would prohibit or interfere with such use or movement, provided that signs giving notice of such parking restrictions are erected or placed at least twenty-four hours prior to the effective time of such restriction;

    C.   At any place within twenty feet of a marked crosswalk when such place is indicated by appropriate signs or markings, except that a bus may stop at a designated bus stop;

    D.  Within twenty feet of the approach to any traffic-control signal, stop or yield sign or flashing beacon when such place is indicated by appropriate signs or markings, except that a bus may stop at a designated bus stop;

    E.   Upon any sidewalk of any street;

    F.   Within an intersection, except adjacent to curbs as may be permitted by this ordinance;

    G.  In front of a public or private driveway, except when otherwise authorized by law. (Ord. 17-1 § 3; Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 88-17 Art. XV § 2)

 

10.24.030 Parallel parking.
    No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a roadway other than parallel with the edge of the roadway, headed in the direction of traffic, and with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle within eighteen inches of the curbline or edge of the roadway, except as follows:

    A.  Upon those streets which have been marked or signed by the city traffic administrator for angle parking, vehicles shall be parked at the angle to the curb indicated by such marks and signs;

    B.   Upon those streets where parking on the left side of the roadway is specifically permitted by signing or marking. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 88-17 Art. XV § 3)

 

10.24.040 Signs or markings indicating angle parking.
    A.  The city traffic administrator, subject to the review and approval of the traffic committee, shall determine upon which streets angle parking shall be permitted and shall mark or sign such streets appropriately.

    B.   All angle parking shall be made with the right-hand wheel of the vehicle within eighteen inches of the curbline of the street or roadway.

    C.   All angle parking shall be made with the forward portion of the vehicle next to the curbline of the street or roadway.

    D.  Angle parking shall not be indicated or permitted at any place where passing traffic would thereby be caused or required to drive upon the left side of the street. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 88-17 Art. XIV § I)

 

10.24.050 Permits for loading or unloading at an angle to the curb.
    A.  The city traffic administrator is authorized to issue a special permit to authorize the backing of a vehicle to the curb for the purpose of loading or unloading property, subject to the terms and conditions of such permit. Such permit may be issued either to the owner or operator of the vehicle and shall grant to such person the privilege as therein stated and authorized in this section.

    B.   It is unlawful for any permittee or other person to violate any of the special terms or conditions of any such permit. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 88-17 Art. XIV § 2)

 

10.24.060 Parking not to obstruct traffic.
    No person shall park any vehicle in such a position as to obstruct the normal movement of traffic or prohibit the free use of the street. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 88-17 Art. XV § 4)

 

10.24.070 Parking not to obstruct sight distance.
    No person shall park or leave standing a vehicle which is six feet or more in height, including any load thereon, along any street within one hundred feet of any intersection, provided that such location is designated no parking or no stopping by appropriate signing or marking. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 88-17 Art. XV § 5)

 

10.24.080 Parking for certain purposes prohibited.
    No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal purpose of maintaining, dismantling or repairing such vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 88-17 Art. XV § 6)

 

10.24.090 Standing or parking on one-way roadways.
    In the event a street includes two or more separate one-way roadways, such as a divided multi-lane street, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of such one-way roadway. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 88-17 Art. XV § 7)

 

10.24.100 Parking on grades.
    No person driving, or in control of, or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to stand on any highway unattended when upon any grade exceeding three percent within any business or residence district without blocking the wheels of the vehicle by turning them against the curb or by other means. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 88-17 Art. XV § 8)

 

10.24.110 Temporary parking restrictions.
    A.  Whenever the city traffic administrator determines that traffic congestion is likely to result from public or private events or emergencies, he or she may place temporary signs indicating that the operation, parking or standing of vehicles is prohibited on such streets and alleys. Signs shall remain in place only during the event or emergency.

    B.   When any activity within or adjacent to the public street right-of-way is likely to create traffic congestion, the city traffic administrator is authorized to place temporary signs indicating the date and time when the stopping or parking of vehicles shall be prohibited. Such signs shall be in place twenty-four hours in advance of the effective time of the prohibition. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 88-17 Art. XV § 9)

 

10.24.120 Time limit parking zones.
    When authorized signs have been placed by the city manager or designee, giving notice thereof, no person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle in a business district or on any street designated by resolution during the days and hours indicated on such signs for a period of time longer than the time limit specified on such signs. (Ord. 17-1 § 3; Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 88-17 Art. XV § 10)

 

10.24.130 Parking space markings.
    Public street and off-street parking lots may be marked with white lines designating parking spaces within which vehicles are required to park. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 88-17 Art. XV § 11)

 

10.24.140 Red curbs.
    No person shall stop, park or leave any vehicle next to a curb which is painted red. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 89-14 § 12: Ord. 88-17 Art. XV § 13)

 

10.24.150 Removal of parked vehicles.
    The city may remove vehicles parked or left standing in any street for seventy-two or more consecutive hours. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 88-17 Art. XV § 12)

 

10.24.160 Freight and passenger loading zones—Designation.
    A.  The city traffic administrator, subject to the review and approval of the traffic committee, is authorized to determine the location of loading zones and passenger loading zones and shall place and maintain appropriate signs or markings indicating the same and stating the hours during which the provisions of this section and Sections 10.24.170 through 10.24.200 are applicable.

    B.   Yellow curb paint indicates stopping only for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or freight for such time as may be specified by this title.

    C.   White curb paint indicates stopping only for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers for such time as may be specified by this title for the purpose of depositing mail in an adjacent mailbox. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 88-17 Art. XVI § 1)

 

10.24.170 Freight and passenger loading zones—Time limits.
    A.  Permission granted in this title to stop a vehicle in a yellow curb zone for purposes allowed by the Vehicle Code and this title shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor, and in no event for more than twenty minutes.

    B.   Permission granted in this title to stop or park in white curb zones for purposes of loading or unloading passengers shall include the loading or unloading of personal baggage, but shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor, and in no event for more than three minutes. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 88-17 Art. XVI § 2)

 

10.24.180 Stopping in an alley.
    No person shall stop or park a vehicle for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers or freight in any alley, and in no event so as to obstruct the passage of other vehicles in the alley. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 88-17 Art. XVI § 3)

 

10.24.190 Designated bus and taxicab zones.
    A.  The city traffic administrator, subject to the review and approval of the traffic committee, is authorized to establish bus and taxicab zones on such streets and at such locations and in such number as shall be determined to be of the greatest benefit and convenience to the public, and every bus loading and taxicab zone shall be designated by appropriate official traffic-control devices.

    B.   The operator of a bus shall not stop such vehicle upon any street location for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or their baggage other than at a bus loading zone, or passenger loading zone so designated as provided in this chapter, except in the case of an emergency.

    C.   The operator of a taxicab shall not stop or park such vehicle upon any street at any place other than in a taxicab zone so designated as provided in this chapter. This provision shall not prevent the operator of a taxicab from stopping for loading or unloading of passengers at locations where such stopping is otherwise permitted. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 88-17 Art. XVI § 4)

 

10.24.200 Restricted use of bus and taxicab stands.
    No person shall stop or park any vehicle other than a bus in a bus loading zone or a taxicab in a taxicab zone when any such zone has been officially designated and appropriately signed and marked. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 88-17 Art. XVI § 5)

 

10.24.210 Disabled parking—On-street.
    The city traffic administrator is authorized to designate parking spaces for the purpose of providing on-street parking spaces for the exclusive use of the physically disabled. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 88-17 Art. XVIII § 1)

 

10.24.220 Disabled parking—Off-street—Public facilities.
    The city traffic administrator is authorized to designate parking stalls or spaces in publicly owned, leased or controlled off-street parking facilities for the exclusive use of the physically disabled. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 88-17 Art. XVIII § 2)

 

10.24.230 Disabled parking—Off-street—Private facilities.
    The city declares that there may be privately owned and operated parking facilities which may reserve parking stalls for the exclusive use of the physically disabled. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 88-17 Art. XVIII § 3)

 

10.24.240 Disabled parking—Identification.
    Each parking space and stall designated for the exclusive use of the physically disabled shall be marked for identification as specified in the Vehicle Code. Signs as specified in the Vehicle Code shall be posted in all off-street parking facilities. The city traffic administrator may place additional markings or signs as permitted by the Vehicle Code to improve identification. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 88-17 Art. XVIII § 4)

 

10.24.250 Enforcement.
    Unauthorized vehicles not displaying distinguishing placards or license plates issued for physically disabled persons will be issued a citation and/or towed away as described in this code and the Vehicle Code. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 88-17 Art. XVIII § 5)

 

10.24.260 Fine schedule.
    The fine to be paid for any parking violation shall be determined by reference to the schedule of parking fines. This schedule shall be adopted and may be periodically amended by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 94-2 § 3)

 

10.24.270 Administrative review.
    The procedures to be followed in hearing any contested parking violation or notice of a delinquent violation shall be as set forth in the city’s adopted parking citation review and appeal procedures administrative policy. (Ord. 17-1 § 3; Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 94-2 § 3)

Chapter 10.26 PARKING METERS
10.26.010 Parking meter zones designated.
    The following traffic districts are hereby designated as parking meter zones:

    A.  The Bridge District;

    B.   Washington District; and

    C.   Civic Center District. (Ord. 17-1 § 4)

 

10.26.020 Authority to install meters and pay-by-space/pay-and-display machines.
    The city manager, or designee, may install, or cause to be installed, parking meters, pay-by-space machines and/or pay-and-display machines in all parking meter zones established by this code or hereafter created by the city council in such numbers and in such places as, in the city manager’s or designee’s judgment, may be necessary for the regulation, control, and inspection of the parking of vehicles therein. (Ord. 17-1 § 4)

 

10.26.030 Parking meter and pay-by-space/pay-and-display specifications.
    A.  Each parking meter shall be so set as to display a signal showing lawful parking upon the deposit of the appropriate United States legal tender or credit card.

    B.   Each parking meter shall be so arranged that upon the expiration of the lawful time limit it will indicate by a proper visible signal that the lawful parking period for the adjacent parking meter space has expired and in such cases the right of such a vehicle to occupy the space shall cease.

    C.   Each pay-by-space or pay-and-display machine shall conspicuously display the applicable parking rates and instructions on use of the machine. (Ord. 17-1 § 4)

 

10.26.040 Maximum parking time limits in meter zones.
    The maximum parking time limits within designated portions of the parking meter zone shall be as provided by this title or other ordinances, and shown by proper signs erected and maintained. (Ord. 17-1 § 4)

 

10.26.060 Parking meter rates.
    The rates for parking in a parking meter zone shall be established by ordinance. Parking or standing a vehicle in a parking meter space is lawful for the period of time corresponding to the monetary amount deposited or paid for that space. (Ord. 17-1 § 4)

 

10.26.070 Parking meter and pay-by-space/pay-and-display machine hours of operation.
    Parking meters and pay-by-space/pay-and-display machines shall be operated in the parking meter zones every day between the hours of eight a.m. and ten p.m. The city manager, or designee, may, after conducting parking surveys, determine that other hours of operation will facilitate the control of parking and may place signs indicating hours of operation other than between eight a.m. and ten p.m. (Ord. 17-1 § 4)

 

10.26.080 Operation of meters and pay-by-space/pay-and-display machines.
    A.  When any vehicle is parked in any parking meter space, the operator of the vehicle shall, immediately after entering the parking meter space, deposit or cause to be deposited either in the meter or machine controlling the space or through an authorized technology platform, the proper legal tender as is required by Section 10.24.060 for the parking meter space. The operator of the vehicle, after the proper deposit, shall also set in operation the timing mechanism on the meter or machine, if any, in accordance with directions properly appearing thereon. Failure to make a proper deposit and to set the timing mechanism in operation and, if applicable, failure to place the parking receipt on the vehicle dashboard as prescribed, shall constitute a violation of this title.

    B.   Upon the proper deposit of legal tender and the setting of the timing mechanism in operation and, if applicable, the placement of the parking receipt on the vehicle dashboard, the parking meter space may be lawfully occupied by the vehicle during the period of time which has been prescribed for the part of the street in which the parking meter space is located. The occupant of the space shall not be required to deposit additional payment so long as the occupancy of the space does not exceed the indicated unused parking time. When an oversized vehicle occupies more than one space, a proper deposit shall be made for each of the spaces. (Ord. 17-1 § 4)

 

10.26.090 Overtime parking in meter zones.
    A.  Where any section of this chapter, or any sign posted pursuant to the provisions of this title, limits parking in any space in a given parking meter zone to a stated period of time during designated daily hours of operation, a vehicle shall be considered in violation of that restriction if it parks in any space within the same parking meter zone during the daily hours of operation for longer than the stated time period.

    B.   The display of a signal showing illegal parking during the hours of operation for any parking meter while a motor vehicle is parked in a space adjoining the parking meter shall be prima facie evidence that the motor vehicle has been parked overtime and beyond the lawful parking period.

    C.   A pay-by-space or pay-and-display parking machine indicating that the lawful parking time has expired, during the hours of operation for any pay-by-space or pay-and-display machine, while a motor vehicle is parked in a space controlled by that pay-by-space or pay-and-display machine, shall be prima facie evidence that the motor vehicle has been parked overtime and beyond the lawful parking period. (Ord. 17-1 § 4)

 

10.26.100 Extending parking meter or pay-by-space/pay-and-display machine time over maximum allowed.
    Parking or standing a vehicle in a parking meter space shall be lawful up to the maximum time indicated on the parking meter, on the pay-by-space or pay-and-display machine, or on posted signs. No person shall deposit in a parking meter or pay-by-space/pay-and-display machine or through any authorized technology platform any legal tender for the purpose of extending the parking time of a vehicle beyond the designated maximum time allowed for parking. (Ord. 17-1 § 4)

 

10.26.110 Defacing, destroying, etc., meters and machines.
    No person shall deface, injure, tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking meter or any pay-by-space or pay-and-display machine installed under the provisions of this title. (Ord. 17-1 § 4)

 

10.26.120 Citations for parking meter violations.
    Each police officer or parking enforcement officer shall take the number of any parking meter space at which any vehicle is parked in violation of this chapter, the state license number of the vehicle, and the time and date of the violation. The police officer or parking enforcement officer shall then issue, in writing, a citation for illegal parking in the form and subject to the procedure provided for by law and the city code applicable to parking violations within the city. (Ord. 17-1 § 4)

 

10.26.130 Use of parking meter and machine funds.
    The money required to be deposited in parking meters and pay-by-space/pay-and-display machines or through any authorized technology platform as provided in this chapter is hereby levied and assessed as fees to provide for the proper regulation and control of traffic upon the public streets, to provide for public vehicular off-street parking facilities, and to cover the cost of the supervision, inspection, installation, maintenance, control, and use of the parking spaces and regulating parking of vehicles in the parking meter zones. (Ord. 17-1 § 4)

Chapter 10.28 PEDESTRIANS
10.28.010 Crosswalks.
    The city traffic administrator, subject to the review and approval of the traffic committee, is authorized to establish, designate and maintain crosswalks by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway where in his or her opinion there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 88-17 Art. XII § 1(a))

 

10.28.020 Prohibited crossing.
    The city traffic administrator, subject to the review and approval of the traffic committee, may install signs at or adjacent to an intersection or other appropriate location directing that pedestrians shall not cross. It is unlawful for any pedestrian to cross at the locations prohibited by such signs. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 88-17 Art. XII § 1(b))

Chapter 10.32 BICYCLES
10.32.010 Bicycle facilities.
    The city traffic administrator, subject to the review and approval of the traffic committee, is authorized to designate and maintain bicycle facilities in the city. (Ord. 14-3 § 2; Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 88-17 Art. XIII § 1)

 

10.32.020 Riding on sidewalks.
    A.  The city traffic administrator is authorized to erect signs on any public sidewalk or roadway regulating the riding of bicycles thereon.

    B.   With the exception of peace officers, as defined in Penal Code Section 830, who are on duty and who are acting within the course and scope of their employment, no person shall ride a bicycle on a sidewalk within a business district.

    C.   Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian. (Ord. 14-3 § 2; Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 88-17 Art. XIII § 2)

Chapter 10.34 SHARED MICRO MOBILITY
10.34.010 Micro-mobility operations permit.
    A.  No persons shall operate a micro-mobility business unless the person holds a valid micro-mobility operations permit issued in accordance with Chapter 5.30.

    B.   Micro-mobility operations permits are the property of the city and are not transferable. (Ord. 19-3 § 5)

 

10.34.020 Riding on sidewalks.
    In accordance with California Vehicle Code Section 407.5, micro-mobility devices shall not be operated on the sidewalk. (Ord. 19-3 § 5)

 

10.34.030 Micro-mobility parking.
    No person shall park a micro-mobility device in such a position that obstructs the normal movement of traffic or prohibits the free use on the street and sidewalk. (Ord. 19-3 § 5)

Chapter 10.36 TRUCKS
10.36.010 Route restrictions.
    A.  No person shall operate a commercial vehicle, as defined by Vehicle Code Section 260, having a manufacturer’s gross vehicle weight rating of ten thousand pounds or more, on a street within any residence district, as defined in Vehicle Code Section 515.

    B.   The council may, by resolution, prohibit or permit the operation of such commercial vehicles on any city street.

    C.   The city traffic administrator shall erect and maintain appropriate signing designating streets on which the operation of such commercial vehicles is permitted.

    D.  This section does not prohibit any such commercial vehicle coming from an unrestricted street having ingress and egress by direct route to and from a restricted street when necessary for the purpose of making pickups or deliveries of goods, wares and merchandise from or to any building or structure located on the restricted street or for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in the actual bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of any building or structure upon the restricted street, for which a building permit has previously been issued, in accordance with Section 35703 of the Vehicle Code.

    E.   The maximum total length of combinations of commercial vehicles operating upon city streets shall not exceed sixty feet. This limitation shall become effective upon the posting of appropriate signage in accordance with Section 35410(d) of the California Vehicle Code. (Ord. 12-12 § 2; Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 88-17 Art. XVII § 1)

 

10.36.020 Parking restrictions.
    A.  No person shall park or leave standing a commercial vehicle having a manufacturer’s gross vehicle weight rating of ten thousand pounds or more, or any trailer or semi-trailer, as defined by Sections 630 and 550 of the Vehicle Code, respectively, on any street, alley, public right-of-way or public place, within a residential zone, as defined by the city’s current zoning ordinance, or on any street on which the council has, by resolution, prohibited the operation of such commercial vehicles.

    B.   In accordance with Section 22507.5 of the Vehicle Code, subsection A shall not be effective with respect to any commercial vehicle making pickups or deliveries of goods, wares and merchandise from or to any building or structure located on a restricted street, or for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of any building or structure upon a restricted street, for which a building permit has previously been obtained.

    C.   No person shall park any trailer or semitrailer, as defined by Sections 630 and 550 of the Vehicle Code, respectively, upon any nonresidential street, alley, public right-of-way or public place, unless signs permitting the parking of such trailers or semitrailers are erected. For the purposes of this subsection, a nonresidential street, alley, public right-of-way or public place includes any street, alley, public right-of-way or public place located outside a residential zone, as defined by the city’s current zoning code. The city traffic administrator, subject to the review and approval of the traffic committee, is authorized to place such signs and establish time limits for such permitted parking if he or she finds that the public health, safety and welfare is not adversely affected by such change. The regulations of this subsection do not apply when such trailer or semitrailer, during the time it is parked, is attached to a motor vehicle capable of providing the motive power for moving the trailer or semitrailer upon the street, alley, public right-of-way or public place. (Ord. 09-6 § 3; Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 88-17 Art. XVII § 2)

 

10.36.030 Exemptions—Public vehicles.
    The provisions of this chapter do not apply to public buses or to any vehicle owned by a public agency or utility while operating in an official capacity. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 88-17 Art. XVII § 3)

 

10.36.040 Permit for excess weight and size.
    The city traffic administrator is authorized to issue permits in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Vehicle Code for vehicles exceeding the weight and/or size and/or type limitations imposed by this title and the Vehicle Code. The fee for such permit shall be established by resolution of the council. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 88-17 Art. XVII § 4)

Chapter 10.40 INTERSTATE TRUCK TERMINAL ACCESS ROUTES
10.40.010 Purpose—Authority.
    The purpose of this chapter is to establish a process for the designation and signing of truck terminal access routes as provided by state law, and to promote the general health, safety and welfare of the public. This chapter is adopted pursuant to Vehicle Code Section 35401.5(d) and the city’s general police power. The city council finds that this chapter is necessary in consideration of public safety on, and preservation of, highways under the city’s jurisdiction. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 87-32 § 1)

 

10.40.020 Definitions.
    The following definitions apply to this chapter, and if any word or phrase used in this chapter is not defined in this section, it shall have the meaning set forth in the California Vehicle Code or, if not defined in the Vehicle Code, the meaning attributed to it in ordinary usage.

    “Terminal” means any facility at which freight is consolidated to be shipped or where full load consignments may be offloaded or at which freeway trucks are regularly maintained, stored or manufactured.

    “Freeway truck” means a truck tractor and semitrailer combination, or truck tractor, semitrailer and trailer combination with a length as regulated and allowed by the Federal Surface Transportation Assistance Act of 1982, Public Law 97-424, 96 Stat. 2097, 49 U.S.C. Section 2311 et seq., and as addressed by California Vehicle Code Section 35401.5.

    “Caltrans” means the Department of Transportation of the state of California, or its successor agency.

    “Federally designated highway system” means those highways within the National System of Interstate and Defense Highways and those portions of federal-aid primary highways and federal-aid urban system highways that have been qualified by the United States Secretary of Transportation for such uses. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 87-32 § 2(A))

 

10.40.030 Application—Requirements generally.
    Any interested person requiring access for a freeway truck or trucks from the federally designated highway system along highways under the city’s jurisdiction to a terminal or terminals shall submit the following to the director of community development: an application, on a form as provided by the city, the requisite fee, and such further information as may be required by the city manager. (Ord. 09-17 § 2; Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 87-32 § 2(B)(1))

 

10.40.040 Application—City action.
    Upon receipt of the application, the city manager will cause an investigation to be made to ascertain whether or not the proposed terminal facility meets the requirements for a terminal, as defined. Upon his or her approval of the terminal facility, he or she will then determine the capability of the route requested and alternate routes, whether requested or not. Determination of route capability will include a review of adequate turning radius and lane widths of ramps, intersections, streets and highways, general traffic conditions such as sight distance, speed and traffic volumes, and other considerations as deemed relevant by the director of public works. Based on these considerations, the city manager will then approve or disapprove a terminal access route. The city manager’s decision shall be in writing and shall be delivered to the applicant within thirty days from the submission of a complete application packet. (Ord. 09-17 § 2; Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 87-32 § 2(B)(2))

 

10.40.050 Fees and costs.
    A.  At the time of submitting the application, the applicant shall pay a nonrefundable application fee, as established by resolution which may be amended from time to time, sufficient to pay the cost of the review of the terminal designation and the review of the route and alternate route, and related administrative costs.

    B.   Upon the approval of the terminal designation and route by the city manager, the applicant shall deposit with the city sufficient funds as estimated by the city manager to pay for the purchase and installation of terminal trailblazer signs. Trailblazer signs will be required at every decision point in the city on route to the terminal. Upon completion of the installation of the signs, the actual cost shall be computed and any difference between the actual and the estimated cost shall be billed or refunded to the applicant, whichever the case may be. No terminal or route may be used until such signs as may be required are in place.

    C.   Notwithstanding subsections A and B of this section, a fee will not be charged if the applicant is a terminal operator. (Ord. 09-17 § 2; Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 87-32 § 2(C))

 

10.40.060 Retrofitting.
    A.  If all feasible routes to a requested terminal are found unsatisfactory by the city manager, the applicant may request retrofitting of the deficiencies. All costs of engineering, construction and inspection will be the responsibility of the applicant. Except when the retrofitting of deficiencies is within the jurisdiction of Caltrans, the actual construction will be done by the city or by a contractor acceptable to the city.

    B.   When the work is to be done by the city, the applicant shall deposit with the city the estimated cost of retrofitting. Adjustments between the estimated and actual costs shall be made after completion of the work and any difference between the actual and the estimated cost shall be billed or refunded to the applicant, whichever the case may be.

    C.   If at any time within five years from the date of completion of the retrofitting by the applicant, should any other applicant seek terminal access route approval which would use the route upon which such retrofitting was accomplished, any such applicant’s fee may include that applicant’s proportionate share of the retrofitting, as determined by the city manager, which fee shall be disbursed by the city to the applicant who paid for the retrofitting as well as to any other applicant who contributed to the cost of retrofitting. (Ord. 09-17 § 2; Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 87-32 § 2(D))

 

10.40.070 Revocation of route.
    The city manager may revoke any approved terminal or terminal access route if the terminal or route becomes an unreasonable traffic hazard for vehicular or pedestrian traffic. A traffic hazard includes the inability of freeway trucks to negotiate the route or such vehicles causing unsafe driving conditions for other vehicular traffic or pedestrians. (Ord. 09-17 § 2; Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 87-32 § 2(E))

 

10.40.080 Appeal process.
    If the city manager denies terminal designation or route feasibility or revokes a previously approved terminal or route, the applicant or terminal owner, within fifteen days following the date of receipt of the decision of the city manager, may appeal the decision to the city council in writing in accordance with the procedure set forth in Chapter 1.08. The appeal shall state specifically whether there was an error or abuse of discretion by the director of public works or whether his or her decision is not supported by the evidence in the record. Within five days of receiving notification that the appeal has been filed, the city manager shall transmit to the city clerk the terminal application, the sketches of the revoked route and all other data filed therewith, the written decision, and all other relevant documentation. The city council will then reconsider the manager’s decision and either affirm or reverse it. The city council’s decision shall be final. (Ord. 09-17 § 2; Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 87-32 § 2(F))

 

10.40.090 Enforcement.
    Any violation of this ordinance shall be prosecuted in accordance with the provisions of Division 17 of the California Vehicle Code and other applicable law. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 87-32 § 2(G))

 

10.40.100 Routes designated.
    The city council designates the following roadway segments as terminal access routes in accordance with Vehicle Code Section 35401.5(d).

    1.   Carlin Drive between Oates Street and Ramco Street;

    2.   Channel Drive between Seaport Boulevard and its westerly terminus;

    3.   Del Monte Street between Harbor Boulevard and Terminal Street;

    4.   E Street between West Street and Railroad Crossing;

    5.   Embarcadero Drive between Riverside Parkway (N) and Riverside Parkway (S);

    6.   Enterprise Boulevard between West Capitol Avenue and Channel Drive;

    7.   F Street between Jefferson Boulevard and Railroad Crossing;

    8.   Harbor Boulevard between Evergreen Avenue and Industrial Boulevard;

    9.   IKEA Court between Reed Avenue and its southerly terminus;

    10. Industrial Boulevard between Enterprise Boulevard and Lake Washington Boulevard;

    11. Jefferson Boulevard between Sacramento Avenue and F Street;

    12. Lake Washington Boulevard between Industrial Boulevard and Southport Parkway;

    13. Oates Street between Carlin Street and Ramos Drive;

    14. Overland Court between Industrial Boulevard and its southerly terminus;

    15. Parkway Boulevard between Industrial Boulevard and its southerly terminus;

    16. Promenade Street between Ramos Street and Southport Parkway;

    17. Ramco Street between Southport Parkway and Promenade Street;

    18. Ramos Drive between Oates Street and Promenade Street;

    19. Reed Avenue between Riverside Parkway and Sunset Avenue;

    20. Riverpoint Court between Harbor Boulevard and its westerly terminus;

    21. Riverside Parkway between Reed Avenue and Stillwater Road;

    22. Sacramento Avenue between Sunset Avenue and Jefferson Boulevard/Kegle Drive;

    23. Seaport Boulevard between Parkway Boulevard and its westerly terminus;

    24. Shore Street between Front Street and Del Monte Street;

    25. Southport Parkway between Promenade Street and Lake Washington Boulevard;

    26. Stillwater Road between Reed Avenue and Riverside Parkway;

    27. Terminal Street between Front Street and Industrial Boulevard;

    28. West Street between F Street and E Street;

    29. West Capitol Avenue between Enterprise Boulevard and Northpoint Drive.

    Notwithstanding the application process set forth in this chapter, freeway trucks may use these access routes without the need to apply for designation of the route. The city manager is directed to ensure that appropriate signage is installed along these routes. (Ord. 09-6 § 4)

Chapter 10.44 PREFERENTIAL PERMIT PARKING
10.44.010 Purpose and authority.
    The purpose of this chapter is to reduce the adverse effects caused in certain areas of the city by motor vehicle congestion, particularly the long-term parking of motor vehicles on the streets of such areas by nonresidents. As more specifically set forth in Section 10.44.020, such parking by nonresidents threatens the health, safety and welfare of the residents and commerce in the city. In order to protect such residents and promote commercial well-being in affected areas, it is necessary to enact the preferential permit parking system established by this chapter.

    The city council enacts the ordinance codified in this chapter in accordance with the authority granted by Article XI, Section 7 of the California Constitution, and pursuant to Vehicle Code Section 22507 which authorizes cities to designate certain streets for preferential parking. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 94-8 § 1)

 

10.44.020 Findings.
    The preferential parking system established by this chapter will relieve the adverse effects caused by motor vehicle congestion by:

    A.  Protecting the ability of residents in certain areas of the city to obtain parking near their residences and ensure access to their residences;

    B.   Preserving the residential character of such areas and neighborhoods, which character has been compromised due to the presence of commuter vehicles;

    C.   Preserving the value of property in such areas and neighborhoods;

    D.  Protecting the safety of children and other pedestrians in such areas; and

    E.   Promoting traffic safety, peace, good order, comfort, convenience and the general welfare of the inhabitants of the city.

    The above findings of the city council support the need for enactment of the ordinance codified in this chapter and is not meant to be an exhaustive list. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 94-8 § 1)

 

10.44.030 Definitions.
    For purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases are defined as follows:

    “Commuter vehicle” means a motor vehicle parked in a preferential parking area by a person not a resident thereof.

    “Customer vehicle” means a motor vehicle parked for a period of less than two consecutive hours in a preferential parking area by a customer of a commercial establishment located therein.

    “Dwelling unit” means a house, apartment, or other residence with an assigned address as used by the U.S. Postal Service or as shown on the city’s address system.

    “Finance director” means the city director of finance or designee.

    “Leases” means pays rent or other remuneration for the use of real property as lessee’s place of business.

    “Motor vehicle” includes an automobile, truck, motorcycle or other motor driven form of transportation not in excess of ten thousand pounds gross weight.

    “Nonresident permit” means a permit issued by the finance director to allow parking of a commuter vehicle in a preferential parking area where the city council has, by resolution, authorized the use of such permits.

    “Owns” means having acquired at least one-quarter of the fee interest in a parcel of real property within a preferential parking area.

    “Preferential parking area” means an area designated as provided in this chapter wherein motor vehicles displaying a valid permit as described herein shall be exempt from the time limit parking regulations or parking prohibitions.

    “Resident” means a person who dwells within the preferential parking area on a permanent basis.

    “Residing permit” means a permit issued by the finance director to allow parking of a resident vehicle in a preferential parking area.

    “Resident vehicle” means a motor vehicle parked in a preferential parking area by resident. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 94-8 § 1)

 

10.44.040 Criteria for designation of preferential parking areas.
    A.  An area shall be deemed eligible for consideration as a preferential parking area if, based on a determination by the city traffic administrator and objective criteria established by the city, the area is found to be adversely affected by commuter vehicles for any extended period during the day or night, on weekends, or during holidays.

    B.   In determining whether an area identified as eligible for preferential permit parking may be designated as a preferential parking area, the city traffic administrator and the city council shall take into account factors which include, but are not limited to the following:

    1.   The extent of the residents’ need for preferential permit parking;

    2.   The extent to which legal on-street parking spaces are occupied by motor vehicles during the period proposed for parking regulations;

    3.   The extent to which motor vehicles parking in the area during the period proposed for parking regulations are commuter vehicles rather than resident or customer vehicles; and

    4.   The extent to which parking spaces for customer vehicles and motor vehicles registered to residents cannot be met by the number of available off-street parking spaces. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 94-8 § 1)

 

10.44.050 Designation process.
    The study of feasibility for establishment of a preferential parking area may be initiated by the city council, traffic committee or city traffic administrator based upon their own action or based upon petition of interested persons. After initiation of such a request, the process for establishment of a preferential parking area is as follows:

    A.  The city traffic administrator shall undertake a survey or study as deemed necessary to determine whether the area is eligible to be a preferential parking area.

    B.   Following the completion of surveys or studies to determine whether designation criteria are met, the traffic committee shall hear the report of the city traffic administrator and shall consider the eligibility of the area under consideration for designation as a preferential parking area. The traffic committee shall also consider the boundaries of the proposed parking area as well as the proposed regulations on parking.

    C.   The traffic committee shall recommend for or against the designation of the area under study as a preferential parking area. Such recommendation may also include a list of recommended conditions and regulations applicable to any area proposed for designation as a preferential parking area.

    D.  Upon receipt of the traffic committee recommendation, the city council shall conduct a noticed public hearing. If the city council determines that a preferential parking area should be created, it shall adopt a resolution establishing the program for the area in question including the boundaries, parking regulations, fees, if any, and other appropriate conditions. Thereafter, the program shall be implemented as hereinafter provided.

    E.   Notice of the public hearing or hearings provided for in this chapter shall be published and circulated within the city at least ten days before the hearing date. The notice shall clearly state the purpose of the hearing, the location and boundaries tentatively considered for the proposed preferential parking area, and if applicable, the approximate permit fee to be charged. During such hearing or hearings, any interested person shall be entitled to appear and be heard. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 94-8 § 1)

 

10.44.060 Issuance of permits.
    A.  Parking permits shall be issued under the direction of the finance director. Each permit shall state for which preferential parking area it is issued.

    B.   Parking permits may be issued to households only upon application of the following persons:

    1.   A resident of the preferential parking area who owns a motor vehicle;

    2.   A person who owns or leases commercial property and actively engages in business activity within a preferential parking area where the city council has authorized the issuance of such permits by resolution;

    3.   A nonresident person who pays the nonresident fee in those areas where the city council has authorized the usage of nonresident permits by resolution. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 94-8 § 1)

 

10.44.070 Visitor permits.
    The finance director is authorized upon application to issue visitor parking permits to households of a preferential parking area for use by bona fide transient visitors therein. The city council, may, by resolution or ordinance, prohibit or regulate the issuance and use of visitor permits in any preferential permit parking area. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 94-8 § 1)

 

10.44.080 Posting of preferential parking areas.
    Upon the adoption by the city council of a resolution designating a preferential parking area, the city traffic administrator shall cause appropriate signs, markings or meters to be erected in the preferential parking area, prominently indicating applicable parking regulations and conditions. Such parking regulations and conditions shall not apply until signs, markings or meters giving adequate notice thereof have been placed. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 94-8 § 1)

 

10.44.090 Display of permits.
    Permits shall be displayed, while in the preferential parking area, in a manner determined by the finance director and police chief. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 94-8 § 1)

 

10.44.100 Permit parking exemptions.
    A.  A resident vehicle displaying a valid parking permit as provided for in this chapter shall be permitted to be parked in the preferential parking area for which the permit has been issued without being limited by time limit parking regulations or without being limited by parking prohibitions which limit parking to residents.

    B.   A preferential parking permit shall not guarantee or reserve to the holder thereof an on-street parking space within the preferential parking area. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 94-8 § 1)

 

10.44.110 Application for and duration of permit.
    Parking permits shall be valid for a period to be determined by the finance director. Permits may be renewed upon reapplication in the manner required by the finance director. Each application or reapplication for a parking permit shall contain information sufficient to identify the applicant, the residence address or address of real property owned or leased within a permit area, the license number of the motor vehicle for which application is made and such other information that may be deemed relevant by the finance director. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 94-8 § 1)

 

10.44.120 Permit fees.
    The fee for preferential parking permits shall be established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 94-8 § 1)

 

10.44.130 Penalty provisions.
    A.  It is a violation of this chapter, unless expressly provided to the contrary herein, for any person to stand or park a motor vehicle contrary to the parking regulations and conditions established pursuant hereto. Such violation shall be punishable as an infraction by a fine as established by the judge of the municipal court.

    B.   It is a violation of this chapter for a person to falsely represent him or herself as eligible for a parking permit or to furnish false information in an application therefor to the finance director.

    C.   It is a violation of this chapter for a person holding a valid parking permit to permit its use or display by anyone who does not qualify for the permit.

    D.  It is a violation of this chapter for a person to copy, produce or otherwise bring into existence a facsimile or counterfeit parking permit in order to evade the parking regulations of this chapter. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 94-8 § 1 (part).

 

10.44.140 Severability.
    If any portion of this chapter is invalid, all valid sections are severable from the invalid section(s) and shall remain in effect. If any section is invalid in one or more of its applications, the section shall remain in effect in all valid applications which are severable from the invalid applications. (Ord. 99-2 § 1; Ord. 94-8. § 1)

Title 11 (RESERVED)

Title 12 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES
Chapter 12.08 SPECIAL EVENTS
Chapter 12.12 PARKS AND COMMUNITY SERVICE FACILITIES
Chapter 12.15 SKATEBOARD PARKS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING USE OF SKATEBOARD PARKS
Chapter 12.16 PUBLIC BOATING FACILITIES
Chapter 12.20 BOATING AND WATER RECREATION
Chapter 12.24 UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICTS
Chapter 12.30 PARK FACILITY DEVELOPMENT FEES
Chapter 12.34 TRAFFIC IMPACT FEES
Chapter 12.38 SOUTHPORT DRAINAGE IMPACT FEES
Chapter 12.40 POLICE FACILITIES DEVELOPMENT FEES
Chapter 12.42 FIRE FACILITIES DEVELOPMENT FEES
Chapter 12.44 CHILDCARE DEVELOPMENT FEES AND ALTERNATIVES
Chapter 12.46 CORPORATION YARD FACILITIES DEVELOPMENT FEES
Chapter 12.48 CITY HALL FACILITIES DEVELOPMENT FEES

Chapter 12.08 SPECIAL EVENTS
12.08.000 Intent of chapter.
    The city is committed to facilitating a wide range of special events that highlight and support the diverse nature of the city. The city recognizes that special events provide cultural enrichment, promote economic vitality and enhance community identity and pride. The city recognizes that some events may result in temporary inconveniences or disturbances to residents and businesses in surrounding areas. Permit conditions for a special event will consider the benefits of special events, while reasonably balancing the city’s obligation to protect the public health, safety and peaceful enjoyment of residents and businesses. Permit conditions will also consider the area of the city where the event is proposed and the types of events and activities that were contemplated for that area; for example the city expects to designate one or more entertainment districts that have been planned as active and event oriented areas of the city. It is not the intent of the city in adopting this chapter to regulate or judge the content of events, but instead to provide a workable and content-neutral framework for mitigating the impacts attributable to special events. (Ord. 15-3 § 3)

 

12.08.010 Special events.
    A.  A special event is defined as any organized activity, formation, parade, procession, block party or assembly that is likely to meet any one or more of the following criteria:

    1.   Be attended by one hundred people or more;

    2.   May obstruct, delay or interfere with the normal flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic on any public or private right-of-way or sidewalk;

    3.   Can reasonably be expected to be a hazard to the public peace, health, safety or general welfare of the public; or

    4.   Can reasonably be expected to require the provision of city services.

    B.   Special events will fall within one of the following categories:

    1.   Category I. Category I events generally involve fewer than five hundred people and are anticipated to require a minimal need for city support services.

    2.   Category II. Category II events generally range between five hundred and one thousand nine hundred ninety-nine people and are anticipated to require a moderate need for city support services.

    3.   Category III. Category III events generally range between two thousand people and above and are anticipated to require a significant need for city support services.

    C.   The event category typically determines the level of city support services required to maintain minimal interference and inconvenience to the general public resulting from the event. (Ord. 15-3 § 3)

 

12.08.020 Additional definitions.
    “Annual permit” means an annual special event permit granted for more than one special event occurring within a twelve calendar month period.

    “Applicant” means any person applying for a permit to conduct or sponsor an event governed by this chapter. Applicants must be eighteen years of age or older.

    “Block party” means an event involving the temporary closure of a public or private right-of-way.

    “City manager” means the city manager appointed by the city council or his/her designee.

    “City support services” means city personnel, contractors and equipment.

    “Entertainment district” means an area of the city planned for vibrant and regular special events, the boundaries of which have been established by city council resolution.

    “First Amendment” means the First Amendment of the United States Constitution and the equivalent provisions in the California Constitution.

    “Organizer” means any person who is conducting, sponsoring or organizing a special event.

    “Participant” means a spectator, fan, supporter or any other person attending for the purpose of watching and/or participating in the special event.

    “Permit” means a special event permit granted pursuant to this chapter.

    “Permit application fee” means the fee to be paid by the applicant at the time the application for a permit is filed with the special events administrator.

    “Permittee” means any person or organization who has been issued a permit by the city.

    “Person” means any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, governmental entity, company or organization of any kind.

    “Right-of-way” means the dedicated portion of any street or road within the city.

    “SEA” means special events administrator, who is the city manager or his/her designee.

    “Sound engineer” means the individual designated by the SEA to review and monitor preparation and/or implementation of the amplified sound plan for events using amplified sound.

    “Sound/music supervisor” means the individual designated by the applicant/permittee to monitor implementation of the amplified sound plan for events using amplified sound. (Ord. 15-3 § 3)

 

12.08.030 Permits required—Exemptions.
    A.  Except as otherwise provided herein, all special events occurring within the city shall be prohibited, unless a permit, properly issued by the special events administrator (SEA), has first been obtained.

    B.   Exemptions. A permit is not required for the following:

    1.   Funeral processions.

    2.   Governmental agencies acting within the scope of their authorized function.

    3.   Regularly scheduled religious services.

    4.   Category I events held on city property; in such cases organizers shall comply with Chapter 12.12 (Parks and Community Facilities) of this code.

    5.   Category I events held at a private facility that was constructed for the purpose of conducting special events of the type proposed to be held at the facility.

    6.   Non-commercial special events at private residences. (Ord. 15-3 § 3)

 

12.08.040 Annual event permits for events occurring at facilities designed for special events.
    A.  Annual permits will be considered for venues or facilities constructed for the purpose of producing, hosting or staging special or sporting events. Except as otherwise provided in this section, these annual permits shall be subject to the same rules and regulations applicable to individual permits.

    B.   Applications for annual permits shall be submitted not less than ninety days before the first scheduled event of the calendar year. An annual permit application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable permit application fee in the amount set by city council in the book of fees. This nonrefundable fee shall cover the actual costs of processing and reviewing special event applications and administering the special events permit program.

    C.   For sporting events, the application shall also include a list of all anticipated activities, not related to game play, held before, during or after the event that would otherwise be deemed a special event. By way of example, and not limitation, such additional activities may include: pyrotechnics displays, vehicular races/demonstrations or other hazardous activities, concerts, and animal exhibitions. The SEA can either prohibit, restrict or place conditions on such additional activities when the application is considered.

    D.  The permittee shall be responsible for the city’s costs in providing a level of public services necessary to ensure the health, safety and welfare of both the special event’s participants and the community. Upon approval of the annual permit, the SEA shall provide the applicant with a statement of the estimated cost of providing such services for each event. The estimated cost for an initial annual permit shall be based on the applicant’s projected attendance for its first year of operations. Thereafter, the estimated cost shall be based on the city’s costs actually incurred in the previous year, modified as necessary to account for changes in the size, scope, or numbers of anticipated events during the term of the permit.

    E.   The annual permit shall authorize the permittee to conduct only such event(s) as is described in the permit, and in accordance with the terms and conditions of the annual permit. It is unlawful for the permittee to willfully violate the terms and conditions of the annual permit, or for any event participate with knowledge thereof, to willfully violate the terms and conditions of the annual permit. Should the holder of an annual permit desire to conduct an activity that would otherwise be deemed a special event but is not authorized by the annual permit, the permittee shall be required to obtain an individual special event permit for the unauthorized activity.

    F.   The SEA shall issue the annual permit after the application has been approved, the applicant has agreed in writing to comply with all of the terms and conditions of the permit, and the requirements of this chapter respecting indemnification, insurance, public services and cleanup deposits have been fully satisfied. (Ord. 15-3 § 3)

 

12.08.050 Permits for special events occurring at venues or facilities in agricultural or residential zones not intended for special events as its primary purpose.
    A.  Permits will be considered for events in agricultural and residential zones involving venues or facilities not constructed for the purpose of producing, hosting or staging special or sporting events. These permits shall be subject to the same rules and regulations applicable to other special event permits.

    B.   No more than twelve special events per calendar year shall be permitted in agricultural or residential zones or at venues or facilities that were not designed or intended for such events as its primary purpose. The applicant shall submit a special event permit application for each event.

    C.   For the purpose of this section, a single “special event” is any activity or attraction that has a duration of no more than three successive days. An exception to this duration may be granted by the SEA for seasonal sales activities subject to Section 17.42.010. However, such seasonal sales shall not exceed thirty days in duration and shall be considered as one of the allowable twelve special events in a calendar year. (Ord. 15-3 § 3)

 

12.08.060 Application procedure.
    A.  Except as otherwise provided herein, all applications for permits shall be filed with the SEA according to the following;

    Category I Events—thirty days prior to the event.

    Category II Events—sixty days prior to the event.

    Category III Events—one hundred twenty days prior to the event.

    B.   Notwithstanding the foregoing, the SEA shall consider an application that is filed after the filing deadline if:

    1.   The event is a noncommercial activity involving First Amendment expressive activity, and waiving the filing deadline is necessary to protect first amendment rights;

    2.   The SEA determines that there is sufficient time to process and review the application and to obtain all city support services needed for the event. Good cause may be demonstrated by showing that the circumstances that gave rise to the permit application did not reasonably allow the participants to file an application within the time prescribed. (Ord. 15-3 § 3)

 

12.08.070 Contents of application form.
    A.  The application for a permit shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable permit application fee in an amount set by the city council in the city’s book of fees. This nonrefundable fee shall cover the actual costs of processing and reviewing special event applications and administering the special events permit program.

    B.   The application for a permit shall include the information set forth below:

    1.   Written proof of consent by the owners of the property where the special event is to be held;

    2.   The name, address, email address and telephone number of the applicant and an alternative contact person;

    3.   The location of the event, including its boundaries and site plan drawings;

    4.   If the proposed event is sponsored by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the organization, and the authorized representative of the organization;

    5.   The nature and purpose of the event, including a list of all planned activities that are contemplated for the special event;

    6.   The name, address and telephone number of the person(s) who will be present and in charge of the event on the day of the special event;

    7.   Date and estimated starting and ending times of the special event;

    8.   The estimated number of participants/ attendees of the special event;

    9.   The type and estimated number of vehicles, animals and structures which will be used at the special event, and whether there will be water aid stations at the special event;

    10. Whether any food or non-alcoholic beverages will be sold or consumed at the special event, and if so, proof of compliance with all applicable local, state and federal laws, rules and regulations, including proof that the applicant has obtained all necessary permits;

    11. Whether any alcoholic beverages will be sold or consumed at the event and, if so, proof of compliance with all applicable laws, rules and regulations of the Alcohol Board of Control (ABC);

    12. Parking site plan that include provisions for meeting the guidelines set forth in the Americans with Disabilities Act;

    13. The plan for clean-up after the special event, including any contracts to effectuate the clean-up;

    14. Proof of liability and property insurance;

    15. A description of the sanitary facilities to serve the participants of the special event;

    16. If the event includes a parade or procession, the application shall include (a) the planned route; (b) the number and kind of vehicles, equipment and animals which will be involved; (c) a plan for the assembly and disbursal of the parade/procession; and (d) a statement as to whether the parade/procession will occupy all, or only a portion of, the streets proposed to be traversed;

    17. A plan to provide notice to area businesses and/or residents that will likely be significantly impacted by noise, amplified sound, traffic, odor, dust or light from the event. The notice is to be delivered by the applicant to the impacted area, as determined by the SEA, no later than seventy-two hours prior to the event and will include pertinent information about the event. Within entertainment districts, a plan and notification of businesses and residents shall only be required for Category III events; and

    18. Any additional information that, under the particular circumstances of the special event application, the SEA finds reasonably necessary to determine whether to approve or conditionally approve a permit.

    C.   Amplified Sound Plan. The application shall include an amplified sound plan if the event is using amplified sound. This plan, which must be approved by the SEA prior to the event, as part of the special event permit shall include:

    1.   A list of the sound equipment that will be used at the event;

    2.   A site plan showing the placement and direction the speakers will be pointed. (Speakers will not be allowed outside of the permitted area);

    3.   A description of the use of directional speaker systems with cutoff points;

    4.   The consideration of smaller systems in specific locations throughout the venue, rather than far ranging single amplification systems;

    5.   Times and duration of planned sound checks; and

    6.   The name of a sound/music supervisor who will remain on site throughout the event along with contact information and the procedure for contacting the sound/music supervisor if there are issues during the event.

    Decibel and other sound check measures may be required at pre-determined locations throughout the event timeframe. The sound/music supervisor shall have the results of the decibel and other sound check measures available should he/she need to respond to an inquiry.

    Depending on the magnitude of an event, the SEA may require that the applicant’s amplified sound plan be reviewed and monitored by a professional sound engineer hired by the city. The cost of the city’s sound engineer will be borne by the applicant. The city’s sound engineer may require modifications to the amplified sound plan that will maintain the integrity of the event while minimizing the impact on surrounding areas.

    Amplified sound guidelines will be set forth as one of the conditions in the special event permit. Additionally, the city’s sound engineer will monitor sound pursuant to the standards approved in the special event permit. the city’s sound engineer will be in ongoing contact with the sound/music supervisor throughout the event to ensure compliance. (Ord. 15-3 § 3)

 

12.08.080 Action on application.
    The SEA shall approve, conditionally approve or deny an application no later than fifteen calendar days after the receipt of a complete Category I application; or thirty calendar days after the receipt of a complete Category II application; or forty-five days after the receipt of a complete Class III application. Denials shall be based on one or more of the conditions or criteria specified in this chapter. In the event of special circumstances, as determined by the SEA, time limits for such a determination may be reasonably extended. (Ord. 15-3 § 3)

 

12.08.090 Permit conditions.
    The SEA may condition the issuance of a permit by imposing reasonable restrictions on the time, place and manner of conducting the event as are necessary or appropriate to protect persons and property and to control traffic, provided that such restrictions shall not unreasonably interfere with the right of free speech. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following:

    A.  Alteration of the staffing for, or the date, time, route or location of the event;

    B.   Conditions concerning accommodation of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, including restricting the event to only a portion of a street;

    C.   Requirements for provision of first aid and sanitary facilities, including the presence of emergency medical services personnel for all Category III special events;

    D.  Requirements for use of event monitors and providing notice of permit conditions to event participants;

    E.   Approval of any proposed private security forces;

    F.   Restrictions on the number and type of vehicles, animals or structures at the event;

    G.  Compliance with animal protection ordinances and laws;

    H.  Requirements for use of garbage containers, cleanup, and restoration of city property;

    I.    Conditions to address noise in general, traffic, odor, dust or lighting;

    J.    Restrictions on the time and use of fireworks, amplified sound and noise makers such as but not limited to, horns, sirens, canon or gun blast sounds and whistles. With the exception of July 4th and New Year’s Eve into the new year, these sounds shall be restricted in entertainment districts to no later than ten p.m. Sunday through Thursday and midnight on Friday and Saturday. In all other areas of the city these sounds shall be restricted to ten p.m. Sunday through Saturday;

    K.  Permits for block parties may be conditioned on having approval of at least fifty percent of the residents living on the affected streets;

    L.   Compliance with any relevant ordinance or law and obtaining any legally required permit or license;

    M.  Adequate proof of payment of the public service fees;

    N.  Adequate proof of compliance with the clean-up requirements; and

    O.  Facilities designed for special events and operating under the terms of an existing use permit shall comply with the operating conditions and limitations set forth in the use permit, and in the event any of those terms conflict with the terms set forth in this chapter, the use permit shall control. (Ord. 15-3 § 3)

 

12.08.100 Grounds for denial.
    A.  The SEA shall approve an application for a permit unless he or she determines, from a consideration of the application or other pertinent information, that:

    1.   Information contained in the application, or supplemental information requested from the applicant, is false in any material detail;

    2.   The application is incomplete or the applicant failed to complete the application after having been notified of the additional information or documents required;

    3.   The applicant undertook a prior special event without a required permit or otherwise in violation of this chapter;

    4.   The applicant failed to pay the additional costs of a prior special event charged pursuant to Section 12.08.150(C);

    5.   Another permit application has been received prior in time, or has already been approved, to hold another event at the time and place requested by the applicant or so close in time and/or place as to cause undue traffic congestion, or the police department is unable to meet the needs for police services for both events;

    6.   The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at the site of the event, or the assembly and disbanding areas around the event, will either prevent proper police, fire or emergency medical services to areas contiguous to the event or exceed the capabilities of the police, fire or emergency medical services needed to adequately protect the participants from the conduct of others;

    7.   The size of the event will require diversion of so great a number of city police officers and other public employees to insure that participants stay within the boundaries or route of the event, or to protect participants in the event, as to prevent normal protection to the rest of the city. Nothing herein authorizes denial of a permit when additional peace officers or approved private security forces to supplement these peace officers would be available to the city, if requested by the city in advance of the event. Nothing herein authorizes denial of a permit because of the need to protect participants from the conduct of others, if reasonable conditions can be imposed to allow for adequate protection of event participants with the number of police officers available to police the event;

    8.   The location of the event will substantially interfere with any construction or maintenance work scheduled to take place upon or along the city streets or a previously granted encroachment permit;

    9.   The event will occur at a time when a school is in session at a route or location adjacent to the school or class thereof, and the noise created by the activities of the event would substantially disrupt the educational activities of the school or class thereof;

    10. Given the nature of the special event, and/or the past history of the applicant, sponsors and/or participants, the SEA reasonably determines that event presents a substantial risk to the health, safety and welfare of the participants and/or local residents that cannot be adequately mitigated using available public resources; or

    11. The applicant failed to comply with the California Fire Code and/or the State Fire Marshall requirements during previous special events.

    B.   When the grounds for denial specified in subsections (A)(4) through (A)(10) of this section can be corrected by altering either the staffing for, or the date, time, duration, route, or location of the event, the chief of police shall, instead of denying the application, conditionally approve the application upon the applicant’s written acceptance of conditions for permit issuance. The conditions imposed pursuant to this section shall provide for only such modifications of the applicant’s proposed event as are necessary to achieve compliance with subsections (A)(4) through (A)(10) of this section.

    C.   If the application is denied, the SEA shall inform the applicant of the grounds for denial in writing. If the application is conditionally approved, the SEA shall inform the applicant of any permit conditions at the time the application is approved. (Ord. 15-3 § 3)

 

12.08.110 Permit issuance.
    A.  The SEA shall issue the permit after the application has been approved, the applicant has agreed in writing to comply with all of the terms and conditions of the permit, and the requirements of this chapter have been fully satisfied.

    B.   The SEA shall not withhold the issuance of a permit if the primary purpose of the proposed event is First Amendment expressive activity and the applicant has requested a waiver pursuant to Section 12.08.170. (Ord. 15-3 § 3)

 

12.08.120 Appeal procedure.
    A.  The applicant may appeal to the city council the denial or conditional approval of a permit, or the revocation of a permit pursuant to Section 12.08.210.

    B.   Appeals shall be conducted pursuant to Chapter 1.08 of this code.

    C.   Notwithstanding Chapter 1.08, all appeals shall be filed with the city clerk no later than five days following the notice of decision by the SEA. (Ord. 15-3 § 3)

 

12.08.130 Indemnification agreement.
    Prior to the issuance of a permit, the applicant shall execute an indemnification agreement. The agreement shall provide that the applicant shall defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city and its officers and employees from any liability to any persons or property resulting from any damage or injury occurring in connection with the permitted event, insofar as permitted by law. (Ord. 15-3 § 3)

 

12.08.140 Insurance.
    A.  The permittee of an event must possess or obtain public liability insurance to protect against liability for personal injury and property damage arising from the event. Coverage shall be a comprehensive general liability insurance policy. Minimum limits required:

    1.   Two million dollars for each occurrence combined single limit bodily injury and property damage;

    2.   If food or nonalcoholic beverages are to be sold or served at the event, the policy must also include an endorsement for products liability in an amount not less than five hundred thousand dollars. If alcoholic beverages are to be sold or served at the event, the policy must also include an endorsement for liquor liability in an amount not less than five hundred thousand dollars.

    B.   Insurance required pursuant to this section shall be maintained for the duration of the event and shall:

    1.   Name the city, its officers, employees and agents on the policy or by endorsement as additional insureds;

    2.   Be a primary policy and not contributory or in excess of any policy of city;

    3.   Declare all deductibles on the policy. (Ord. 15-3 § 3)

 

12.08.150 City support service fees.
    A.  Upon approval of an application for a permit, the SEA shall provide the applicant with a statement of the estimated cost of providing city support services. The cost of such services shall be solely borne by the applicant and shall be paid to the city at the time the event is permitted. A permit will not be issued unless fees have been paid.

    B.   The city support service fees will be established by the city council in the book of fees. The amount of such fees shall be based on the city’s actual cost of providing the services necessary to ensure the safety of both the special event’s participants and the community.

    C.   If the actual cost of city support services for the event is less than the estimated cost, the applicant will promptly be refunded the difference by the city. If the actual cost for city support services is more than the estimated cost, the difference shall become due and payable to the city upon the permittee’s receipt of a statement of costs. (Ord. 15-3 § 3)

 

12.08.160 Cleanup deposits for certain special events.
    A.  The applicant for an event in public facilities or on public property or rights-of-way involving the sale of food or beverages, erection of structures, horses or other large animals, or water aid stations, shall be required to provide a cleanup deposit prior to the issuance of a permit. As an alternative to such deposit, the applicant may provide a written contract for event cleanup.

    B.   The cleanup deposit shall be returned after the event, if the area used for the event has been cleaned and restored to the same condition as existed prior to the event.

    C.   If the public facilities, property, or rights-of-way used by the participants of the special event have not been fully cleaned or restored, the permittee shall be billed for the actual cost for cleanup and restoration, and the cleanup deposit, or a portion thereof, shall be applied toward payment of the bill. If the permittee disputes the bill, the permittee may appeal to the SEA within five days after receipt of the bill. Should there be any unexpected balance on deposit after completion of the work, this balance shall be refunded to the applicant/sponsor. Should the amount of the bill exceed the cleanup deposit, the difference shall become due and payable to the city upon the applicant’s receipt of the bill. (Ord. 15-3 § 3)

 

12.08.170 Waiver or reduction in city support service fees and deposits.
    The city council may adopt a policy setting forth acceptable guidelines and considerations for the waiver or reduction in city support service fees and deposits. The SEA will evaluate requests for waivers or reductions in fees and deposits in accordance with the policy and make a recommendation for a waiver or reduction in fees to the city council, which will make the final decision. (Ord. 15-3 § 3)

 

12.08.180 Duties of permittee.
    A.  Each permittee shall comply with all terms and conditions of the permit.

    B.   Each permittee shall ensure that the person in charge of any special event shall carry the permit on his or her person or otherwise have the permit immediately available upon demand.

    C.   Each permittee shall ensure the area used for the permitted event is immediately cleaned and restored to the same condition as existed prior to the event.

    D.  Each permittee shall comply with all applicable local, state and federal laws, rules and regulations, including, but not limited to, this chapter, the California Fire Code and all State Fire Marshall requirements. (Ord. 15-3 § 3)

 

12.08.190 Unlawful to sponsor, authorize or participate in an event without a permit or notice.
    It is unlawful for any person to sponsor or conduct a special event requiring a permit, unless a permit has been issued for the event. It is unlawful for any person to participate in a special event with the knowledge that the sponsor of the event has not been issued the required permit. (Ord. 15-3 § 3)

 

12.08.200 Unlawful to exceed scope of permit.
    It is unlawful to exceed the scope of the permit for the event(s) described in the permit, and in accordance with the terms and conditions of the permit. It is unlawful for the permittee to willfully violate the terms and conditions of the permit, or for any event participant with knowledge thereof, to willfully violate the terms and conditions of the permit. (Ord. 15-3 § 3)

 

12.08.210 Revocation of permit.
    A.  The SEA may revoke a permit upon a finding that the event is not being conducted in compliance with any term, condition, restriction or limitation of the permit, or if he or she finds that, as a result of changed circumstances, any one or more of the grounds for denial have been met. Notice of such action revoking a permit shall be delivered in writing to the permittee by personal service or by registered mail. Appeal to the city council from any such revocation may be taken in accordance with Section 12.08.100.

    B.   The SEA, chief of police and/or fire chief may revoke a permit and close a special event prior to the expiration of the permit in the event of the occurrence of a riot, major disorder or serious breach of the peace when, in their opinion, it is necessary to prevent injury to persons and/or to property. (Ord. 15-3 § 3)

 

12.08.220 Violation—Penalty.
    All violations of the provisions of this chapter are misdemeanors, punishable as set forth in Chapter 1.12. (Ord. 15-3 § 3)

Chapter 12.12 PARKS AND COMMUNITY SERVICE FACILITIES
12.12.010 Purpose of provisions.
    The purpose of this chapter is to establish the rules, regulations and policies for the orderly use of parks and community service facilities for the general enjoyment of the community.

    The regulations contained herein shall not prohibit any person authorized by the city manager from the normal exercise of requested, assigned or contracted duties. (Ord. 89-12 §§ 1.01, 1.05)

 

12.12.020 Definitions.
    The following words and phrases used in this chapter have the meanings indicated in this section unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:

    “Alcoholic beverage” means alcohol, spirits, liquor, beer, wine or any other liquid which contains one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume.

    “Amplified sound” means sound projected and/or transmitted by electronic means including amplifiers, loud speakers, microphones or similar devices which are intended to increase the volume, range, distance or intensity of sound.

    “Building” means and includes those buildings or community service facilities, or any portion thereof, under the supervision of the department of parks and community services.

    “Camp” or “camping” includes:

    1.   Occupying for living or sleeping purposes a camper, trailer, motor home or other vehicle equipped for human habitation;

    2.   The erection of any tent or other shelter; or

    3.   The arrangement of sleeping bags or other bedding for the purpose of, or which will permit, remaining overnight.

    “Charitable purposes” means the use, actual or represented, of money or property for:

    1.   The benefit in any manner of poor, impoverished, destitute, underprivileged, needy, sick, refugee or crippled persons;

    2.   The relief or assistance of any veteran or the benefit of any veterans organization or association or any purpose purporting to aid the general welfare of any state or nation;

    3.   Civic purpose such as social or cultural functions or the improvement or beautification of any state, city or other community;

    4.   The benefit of any fraternal or social organization or association;

    5.   The benefit of educational institutions or for the education of any person or group of persons;

    6.   The benefit of youth service organizations.

    “Children’s playground area” means and includes park areas which are specifically designed and include equipment for use by children.

    “City manager” means the city manager or the city manager’s designee.

    “Commercial activity” means the selling, offering for sale, or solicitation for immediate or future delivery or performance of any goods, wares, merchandise or services of any kind, including, but not limited to, food and beverages in any park or building, but shall not include magazines, books, newspapers, periodicals or pamphlets.

    “Cosponsored” means activities that provide specific organized recreation/community services for participants and for which the department of parks and community services shares the responsibility for the activity with other community agencies and/or organizations or individuals.

    “Decibel” or “dBA” means a unit which denotes the ratio between two quantities which are proportional to power (the number of decibels corresponding to the ratio of two amounts of power is ten times the logarithm to the base of ten is this ratio), as measured by the “A” weighted sound pressure level obtained by meter at slow response, with a reference pressure or twenty microPascals.

    “Designated area” or “building” means an area or building specifically designed or equipped for special uses and set aside for such uses.

    “Fundraising” means and includes the act of making a request, directly or indirectly, for money, credit, property, financial assistance or other thing of value on the plea or representation that such money, credit, property, financial assistance or other thing of value will be used for charitable purposes (as the term “charitable purpose” is defined herein) or for any other purpose other than that of pecuniary profit.

    “Nonprofit organization” means any group or persons associated for scientific, literary, educational, recreational, leisure services, benevolent or other nonprofit purpose not of pecuniary profit.

    “Parks” means and includes all parks, parkways, malls, plazas, greenbelts, gardens, lakes, boating facilities, ponds and any other property owned by the city, including structures thereon, and used, operated or maintained for recreational purposes whether passive or active. The term “park” also includes all off street parking areas which are used or intended to be used in connection therewith. The term “owned” includes any property or interest under which the department of parks and community services operates, maintains or controls said property. The term also includes any property owned or kept by the city as open space, utility easements or rights-of-way, including undeveloped sites for future parks.

    “Person” means and includes persons, individuals, associations, groups, partnerships, firms and corporations.

    “Picnic” means the consumption of food and/or beverage outdoors.

    “Residential property” means a parcel or real property which is developed and used either in part or in whole for residential purposes other than transient uses such as hotels and motels.

    “Sponsored” means activities organized by the city and over which it retains responsibility.

    “Supervisor” or “park supervisor” means the superintendents of parks and community services for the city.

    “Vehicle” means and includes gasoline, electric or other fuel-powered or human or animal powered devices by which any person or object may be propelled, moved or drawn, including gocarts, minibikes, model boats and model airplanes. (Ord. 89-12 § 2.00)

 

12.12.030 Use restrictions.
    No person shall:

    A.  Conduct or carry on an assembly of more than fifty people in a park or ten in a building, which assembly is intended or can reasonably be expected to last more than twenty minutes or which does in fact last more than twenty minutes, unless a facilities use permit first has been issued therefor as provided in this chapter;

    B.   Use any amplified sound in a park, except as provided in this chapter without first obtaining an amplified sound permit. This prohibition shall not apply to the use of any radio, tape player, tape recorder, record player or television for personal use or to broadcasts from emergency vehicles or personnel;

    C.   Engage in any commercial activity in any city park or building. This prohibition does not apply to commercial activity carried on pursuant to a lease or concession contract with the city or to a nonprofit organization pursuant to a city fund-raising permit issued therefor;

    D.  Engage in any fundraising activity in any city park or building, except pursuant to a permit issued therefor as provided in this chapter; provided, however, that funds may be raised for organizational dues or to defray the cost of the activity by a nonprofit organization or cosponsored activity without first securing a permit;

    E.   Use, or interfere with the use of, any city park or building or portion thereof which at the time is reserved by a permit for the use of any other person or group;

    F.   Reserved.

    G.  Possess, serve or consume alcoholic beverages of any kind within any city park or building, except as may be expressly conditioned by permit;

    H.  Bring or permit to remain within any park any domesticated animal, except securely leashed and under control, nor fail to promptly remove to an appropriate receptacle fecal matter deposited by such animals. Domesticated animals shall be prohibited from city buildings except Seeing Eye dogs or other specially trained dogs to assist handicapped or disabled persons;

    I.    Possess, discharge or shoot any firework, firearm, model rocket or bow and arrow in any park, except as may be expressly conditioned by permit; provided, however, that slingshots, airguns, firecrackers and other such devices potentially harmful to park visitors are prohibited in all parks;

    J.    Play or practice golf in any area not expressly designated for such use;

    K.  Swim or wade in any area not expressly designated for such use;

    L.   Bring or permit to remain within any park or building any livestock or exotic undomesticated animals except as may be expressly conditioned by permit;

    M.  Hunt, kill, chase, wound, tease, molest or capture any wild or domestic bird or animal in a park, except chasing or capturing of one’s own animal, nor remove or have in his or her possession the young, eggs or nest of any such creature;

    N.  Intentionally remove, break, injure, deface or disturb any material, equipment, structure, building or improvement, nor cut, dig up, pick, remove or destroy any turf, tree, plant, shrub, bloom or flower in a park;

    O.  Contaminate in any way any water, fountain, pools, lakes, rivers, other water supply or wash any clothing or cooking utensils in any such waters in a park;

    P.   Dispose of trash or garbage not accumulated within park areas, nor dispose of trash or garbage accumulated within park areas other than in receptacles provided for this purpose;

    Q.  Start or maintain fires in parks other than in “on-site” barbecue pits or personal portable barbecues within designated picnic areas, nor fail to extinguish live coals or fires before leaving the picnic area;

    R.   Open, expose or interfere with any water system or utility, provided that this prohibition shall not apply to the use of any drinking fountain for its intended purpose;

    S.   Use, operate or leave standing, whether attended or unattended, any vehicle or motorized objects in a park, except as provided in this chapter;

    T.   Camp in any city park, parking area, or building without a use permit therefor as provided in this chapter;

    U.  Remain or loiter in any park or building between one hour after sundown and six a.m. except as expressly conditioned by permit;

    V.  Enter, be or remain in any city park or building unless he or she complies with all regulations set forth in this chapter or procedures adopted pursuant thereto;

    W.  A maximum load limit of ten thousand pounds allowed on the Broderick Boat Ramp facility. (Ord. 03-21 § 1 (part); Ord. 96-20 § 2; Ord. 93-21 § 1(A); Ord. 89-12 § 3.00)

 

12.12.040 Permits—Generally.
    A permit must be obtained from the city as provided in this chapter whenever any park or building of the city is required for the exclusive, restricted use by any individual or group. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, restricted use shall be granted on generally a “first-come, first-served” basis. (Ord. 89-12 § 4.01)

 

12.12.050 Permits—Application.
    Whenever any permit is required by a provision of this chapter, an application therefor shall be filed with the department of parks and community services at least five business days for park facilities or three days for buildings, but not more than twelve calendar months, in advance of the earliest date for which the permit is sought stating:

    A.  The name, address and telephone number of the applicant, who must be twenty-one years of age or older;

    B.   The name, address and telephone number of the person, group, organization or corporation sponsoring the proposed activity;

    C.   The date, hours and facility or portion thereof for which the permit is desired;

    D.  The nature of the proposed activity including a description of the equipment to be used in connection therewith;

    E.   The estimated attendance;

    F.   Whether the applicant has insurance covering the described activity and, if so, the type, amount, company and agent; and

    G.  Any other information respecting the public health, safety and welfare which the city manager or authorized designee finds necessary to a fair determination, including assurances the activity will not result in injury to persons or property or involve violations of the law. (Ord. 89-12 § 4.02)

 

12.12.060 Permits—Waiver of time limits.
    The city manager or the city manager’s authorized designee may waive the time period for filing a permit application where circumstances make it impractical or unnecessary, as when the issuance of a permit would not create a scheduling conflict, or when the activity is spontaneous, as in response to an event of obvious local or national importance. (Ord. 89-12 § 4.03)

 

12.12.070 Permits—Standards for issuance.
    The city manager or the city manager’s designee shall issue a permit under this chapter unless first expressly finding that:

    A.  The proposed activity and use will unreasonably or unnecessarily interfere with or detract from the public health, welfare, safety and general enjoyment of the facility;

    B.   The proposed activity and use are reasonably anticipated to incite violence, crime or disorderly conduct;

    C.   The proposed activity and use will entail unusual, extraordinary or burdensome expense or security operation by the city;

    D.  The facilities requested have been reserved for other use or will not accommodate the desired activity;

    E.   The applicant fails to agree in writing to all conditions of use including where applicable:

    1.   The payment of fees,

    2.   To provide deposit for use of special equipment or utensils,

    3.   The use of adult monitors at the prescribed ratio,

    4.   To clean, repair and restore the park facility, building or recreation area or portion thereof to the condition it was in immediately prior to the activity,

    5.   To provide satisfactory evidence of adequate insurance coverage,

    6.   To relinquish any issued permit if a priority permit subsequently is issued in accordance with provisions of this chapter;

    F.   The applicant or sponsoring group has misused a park or building of the city in such a way as to cast doubt on the responsibility of the applicant or group;

    G.  The applicant failed to file a timely application.

    Where one or more of the conditions above exist justifying denial, the city manager or the city manager’s authorized designee shall notify the applicant thereof within two business days of application. Otherwise, the permit shall be issued the following business day. (Ord. 89-12 § 4.04)

 

12.12.080 Types of permits.
    The following types of permits are expressly required where applicable:

    A.  Facility use permit. This permit is the basic permit for the exclusive, restricted use of a park or building or portions thereof.

    B.   Amplified sound permit. In addition to any other permit required by this chapter, the use of amplified sound in any park or building requires such a permit and shall be subject to the following regulations:

    1.   No person shall use amplified sound except between sunrise and sunset unless otherwise expressly conditioned in the permit;

    2.   No sound shall be amplified except human speech or music, or both;

    3.   No amplified sound may exceed a noise level of eighty-four dBA, at a distance of thirty-five feet from the noise source(s), or exceed fifty-five dBA on residential property. The provision of this paragraph shall not apply to the use of any amplified sound by any peace officer, or employee of the city, while engaging in the performance of his or her duties.

    C.   Fundraising permit. In addition to any other permit required by this chapter, any nonprofit organization desiring to raise funds in any park or building shall first obtain a fund raising permit. Fund raising permits must be approved for issuance by the parks commission and are not subject to the time limitations of Section 12.12.070. (Ord. 89-12 § 4.05)

 

12.12.090 Priority reservations.
    Organized member groups of the East Yolo sports federation shall be considered for priority issuance of park use permits over any other use, except for programs sponsored or cosponsored by the city, or conducted under agreement with the city.

    A.  Priority consideration hereunder shall include the revocation of existing conflicting use permits if application by the member group is made not less than ten business days before the earliest use date of the conflicting permit which is to be revoked.

    B.   Priority consideration hereunder extends only to park facilities designated for scheduled use of the type requested.

    C.   Conflicting use permit requests by two or more members of the East Yolo sports federation shall all be treated as nonpriority requests.

    D.  For the purpose of this section, the East Yolo sports federation shall be deemed to exist when four or more nonprofit groups organized primarily to engage in team athletics and whose members are principally residents of the city, and which groups are recognized as such by the city, join together to promote their common interest in a manner acceptable to the city. (Ord. 89-12 § 4.06)

 

12.12.100 Exhibition of permit.
    No person shall fail to produce and exhibit a permit he or she claims to have upon request of the park supervisor or designee or any peace officer who desires to inspect such permit for the purpose of enforcing compliance with this chapter or any permit condition. (Ord. 89-12 § 4.08)

 

12.12.110 Liability of permittee.
    The person or persons to whom a permit is issued shall be liable for any loss, damage or injury sustained by any person or property by reason of the negligence or intentional acts of the person or persons to whom such permit has been issued. All persons to whom a use permit has been granted must agree in writing to hold the city harmless and indemnify the city from any and all liability for injury to persons or property occurring as a result of the activity of permittee or as caused by any participant in such activity. (Ord. 89-12 § 4.07)

 

12.12.120 Appeal of permit revocation or denial.
    An applicant may appeal the revocation or denial of any permit under this chapter to the city parks commission, who may affirm, reverse or amend the action. The appeal must be filed in writing within three business days of the decision to revoke or deny the permit. The decision of the city parks commission may be further appealed to the city council in accordance with the uniform appeals and hearings procedure as established by Chapter 1.08. (Ord. 89-12 § 9.01)

 

12.12.130 Fees.
    Such fees as may be established from time to time by the parks commission and approved by the city council for the use of city parks and buildings shall be collected at the time of issuance of permits, and no permit for which a fee has been established shall be issued if such fee has not first been paid. The schedule of fees shall be reviewed annually by the parks commission. (Ord. 89-12 § 5.00)

 

12.12.140 Sanitation.
    In parks without toilet facilities, or where available facilities are below the ratio required in this chapter, use permits shall require that chemical toilets be provided at the rate specified in this section, as a condition of use.

    A.  For any event where the estimated attendance is at least fifty persons, and not more than one hundred persons, two toilets shall be provided at the permittee’s expense.

    B.   Additional toilets for attendance in excess of one hundred persons shall be provided at the permittee’s expense at the ratio of one toilet for each additional two hundred persons or fraction thereof, up to one thousand five hundred persons.

    C.   Additional toilets for attendance in excess of one thousand five hundred persons shall be provided at the permittee’s expense at the ratio of one toilet for each additional five hundred persons or fraction thereof. (Ord. 89-12 § 6.00)

 

12.12.150 Motorized vehicles.
    While within the boundaries of any city park, no person shall:

    A.  Drive or operate any motorized vehicle or craft except in areas specifically designated, or as expressly conditioned by permit;

    B.   Park any motorized vehicle except in areas specifically designed as parking areas, or as expressly conditioned by permit;

    C.   Park or otherwise allow his or her vehicle to remain within the park during the hours the park is closed, whether the park is physically restricted or not, except as may be expressly conditioned by permit;

    D.  Wash, detail or repair any vehicle;

    E.   Drive or operate any motorized vehicle contrary to the California Vehicle Code, except as may be expressly conditioned by permit. (Ord. 89-12 § 7.01)

 

12.12.160 Bicycles.
    While within the boundaries of any park no person shall:

    A.  Ride a bicycle across any turf or planted area, except as may be expressly conditioned by permit;

    B.   Park or leave standing a bicycle except in racks or areas designated therefor;

    C.   Ride a bicycle in any manner that presents a hazard to the public. (Ord. 89-12 § 7.02)

 

12.12.170 Boats, watercraft.
    While within the boundaries of city boat facilities no person shall:

    A.  Leave a boat or watercraft moored to dock for more than fifteen minutes;

    B.   Leave standing or moored any boat or watercraft vehicle in parking area or dock area respectively, for purposes of repair or maintenance without prior approval of the city manager or the city manager’s authorized designee;

    C.   Anchoring a boat or watercraft in a manner obstructing public use of dock or boating facilities. (Ord. 89-12 § 7.03)

 

12.12.180 Facility use schedule.
    The city manager or his or her authorized designee shall promulgate a schedule which shows uses and capacities of each park or building. Such schedule shall be approved by the city parks commission and adopted by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 89-12 § 8.00)

 

12.12.190 Special events not covered.
    Consistent with the terms and procedures set forth in this chapter, the city manager shall provide for special events and circumstances not covered by this chapter. (Ord. 89-12 § 9.02)

 

12.12.200 Decorations.
    Plans for decorations authorized in connection with the use of any city park or building must be approved prior to installation, and are subject to the following limitations:

    A.  Only fireproof or fire-retardant decoration material may be used.

    B.   Nails, tacks or adhesives which might deface the property may not be used.

    C.   Facility exits may not be covered in such a way as to restrict free ingress or egress or to visually obstruct or camouflage them at any time. (Ord. 89-12 § 9.05)

 

12.12.210 Facility cleanup.
    Users of any city park or building are responsible for cleaning up the facility or area after use. Permit holders must prepare and/or clean up within the time for which the permit is issued.

    Special custodial and maintenance services may be arranged at the permittee’s expense, or the city may bill the applicant for such special services performed or ordered by the city or a cleaning or repair deposit may be levied at the city’s option from which special custodial, maintenance and repair expenses shall be paid prior to refund. (Ord. 89-12 § 9.03)

 

12.12.220 Keys and locks.
    No person other than one acting under the direction of the city manager or the city manager’s designee shall duplicate or cause to be duplicated a key used by the city for any lock of whatever type or description, nor transfer or permit the unauthorized use of a key by anyone other than the person to whom it is issued, nor fail to promptly return the key after its use has been fulfilled or revoked. (Ord. 89-12 § 9.04)

 

12.12.230 Administration.
    The city manager is responsible for the administration of the rules set forth in this chapter, and is hereby authorized to prepare procedural regulations consistent herewith to amplify the provisions of these rules, and to promulgate and enforce compliance with such regulations so as to promote the intent and purpose of this chapter. (Ord. 89-12 § 1.02)

 

12.12.240 Violation—Penalty.
    A.  Except as provided in subsection B of this section, a violation of any provision of this chapter or any rule or regulation adopted pursuant to it is a misdemeanor, punishable as set forth in the city’s general penalty law.

    B.   Malicious injury or destruction of any real or personal property which constitutes vandalism under Penal Code Section 594 is subject to prosecution under that section, punishable as either a misdemeanor or a felony, as provided therein.

    C.   The city manager or the city manager’s authorized designee shall have the authority to amend, modify, suspend or revoke a use permit upon finding of violation.

    D.  The city manager or the city manager’s authorized designee may close or cause to be closed any city park, building, recreation area or portion thereof, and remove all persons therefrom when in the city manager’s judgment such closing will best preserve the public peace, prevent damage to public property or quell or prevent violent disturbance. The city manager or the city manager’s authorized designee may also cause to be removed any and all persons whose presence on the premises is disruptive to the normal and safe use and enjoyment of the premises. (Ord. 89-12 § 1.04)

Chapter 12.15 SKATEBOARD PARKS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING USE OF SKATEBOARD PARKS
12.15.010 Definitions.
    For purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:

    “Skateboard” means a board of any material, which has wheels attached to it and which is propelled or moved by human, gravitational, or mechanical power and to which there is not fixed any device or mechanisms to turn or control the wheels.

    “Skating” means the use of a skateboard or skates by an individual.

    “Skates” means a device worn on or affixed to the feet with small wheels for skating on a surface other than ice.

    “Skateboard park” means an area designated as a skateboard park by the city of West Sacramento. (Ord. 03-14 § 3)

 

12.15.020 Safety equipment requirement.
    Any individual skating or riding and/or using a skateboard at the skateboard park must wear a helmet, elbow pads and kneepads. (Ord. 03-14 § 3)

 

12.15.030 Regulations for use.
    Individuals riding, skating, and/or using a skateboard at a skateboard park and all persons in charge of minors who are riding, skating and/or using the skateboard park are subject to the following regulations:

    A.  It is unlawful for an individual to use the skateboard park for any purpose other than skating or skateboarding.

    B.   It is unlawful for an individual to use and/or possess alcohol or drugs in the skateboard park.

    C.   It is unlawful for an individual to litter in the skateboard park.

    D.  It is unlawful for an individual to cause graffiti or tagging in or on the skateboard park.

    E.   It is unlawful for an individual to skate or skateboard on the fence or railing of the skateboard park.

    F.   It is unlawful for an individual to skate or skateboard on the non-public property on which the skateboard park is located.

    G.  It is unlawful for an individual not authorized by the city to remain in the skateboard park when said park is closed for public use. (Ord. 03-14 § 3)

 

12.15.040 Hours of operation.
    The director of parks and community services shall establish the hours of operation for a skateboard park. Such hours shall be posted at the skateboard park. (Ord. 03-14 § 3)

 

12.15.050 Violation—Penalty.
    Violation of Section 12.15.020 shall result in the removal of the individual from the skateboard park. Violation of Section 12.15.030 shall be an infraction punishable by:

    A.  A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for a first violation;

    B.   A fine not exceeding two hundred dollars for a second violation within one year; and

    C.   A fine not exceeding five hundred dollars for each additional violation within one year. (Ord. 03-14 § 3)

Chapter 12.16 PUBLIC BOATING FACILITIES
12.16.010 Purpose—Authority.
    The provisions of this chapter are adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 660 of the Harbors and Navigation Code of the state for the purpose of establishing and maintaining boating regulation signs at public boating facilities along the Sacramento River. (County code § 9-2.01)

 

12.16.020 Definitions.
    For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:

    “Powerboat” means any vessel propelled by machinery, whether or not such machinery is the principal source of propulsion.

    “Public boating facility” means any marina, way, landing float, launching site, wharf, runway, dock or other place commonly used for embarkation upon, or debarkation from, the Sacramento River by powerboat, which facility is available for the use of the public, either with or without the payment of consideration. (County code § 9-2.02)

 

12.16.030 Signs—Purpose.
    The city council finds and declares that the establishment and maintenance of boating regulation signs, as provided in this chapter, is necessary and appropriate for the preservation and protection of the public health, safety and general welfare for the following reasons:

    A.  Powerboats moving at a high speed constitute an extreme danger to persons engaged in bathing, swimming or diving who may be struck by a moving boat. Powerboats moving at a high speed also create wakes and turbulence in the water which in turn cause the movement and surge of landing floats, making conditions dangerous for persons embarking or disembarking from their own craft.

    B.   Although Section 655.2 of the Harbors and Navigation Code of the state sets forth special speed limits for powerboats operated upon navigable waters, and although such speed limits are applicable to the waters of the Sacramento River located within the city, many persons who operate powerboats are unaware of the provisions of Section 655.2.

    C.   In recent years there have been numerous reports by citizens of violations of the provisions of Section 655.2 of the Harbors and Navigation Code of the state along and upon the waters of the Sacramento River within the city. By posting the provisions of Section 655.2 in places used by the boating public, potential violations of Section 655.2 may be averted through the education of persons who are ignorant of the existing speed limits.

    D.  The posting of the provisions of Section 655.2 of the Harbors and Navigation Code of the state, as provided in this chapter, has been approved by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Coast Guard and the Division of Small Craft Harbors of the Department of Parks and Recreation of the state. (County code § 9-2.06)

 

12.16.040 Signs—Required.
    Every person conducting, operating or maintaining a public boating facility shall, by June 15, 1966, install and thereafter maintain boating regulation signs, as provided by this chapter, on the premises of such public boating facility. (County code § 9-2.03)

 

12.16.050 Signs—Construction—Contents.
    The department of parks and community services shall have prepared boating regulation signs in sufficient number to supply all the public boating facilities which are located within the city. The signs shall be constructed of metal and shall be twenty-four inches by eighteen inches in dimensions. The following legend shall be printed on such signs in black on white background surrounded by a one and one-half inch orange border:

 

Notice To Boaters

 

    State law makes it a misdemeanor to operate your powerboat in excess of five (5) nautical miles per hour when you are:

    (1)  Within 100 feet of bathers;

    (2)  Within 200 feet of a bathing beach;

    (3)  Within 200 feet of a swimming float, diving platform, or lifeline; or

    (4)  Within 200 feet of a way or landing float to which boats are made fast or which is used for the embarkation or debarkation of passengers.

 

(Ord. 03-21 § 1; county code § 9-2.04)

 

12.16.060 Signs—Display.
    Boating regulation signs shall be prominently displayed in such a manner as to be clearly visible to all persons embarking upon the river by boat. (County code § 9-2.05)

 

12.16.070 Enforcement.
    The city police chief shall enforce the provisions of this chapter. (County code § 9-2.07)

Chapter 12.20 BOATING AND WATER RECREATION
Article I. Generally
12.20.010 Scope.
    The provisions of this chapter are applicable to and govern all public waters, including, but not limited to, lakes and rivers, or portions thereof, situated within the boundaries of the city over which the city has police power jurisdiction, either exclusively or concurrently with the United States or the state, or both, insofar as the provisions of this chapter do not conflict with applicable statutes or regulations of the United States or the state; provided, however, the provisions of this chapter shall not be held to apply to documented vessels and their tows. (County code § 9-1.01)

 

12.20.020 Aquaplaning and water skiing.
    It is unlawful for any person to operate a boat, vehicle or other motive power which is pulling or towing any aquaplane or water skier, or for any person to ride any aquaplane or water ski, between sunset and sunrise. (County code § 9-1.15 (a))

 

12.20.030 Area designation and marking.
    A.  Authorized. The city council, by resolution, as to water under its jurisdiction, and the authorized representative of any other public agency, as to water under its jurisdiction, may designate and cause to be appropriately marked boat launching areas, areas designed exclusively for swimming, areas where swimming is prohibited, areas where boats are prohibited, areas of restricted speed or emergency areas and may designate boating and personnel control signs and devices and change the same from time to time as the public safety and welfare require. When so marked, it is unlawful for any person to fail to comply with such designations. Such designations shall be reported to the United States Army Corps of Engineers for notification to mariners.

    B.   Boating on Putah Creek. It is unlawful for any person to operate any vessel in the waters of Putah Creek westerly of County Road 86 at such times as:

     1.     The flow of water at Monticello Dam exceeds the rate of seven hundred fifty cubic feet per second; and

    2.   Control signs or devices prohibiting boating are posted at the Putah Creek fishing access area.

    For the purposes of this subsection, “vessel” is defined as set forth in subsection (aa) of Section 651 of the Harbors and Navigation Code of the state.

    C.   Signs. The director of the department of parks and community services shall cause control signs or devices prohibiting boating to be posted at the Putah Creek fishing access area at such times as the flow of water at Monticello Dam exceeds the rate of seven hundred fifty cubic feet per second. (Ord. 03-21 § 1 (part); county code § 9-1.16)

 

12.20.040 Swimming in prohibited areas.
    It is unlawful for any person to swim in any area designated as a nonswimming area, or more than two hundred feet from the shore, or outside the boundaries of a marked swimming area, or in a location or in such a manner as to create a hazardous or dangerous condition to the swimmer or any other person or object; provided, however, the provisions of this section shall not be construed to limit skin diving when areas for such activity are properly marked. (County code § 9-1.17)

 

12.20.050 Dumping debris in water.
    It is unlawful for any person to dump or place in any land-locked public waters any garbage, trash, gasoline, oil, sawdust or other foreign matter from a boat, the shore or any other place. (County code § 9-1.18)

 

12.20.060 Enforcement.
    It is the duty of the city police chief to enforce the provisions of this chapter. (County code § 9-1.22)

 

12.20.070 Violation—Penalty.
    A.  Notices to Appear. Whenever a person is arrested for the violation of the provisions of this chapter and such person is not immediately taken before a magistrate, as is more fully set forth in the Penal Code of the state, the arresting officer shall prepare, in duplicate, a written notice to appear in court containing the name and address of such person, the offense charged and the time when and place where such person shall appear in court. The time set forth in the notice to appear shall be at least ten days after such arrest. The place set forth in the notice to appear shall be before a judge of any court having jurisdiction of the offense who is nearest and most accessible with reference to the place where the arrest was made.

    B.   Promises to Appear. The officer shall deliver one copy of the notice to appear to the arrested person, and the arrested person, in order to secure release, shall give his or her written promise so to appear in court by signing the notice, which shall be retained by the officer. Thereupon, the arresting officer shall forthwith release the person arrested from custody.

    C.   Bail—Appearance in Court. The officer shall, as soon as practicable, file the notice with the magistrate specified therein. Thereupon the magistrate shall fix the amount of bail which, in his or her judgment, in accordance with the provisions of Section 853.6 of the Penal Code of the state, shall be reasonable and sufficient for the appearance of the defendant and shall endorse upon the bottom a statement signed by him in the form set forth in Section 853.6 of the Penal Code of the state. The defendant may, prior to the date upon which he or she promised to appear in court, deposit with the magistrate the amount of bail thus set. Thereafter, at the time when the case is called for arraignment before the magistrate, if the defendant shall not appear, either in person or by counsel, the magistrate may declare the bail forfeited and may, in his or her discretion, order that no further proceedings shall be had in such case. Upon the making of such order that no further proceedings shall be had, all sums deposited as bail shall forthwith be paid into the city treasury.

    D.  Failure to Appear—Warrants for Arrest. Any person willfully violating his or her written promise to appear in court shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, regardless of the disposition of the charge upon which he or she was originally arrested. When a person signs a written promise to appear at the time and place set forth therein, and has not posted bail as provided in said Penal Code, and fails to appear at the time and place specified, a warrant for his or her arrest shall be issued by the magistrate within twenty days after the failure of such person to appear as promised. (Ord. 03-21 § 1 (part); county code § 9-1.23)

 

Article II. Speed Limits on the Sacramento River
12.20.080 Authority.
    This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority conferred by Section 660 of the Harbors and Navigation Code of the state. (County code § 9-4.01)

 

12.20.090 Definitions.
    As used in this chapter, unless the context clearly requires a different meaning, all words shall have the meanings as provided in Section 651 of the Harbors and Navigation Code of the state, including any amendment made thereto subsequent to May 15, 1984. (County code § 9-4.02)

 

12.20.100 Speed limit established.
    No person shall operate any motorboat or other motor-powered vessel at a speed in excess of five miles per hour relative to the stream bottom for upstream speeds and relative to the water surface for downstream speeds on that part of the waters of the Sacramento River located between the I Street bridge and the Tower Street bridge within the city. (County code § 9-4.03)

 

12.20.110 Exceptions.
    This chapter does not apply to any vessel being used by a peace officer of any federal, state or local agency while engaged in law enforcement activities for which the use of such vessel is reasonably necessary, nor to vessels operated by the state, or any agency thereof, in the performance of official duties. (County code § 9-4.04)

 

12.20.120 Violation—Penalty.
    Any person violating the provisions of Section 12.20.100 is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as set forth in Chapter 1.12. (County code § 9-4.05)

Chapter 12.24 UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICTS
12.24.010 Definitions.
    For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:

    “City manager” means the city manager or designee.

    “Clerk” means the city clerk.

    “Commission” means the Public Utilities Commission of the state.

    “Person” means and includes individuals, firms, corporations, partnerships and their agents and employees.

    “Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures” means poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms, braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits, appliances, attachments and appurtenances located aboveground within a district and used or useful in supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service.

    “Underground utility district” or “district” means that area in the city within which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are prohibited as such area is described in a resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 12.24.030.

    “Utility” means and includes all persons or entities supplying electric, communication or similar associated service by means of electrical materials or devices. (Ord. 95-1 § 1 (part); county code § 5-9.01)

 

12.24.020 Public necessity—Hearings.
    The city council may, from time to time, call public hearings to ascertain whether the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures within designated areas of the city and the underground installation of wires and facilities for supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service. The city clerk shall notify all affected property owners, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, and utilities concerned by mail of the time and place of such hearings at least fifteen days prior to the date thereof. Each such hearing shall be open to the public and may be continued from time to time. At each such hearing all persons interested shall be given the opportunity to be heard. The decision of the city council shall be final and conclusive. (County code § 5-9.02)

 

12.24.030 Designation of districts—Generally.
    If, after any such public hearing, the city council finds that the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires such removal and such underground installation within a designated area, the city council shall, by resolution, declare such designated area an underground utility district and order such removal and underground installation. Such resolution shall include a description of the area comprising such district and shall fix the time within which such removal and underground installation shall be accomplished and within which affected property owners shall be ready to receive underground service. A reasonable time shall be allowed for such removal and underground installation, having due regard for the availability of labor, materials and equipment necessary for such removal and for the installation of such underground facilities as may be occasioned thereby. (County code § 5-9.03)

 

12.24.040 Designation of districts—Notices.
    Within ten days after the effective date of a resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 12.24.030, the city clerk shall notify all affected utilities and all persons owning real property within the district created by such resolution of the adoption thereof. The city clerk shall further notify such affected property owners of the necessity that, if they or any person occupying such property desires to continue to receive electric, communication or similar or associated service, they or such occupant shall provide all necessary facility changes on his or her premises so as to receive such service from the lines of the supplying utility or utilities at a new location subject to the applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the commission.

    Notification by the city clerk shall be made by mailing a copy of the resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 12.24.030, together with a copy of the provisions of this chapter, to affected property owners as such are shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the affected utilities. (County code § 5-9.07)

 

12.24.050 Responsibility—Utility companies.
    If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service within a district created by any resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 12.24.030, the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of the conduits, conductors and associated equipment required to be furnished by it under its applicable rules, regulations and tariffs on file with the commission. (County code § 5-9.08)

 

12.24.060 Responsibility—Property owners.
    A.  Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting a building or structure within a district shall construct and provide that portion of the service connection on his or her property between the facilities set forth in Section 12.24.050 and the termination facility on or within the building or structure being served, all in accordance with the applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the commission. If such construction is not accomplished by any person within the time provided for in the resolution enacted pursuant to the provisions of Section 12.24.030, the director shall give notice in writing to the person in possession of such premises and a notice in writing to the owner thereof as shown on the last equalized assessment roll to provide the required underground facilities within ten days after the receipt of such notice.

    B.   The notice to provide the required underground facilities may be given either by personal service or by mail. In the event of service by mail on either of such persons, the notice shall be deposited in the United States mail in a sealed envelope with postage prepaid, addressed to the person in possession of such premises at such premises, and the notice shall be addressed to the owner thereof as such owner’s name appears, and shall be addressed to such owner’s last known address as the same appears on the last equalized assessment roll. If notice is given by mail, such notice shall be deemed to have been received by the person to whom it has been sent within forty-eight hours after the mailing thereof. If notice is given by mail to either the owner or occupant of such premises, the director shall, within forty-eight hours after the mailing thereof, cause a copy thereof, printed on a card not less than eight inches by ten inches in size, to be posted in a conspicuous place on such premises.

    C.   The notice given by the city manager to provide required underground facilities shall particularly specify what work is required to be done and shall state that if such work is not completed within thirty days after receipt of such notice, the director will provide such required underground facilities, in which case the cost and expense thereof shall be assessed against the property benefitted and become a lien upon such property.

    D.  If, upon the expiration of the thirty-day period, such required underground facilities have not been provided, the city manager shall forthwith proceed to do the work; provided, however, if such premises are unoccupied and no electric or communications services are being furnished thereto, the city manager shall, in lieu of providing the required underground facilities, have the authority to order the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated facilities supplying utility service to such property. Upon completion of the work by the city manager, he or she shall file a written report with the city council, setting forth the fact that the required underground facilities have been provided and the cost thereof, together with the legal description of the property against which such cost is to be assessed. The city council shall, thereupon, fix a time and place for hearing protests against the assessment of the cost of such work upon such premises, which time shall not be less than ten days thereafter.

    E.   The city manager shall, forthwith, upon the time for hearing such protests having been fixed, give notice in writing to the person in possession of such premises and a notice in writing thereof to the owner thereof, in the manner provided in subsection B for the giving of the notice to provide the required underground facilities, of the time and place that the city council will pass upon such report and will hear protests against such assessment. Such notice shall also set forth the amount of the proposed assessment.

    F.   Upon the date and hour set for the hearing of protests, the city council shall hear and consider the report and all protests, if there be any, and then proceed to affirm, modify or reject the assessment.

    G.  If any assessment is not paid within five days after its confirmation by the city council, the amount of the assessment shall become a lien upon the property against which the assessment is made by the city manager, and the city manager is here directed to turn over to the city finance director a notice of lien on each of such properties on which the assessment has not been paid, and the city finance director shall add the amount of such assessment to the next regular bill for taxes levied against the premises upon which the assessment was not paid. Such assessment shall be due and payable at the same time as such property taxes are due and payable and, if not paid when due and payable, shall bear interest at the rate of six percent per year. (Ord. 95-1 § 1 (part); county code § 5-9.09)

 

12.24.070 Responsibility—City.
    The city shall remove at its own expense all city-owned equipment from all poles required to be removed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter in ample time to enable the owner or user of such poles to remove the same within the time specified in the resolution enacted pursuant to the provisions of Section 12.24.030. (County code § 5-9.10)

 

12.24.080 Unlawful acts.
    Whenever the city council creates an underground utility district and orders the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures therein, as provided in Section 12.24.030, it is unlawful for any person or utility to erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures in the district after the date when such overhead facilities are required to be removed by resolution, except as such overhead facilities may be required to furnish service to an owner or occupant of property prior to the performance by such owner or occupant of the underground work necessary for such owner or occupant to continue to receive utility service, as provided in Section 12.24.060, and for such reasonable time required to remove the facilities after such work has been performed, and except as otherwise provided in this chapter. (County code § 5-9.04)

 

12.24.090 Exceptions—Emergencies, unusual circumstances.
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, overhead facilities may be installed and maintained, for a period not to exceed ten days, without the authority of the city council in order to provide emergency service. The city council may grant special permission, on such terms as the city council may deem appropriate, in cases of unusual circumstances without discrimination as to any person or utility, to erect, construct, install, maintain, use or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures. (County code § 5-9.05)

 

12.24.100 Other exceptions.
    The provisions of this chapter and any resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 12.24.030, unless otherwise provided in such resolution, do not apply to the following types of facilities:

    A.  City facilities or equipment installed under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the city manager;

    B.   Poles or electroliers used exclusively for street lighting;

    C.   Overhead wires (exclusive of supporting structures) crossing any portion of a district within which overhead wires have been prohibited, or connecting to buildings on the perimeter of a district, when such wires originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are not prohibited;

    D.  Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used for the transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of thirty-four thousand five hundred volts;

    E.   Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location on the building to another location on the same building or to an adjacent building without crossing or overhanging any public right-of-way;

    F.   Antennae, associated equipment and supporting structures used by a utility for furnishing communication services;

    G.  Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface mounted transformers, pedestal mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts; and

    H.  Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used or to be used in conjunction with construction projects. (Ord. 95-1 § 1 (part); county code § 5-9.06)

 

12.24.110 Extension of time.
    In the event any act required by the provisions of this chapter or by a resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 12.24.030 cannot be performed within the time provided on account of shortage of materials, war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor disturbances, civil disobedience or any other circumstances beyond the control of the actor, the time within which such act shall be accomplished shall be extended for a period equivalent to the time of such limitation. (County code § 5-9.11)

Chapter 12.30 PARK FACILITY DEVELOPMENT FEES
12.30.010 Definitions.
    The following words are defined for purposes of this chapter:

    “Building permit” means the permit issued or required by the city for the construction of any dwelling, industrial or commercial unit pursuant to and as defined by the Uniform Building Code.

    “Department” means the department of parks and community services.

    “Director” means the director of the department of parks and community services.

    “Dwelling unit” means a building or part of a building designed for occupancy as a residence by one family.

    “Facilities” means city-wide park and recreation facilities, land, improvements or infrastructure shown and included in the park master plan.

    “Fee” or “city-wide park fee” means the fee established by this chapter. The fee shall be collected prior to the issuance of any building permit. The fee shall be used solely to finance the facilities.

    “Industrial development” means a building or a portion of a building engaged in processing and manufacturing of materials and/or the manufacture of previously prepared materials including processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, packaging, storage, sales and distribution of such products.

    “Mobile home park” means any area or tract of land where one or more mobile home sites are rented or held out for rent. “Mobile home park” includes the terms “mobile home court,” “trailer court” and “trailer park.”

    “Motel/hotel/transient houses/inns” means any transitory or temporary and/or boarding facility where no kitchen facility is included in the living unit.

    “Multiple-family dwelling” means a building designed for occupancy as a residence by two or more families, living independently of each other. Provided, that multiple-family dwelling also includes forms of group living, including, without limitation, senior citizen homes, retirement homes or boarding homes.

    “Nonresidential unit” means a building or part of a building used for office, retail or industrial uses.

    “Office development” means buildings or portions of buildings wherein services are performed involving administrative, professional or clerical services.

    “Retail development” means a building or a portion of a building engaged in the sale of merchandise, foods, goods and services.

    “Single-family dwelling” means a building designed for occupancy as a residence by one family, including mobile homes. (Ord. 90-9 § 3)

 

12.30.020 Imposition of fee.
    A.  Fee Imposed. A parks facilities development fee shall be imposed as a condition of the issuance of all building permits in the city. The city council shall, by resolution, set forth the specific amount of the parks development facilities fee, identify the specific public improvements to be financed thereby, describe the estimated costs of the facilities, describe the reasonable relationship between the fee and the various types of new development, and describe the relationship between the need for the facility and the various types of new development. The city may, in its sole discretion, accept from an applicant for a building permit an offer to dedicate land for use as a city park in lieu of all or any portion of a parks facilities development fee, when the land is substantially equal in value, as determined by the city, to the fee or portion of the fee imposed upon said applicant.

    B.   Date Due. The parks facilities development fee shall be paid by each applicant prior to issuance of a building permit. (Ord. 93-23 § 4: Ord. 90-9 § 3)

 

12.30.030 Exception.
    There is excepted from the fee imposed by this chapter the construction and occupancy of any unit which is a replacement for a unit being removed from the same lot or parcel of land. The exception shall apply as a credit not to exceed the fee which would be payable under this chapter if the unit being replaced were being newly constructed. (Ord. 90-9 § 3)

 

12.30.040 Refunds.
    Any fee, penalty and interest paid to the city under this chapter for any building, unit of a building or mobile home park which is not constructed shall be refunded upon application of the payor and a showing to the satisfaction of the director of finance that such building or unit has not been constructed or construction commenced, and that the building permit issued for such building or unit has been canceled or surrendered or otherwise does not authorize the construction of such building or unit. (Ord. 90-9 § 3)

 

12.30.050 Proceeds.
    All proceeds from the fees, penalty and interest collected under this chapter shall be paid into a segregated fund of the city, which fund shall be used only for the acquisition, development, renovation, improvement and replacement of parks and recreational facilities and their development, including equipment for recreational purposes. (Ord. 90-9 § 3)

 

12.30.060 Inflationary adjustments.
    The parking facilities development fee shall be adjusted each succeeding July 1st, commencing July 1, 1999, to reflect inflationary costs. The fees shall be adjusted by the ratio which the Engineering News Record’s Construction Cost Index (twenty cities) for the most recent July 1st bears to the July 1, 1998 index. (Ord. 98-17 § 1: Ord. 90-9 § 3)

Chapter 12.34 TRAFFIC IMPACT FEES
Note
*      Prior ordinance history: Ord. 91-06.

 

12.34.010 Purpose and authority.
    The purpose of this chapter is to further the goals and objectives of the city general plan transportation and circulation element and to provide a source of funding for the transportation improvements identified in the city’s capital improvement program. The city council has determined that a fee as a condition of the issuance of building permits is necessary to defray the actual or estimated cost of constructing the necessary improvements. The fees authorized by this chapter are consistent with Goals A and E of the transportation and circulation element of the city’s general plan, as well as other provisions, reports and studies.

    This chapter is enacted pursuant to the city’s police powers under California Constitution Article XI, Section 7, and Government Code Section 66000, et seq. (Ord. 93-18 § 3)

 

12.34.020 Imposition of fee.
    A.  Fee Imposed. A traffic mitigation fee shall be imposed as a condition of the issuance of all building permits in the city. The city council shall, by resolution, set forth the specific amount of the traffic mitigation fee, identify the specific public improvements to be financed thereby, describe the estimated costs of these facilities, describe the reasonable relationship between the fee and the various types of new developments, and describe the relationship between the need for the facility and the various types of new developments.

    B.   Date Due. The traffic mitigation fee shall be paid by each applicant prior to issuance of a building permit.

    C.   The traffic mitigation fee shall be adjusted each succeeding July 1st, commencing July 1, 2006, to reflect inflationary costs. The fees shall be adjusted by the ratio which the American Road and Transportation Builders Association’s Highway and Street Construction Producer Price Index for the most recent July 1st bears to the July 1, 2005 index. (Ord. 06-3 § 1; Ord. 98-17 § 2: Ord. 93-18 § 3)

 

12.34.030 Credits and exemptions.
    Any fees pursuant to this chapter may provide for credits or exemptions, as determined by the director of public works, for properties which are included in a financing district providing funding for transportation improvements; or which are subject to transportation mitigation fees and/or conditions pursuant to agreement or other authority; or which have constructed transportation improvements. (Ord. 93-18 § 3)

Chapter 12.38 SOUTHPORT DRAINAGE IMPACT FEES
12.38.010 Purpose and authority.
    The purpose of this chapter is to further the goals and objectives of the city general plan public facilities and services element and the Southport framework plan, and to provide a source of funding for the storm drainage improvements identified in the city’s Southport drainage master plan. The city council has determined that a fee as a condition of the issuance of building permits is necessary to defray the actual or estimated cost of constructing the necessary improvements. The fees authorized by this chapter are consistent with goal C of the public facilities and services element of the city’s general plan, and with the Southport framework plan.

    This chapter is enacted pursuant to the city’s police powers under California Constitution Article XI, Section 7, and Government Code Section 66000, et seq. (Ord. 97-2 § 3)

 

12.38.020 Imposition of fee.
    A.  Fee Imposed. A drainage impact fee shall be imposed as a condition of the issuance of all building permits in the Southport area. The city council shall, by resolution, set forth the specific amount of the drainage impact fee, identify the specific public improvements, describe the reasonable relationship between the fee and the various types of new development, and describe the relationship between the need for the improvements and the various types of new development.

    B.   Due Date. The drainage impact fee shall be paid by each applicant prior to issuance of the building permit.

    C.   The drainage impact fee shall be adjusted each succeeding July 1st, commencing July 1, 1999, to reflect inflationary costs. The fees shall be adjusted by the ratio which the Engineering News Record’s Construction Cost Index (twenty cities) for the most recent July 1st bears to the July 1, 1998 index. (Ord. 98-17 § 3: Ord. 97-2 § 3)

 

12.38.030 Credits and exemptions.
    Any fees pursuant to this chapter may provide for credits or exemptions, as determined by the director of public works, for properties which are included in a financing district providing funding for drainage improvements; or which are subject to drainage mitigation fees and/or conditions pursuant to agreement or other authority; or which have constructed or provided drainage improvements. (Ord. 97-2 § 3)

Chapter 12.40 POLICE FACILITIES DEVELOPMENT FEES
12.40.010 Imposition of fee.
    A.  Fee Imposed. A police facilities development fee shall be imposed as a condition of the issuance of all building permits in the city. The city council, shall, by resolution, set forth the specific amount of the police facilities development fee, identify the specific public improvements to be financed thereby, describe the estimated costs of the facilities, describe the reasonable relationship between the fee and the various types of new development, and describe the relationship between the need for the facility and the various types of new development.

    B.   Date Due. The police facilities development fee shall be paid by each applicant prior to the issuance of a building permit.

    C.   Police facilities development fees shall be adjusted each succeeding July 1st, commencing July 1, 2005, to reflect inflationary costs. The fees shall be increased by the ratio which the Engineering News Record’s Construction Cost Index (twenty cities) for the most recent July 1st bears to the July 1, 2004 index. (Ord. 05-17 § 1; Ord. 03-9 § 3)

Chapter 12.42 FIRE FACILITIES DEVELOPMENT FEES
12.42.010 Imposition of fee.
    A.  Fee Imposed. A fire facilities development fee shall be imposed as a condition of the issuance of all building permits in the city. The city council, shall, by resolution, set forth the specific amount of the fire facilities development fee, identify the specific public improvements to be financed thereby, describe the estimated costs of the facilities, describe the reasonable relationship between the fee and the various types of new development, and describe the relationship between the need for the facility and the various types of new development.

    B.   Date Due. The fire facilities development fee shall be paid by each applicant prior to the issuance of a building permit.

    C.   Fire facilities development fees shall be adjusted each succeeding July 1st, commencing July 1, 2005, to reflect inflationary costs. The fees shall be increased by the ratio which the Engineering News Record’s Construction Cost Index (twenty cities) for the most recent July 1st bears to the July 1, 2004 index. (Ord. 05-17 § 2; Ord. 02-1 § 3)

Chapter 12.44 CHILDCARE DEVELOPMENT FEES AND ALTERNATIVES
12.44.010 Purpose and authority.
    The purpose of this chapter is to further the goals of the city’s general plan childcare element through the imposition of a childcare development fee. The city council enacts this chapter in accordance with the authority granted to cities in Article XI, Section 7 of the California Constitution. (Ord. 03-22)

 

12.44.020 Findings.
    The city council of the city of West Sacramento, California (hereinafter referred to as the “city”) finds and determines as follows:

    A.  Growth of the city and new construction contributes to the demand for childcare facilities for all age levels of children.

    B.   Without adequate childcare facilities more children are potentially at risk.

    C.   To mitigate this situation and to encourage the development of childcare facilities, this chapter shall require that new construction within the city contribute to the cost of providing new childcare facilities and equipment for which it creates a need.

    D.  Government Code Section 66000 and following provides substantive requirements and conditions, which must be met before establishing, increasing, or imposing a fee as a condition of approval of a development project.

    E.   Proposition 218, adding Articles XIIC and XIID to the California Constitution, provides that the developer fees shall not be affected in any way by the proposition. (Ord. 03-22)

 

12.44.030 Imposition of fee—Nexus study.
    A.  Fee Imposed. A childcare development fee shall be imposed as a condition of the issuance of all building permits for construction of new buildings in the city. The city council, shall, by resolution, set forth the specific amount of the childcare development fee and identify the facilities, improvements and equipment that may be financed by the fee.

    B.   Nexus Study. Prior to the imposition of any fee, a nexus study shall be completed and adopted by the city council. The study must confirm the demand for childcare facilities as a result of new development. The study shall describe the reasonable relationship between the fee and the various types of new development, and describe the relationship between the need for the facility and the various types of new development.

    C.   Date Due. The childcare development fee shall be paid by each applicant prior to the issuance of a building permit for construction of new buildings. Alternatives to payment of the fee are available in Chapter 17.47.

    D.  Childcare development fees shall be adjusted each succeeding July 1st, commencing July 1, 2005, to reflect inflationary costs. The fees shall be increased by the ratio which the Engineering News Record’s Construction Cost Index (twenty cities) for the most recent July 1st bears to the July 1, 2004 index. (Ord. 05-17 § 3; Ord. 03-22)

Chapter 12.46 CORPORATION YARD FACILITIES DEVELOPMENT FEES
12.46.010 Imposition of fee.
    A.  Fee Imposed. A corporation yard facilities development fee shall be imposed as a condition of the issuance of all building permits in the city. The city council shall, by resolution, set forth the specific amount of the corporation yard facilities fee, identify the specific public improvements to be financed thereby, describe the estimated costs of the facilities, describe the reasonable relationship between the fee and the various types of new development, and describe the relationship between the need for the facility and the various types of new development.

    B.   Date Due. The corporation yard facilities development fee shall be paid by each applicant prior to the issuance of a building permit.

    C.   Corporation yard facilities development fees shall be adjusted each succeeding July 1st, commencing July 1, 2005, to reflect inflationary costs. The fees shall be increased by the ratio which the Engineering News Record’s Construction Cost Index (twenty cities) for the most recent July 1st bears to the July 1, 2004 index. (Ord. 05-16 § 3)

Chapter 12.48 CITY HALL FACILITIES DEVELOPMENT FEES
12.48.010 Purpose and authority.
    The purpose of this chapter is to impose the City Hall facilities development impact fees. The city council enacts this chapter in accordance with the authority granted to cities by Article XI, Section 7, of the California Constitution. (Ord. 06-2 § 1)

 

12.48.020 Findings.
    The city council of the city of West Sacramento, California (also referred to as the “city”) finds and determines as follows:

    A.  Growth of the city and new construction adversely affect the ability of the West Sacramento City Hall facility to provide an adequate level of service.

    B.   As a result, the services are directly impacted and a critical need for additional facilities as an addition to the existing City Hall building and equipment has arisen.

    C.   To mitigate this condition, this chapter shall require that new construction within the city of West Sacramento contribute to the cost of providing the new City Hall facilities and equipment for which it creates a need.

    D.  Government Code Section 66000, and following, provides substantive requirements and conditions which must be met before establishing, increasing, or imposing a fee as a condition of approval of a development project.

    E.   Proposition 218, adding Articles XIII C and XIII D to the California Constitution, provides that developer fees shall not be affected in any way by the proposition. (Ord. 06-2 § 2)

 

12.48.030 Imposition of fee.
    A.  Fee Imposed. A City Hall facilities development fee shall be imposed as a condition of the issuance of all building permits in the city. The city council shall, by resolution, set forth the specific amount of the City Hall facilities fee, identify the specific public improvements to be financed thereby, describe the estimated costs of the facilities, describe the reasonable relationship between the fee and the various types of new development, and describe the relationship between the need for the facility and the various types of new development.

    B.   Date Due. The City Hall facilities development fee shall be paid by each applicant prior to the issuance of a building permit.

    C.   City hall facilities development fees shall be adjusted each succeeding July 1st commencing July 1, 2006, to reflect inflationary costs. The fees shall be increased by the ratio which the Engineering News Record’s Construction Cost Index (twenty cities) for the most recent July 1st bears to the July 1, 2005 index. (Ord. 06-2 § 3)

Title 13 PUBLIC SERVICES
Chapter 13.04 WATER SERVICE SYSTEM
Chapter 13.08 SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM
Chapter 13.09 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE AND REGULATIONS
Chapter 13.10 URBAN STORMWATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT AND DISCHARGE CONTROL

Chapter 13.04 WATER SERVICE SYSTEM
Note
*      Editor’s note: Articles I through X are derived from Chapter 7, Article I of the East Yolo Community Services District Code, adopted by reference by city Ordinance No. 87-18.

 

Article I. General Provisions
13.04.010 Title.
    This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the water code of the city of West Sacramento. (District code Ch. 7 Art. I § 1.01)

 

13.04.020 Scope.
    The provisions of this chapter apply to water supply and service in, upon or affecting the territory of the city, and the design, construction, alteration, use and maintenance of public water mains, reservoirs, distribution systems, pumping equipment and facilities, pressure reducing stations, connections and services, and all system appurtenances; the issuance of permits and the collection of fees therefor; fees to pay for the cost of checking plans, inspecting construction and making record plans of the facilities permitted in this chapter; providing penalties for violation of any of the provisions of this chapter; and all other necessary or related matters. (District code Ch. 7 Art. I § 1.02)

 

13.04.030 Definitions.
    For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:

    “Applicant” means the owner or the agent of the owner of the property for which water service is being requested.

    “Business service” means the provision of water for use in connection with commercial premises devoted primarily to operations for profit including offices, stores, markets, apartments, hotels, motels, automobile trailer parks or courts, service stations and the like.

    “City council” means the city council of the city.

    “Corporation stop” or “corporation cock” means the valve adjoining the water main on a service connection.

    “Curb stop” means the shut-off valve on the service connection at the property line.

    “Customer” means the owner or agent of the owner of the property receiving water service.

    “Distribution system” means the system of the pipelines and other appurtenances by which the city conveys water to its customers.

    “District” means the East Yolo Community Services District.

    “Flat rate service” means the provision of water in unmeasured quantities for a fixed periodic charge.

    “Industrial service” means the provision of water to industrial premises where the water is primarily in manufacturing or processing activities.

    “Mains” or “water mains” means the portion of distribution system which is located in streets, highways, public ways or easements which are used to supply water to the city’s customers.

    “Manager” means the city manager of the city.

    “Metered service” means the provision of water in measured quantities for a charge based on the quantity of water supplied.

    “Metered service connection” means the portion of the distribution system by which water is conveyed from the water main to the premises, including the tap, meter, meter box, pipe, corporation stop, curb stop or shut-off valve.

    “Multiple-family dwelling” means a dwelling occupied as a permanent residence or home for two or more customers, or families of customers, living independently of each other.

    “Premises” means a parcel of real estate, including any improvements thereon, which is determined by the city to be a single unit for purposes of receiving, using and paying for service. In making this determination, the city shall take into consideration such factors as whether the unit could reasonably be subdivided and whether the unit is being used for a single enterprise, apartment or dwelling.

    “Private water line” means the portion of the distribution system located on the customer’s side of the metered service connection.

    “Residential service” means the provision of water for household purposes, including water used on the premises for sprinkling lawns, gardens and shrubbery; washing vehicles; and other similar and customary purposes pertaining to single or multiple-family dwellings.

    “Service connection” generally means the pipe, valves and other facilities by which water is conveyed from the water main to the premises, and includes the tap, corporation stop or shut-off valve and may include meter and/or service box depending on the type of service.

    “Unmetered service connection” means the portion of the distribution system by which water is conveyed from the water main to the premises, including the tap, pipe, corporation stop, curb stop or shut-off valve.

    “Water facilities” means all wells, sources of supply, storage, treatment, transmission, distribution and pumping facilities, service connections and any other appurtenance. (District code Ch. 7 Art. I §§ 2.01—2.21)

 

Article II. Policies
13.04.040 Generally.
    The city shall operate and maintain the water system in an efficient and economical manner and supply water as fairly and equitably as possible. The charges to be made for service shall be set at rates necessary to enable the city to recover all costs of supplying water including, but not limited to, the costs for the following:

    A.  Purchasing, pumping, treating, storing, transmitting and distributing water;

    B.   Customer service;

    C.   Administration;

    D.  Overhead;

    E.   Debt service;

    F.   In-lieu taxes;

    G.  Replacement and maintenance of facilities; and

    H.  All other necessary and appropriate expenses. (District code Ch. 7 Art. I § 3.01)

 

13.04.050 Responsibility.
    The city shall be responsible for operating, maintaining and replacing all portions of the distribution system which are owned by the city. The city shall not be responsible for operating, maintaining or replacing that portion of the distribution system not owned by the city. The installation of a city measuring device upon private property or within a portion of the distribution system not owned by the city shall not create an obligation on the part of the city operation, maintenance or replacement of any works of facilities not owned by the city. (District code Ch. 7 Art. I § 3.02)

 

13.04.060 Ownership—Control.
    The portion of the distribution system, including the water main, service connection and/or meter which is located in the public way or in easements, shall be under the exclusive control of the city and owned, managed and operated under the direction of the city manager. (District code Ch. 7 Art. I § 3.04)

 

13.04.070 Unauthorized service.
    No person shall supply water to any person or to any premises except as authorized by city permit or as approved in writing by the city for service outside the city or for temporary service. (District code Ch. 7 Art. I § 3.03)

 

13.04.080 Fraudulent use.
    When the city has discovered that a customer has obtained water service by fraudulent means, or has diverted the water service for unauthorized use, the service to that customer may be discontinued without notice. The city shall not be required to restore service until the customer has complied with all rules and requirements of the city and the city has been reimbursed for the full amount of the service rendered and the actual or estimated costs to the city incurred by reason of the fraudulent use. (District code Ch. 7 Art. I § 3.08)

 

13.04.090 Private water lines.
    The customer shall be responsible for the proper operation and maintenance of the customer’s private water line and for any damages to the distribution system or loss of water resulting from the customer’s private water line. (District code Ch. 7 Art. I § 3.05)

 

13.04.100 Access.
    The city shall have access at all reasonable hours to meters, service connections and other property owned by the city, whether located on or off the customer’s premises, for the purposes of inspection, installation, repair, maintenance, operation, turn on, turn off or removal of the city’s property. (District code Ch. 7 Art. I § 3.06)

 

13.04.110 Unsafe apparatus.
    If an unsafe or hazardous condition is found to exist on the customer’s premises, or if the use of water thereon by apparatus, appliances, equipment or otherwise is found to be detrimental or damaging to the city or its customers, the service may be shut off without notice; provided, that the city shall notify the customer immediately of the reasons for the discontinuance and the corrective action to be taken by the customer before service can be restored. (District code Ch. 7 Art. I § 3.07)

 

13.04.120 Inspection.
    A customer’s private water line shall be open for inspection at all reasonable times to a representative of the city. However, before a city representative enters a customer’s premises for the purpose of inspecting non-city-owned facilities, the city shall obtain the occupant’s consent or the city shall give twenty-four-hour advance notice, in writing, to the occupant of the city’s intention to enter and inspect the customer’s private water line. (District code Ch. 7 Art. I § 3.09)

 

13.04.130 Interference with city employees.
    Except as provided in Section 13.04.120, it is unlawful for any person to interfere, seek or cause to interfere with the inspection, installation, removal, maintenance or other lawful activity by the city manager, or the city manager’s authorized representative, of any part of the distribution system owned by the city. (District code Ch. 7 Art. I § 3.10)

 

13.04.140 Obstructions prohibited.
    No person shall place or cause to be placed on any water line easements any wires, fences, trees, buildings or other structures, either temporary or permanent, or any refuse, rubbish, debris or other objects which may impede or otherwise interfere with the ready access by the city to any portion of the distribution system owned by the city. Any such obstruction, upon the written request of the manager, shall immediately be removed by the violator at no expense to the city or removed by the city at violator’s expense, and shall not be replaced. (District code Ch. 7 Art. I § 3.11)

 

13.04.150 Continuity of service.
    The city shall not be liable for any interruption, shortage or insufficiency of water supply or for pressure at the customer’s point of connection, or for any loss or damages occasioned thereby. (District code Ch. 7 Art. I § 3.12)

 

13.04.160 Street work.
    A.  When a person who opens, grades, excavates, fills or does other street construction, deems it necessary to expose, remove, raise, lower or otherwise affect any portion of the distribution system owned by the city, the person performing the street construction shall give at least seven days’ advance notice in writing to the city of the person’s intention to perform the construction and immediate notice upon exposure or contact with such system.

    B.   At its option, the city may elect to perform the removal, raising, lowering or other construction of the city’s distribution system which is necessitated by the street construction. Prior to the city performing the construction on its distribution system, the person requiring the street construction shall pay the city a reasonable deposit in an amount not to exceed the estimated cost of the city’s construction. When the city completes its construction, the city shall refund that portion, if any, of the deposit which exceeds the actual costs of construction and the person requiring the construction shall pay the amount, if any, by which the actual costs of construction exceed the deposit.

    C.   The person performing the street construction shall be liable for any damage to the city’s distribution system resulting from the street construction or from the person’s construction on the city’s distribution system. (District code Ch. 7 Art. I § 3.13)

 

13.04.170 Subcontractors.
    Portions of this chapter may be waived for persons hired by the city to construct any part of the city’s distribution system. (District code Ch. 7 Art. I § 3.14)

 

13.04.180 Delegation of authority.
    The city manager has the authority to delegate the performance of any of the manager’s responsibility to any city employee or independent contractor. (District code Ch. 7 Art. I § 3.15)

 

13.04.190 Standards.
    All procedures, design, work, materials, capacities, facilities and other improvements shall be based on the applicable provisions of the latest revisions of state and local regulations and generally accepted standards of water works practice insofar as deemed appropriate by the city considering the conditions and where not in conflict with city standards. Such regulations and standards are included in but not necessarily limited to the following references:

    A.  Waterworks Standards of the California Department of Health Services;

    B.   Titles 17 and 22 of the California Administrative Code;

    C.   California Safe Drinking Water Act;

    D.  Uniform Plumbing Code; and

    E.   American Water Works Association. (District code Ch. 7 Art. I § 3.16)

 

Article III. Water Facilities—Connection to and Construction
13.04.200 Generally.
    Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as preventing or limiting the right of the city to require or undertake the preparation of engineering, economic, environmental or financing evaluations from any person requesting water service from the city, which service necessitates the installation of water facilities, and thereafter to require the construction of such facilities as a condition of service, all without cost to the city. (District code Ch. 7 Art. I § 4.01)

 

13.04.210 Meter required.
    Following the effective date of the ordinance adopted in this chapter, every connection made to the city distribution system or service connection shall provide for and include a meter. The meter shall be supplied, approved and/or installed by the city prior to the time the owner connects to the city’s distribution system. (District code Ch. 7 Art. I § 4.02)

 

13.04.220 Installation.
    A.  Whenever practicable, the service connection from the water main to the customer’s property line shall be installed at the time the main is constructed.

    B.   Main line extensions, service connections and meters shall be installed only after the city’s issuance of a permit and after payment by the customer of all city fees and charges.

    C.   Main line extensions, service connections and/or meters shall be installed, at the city’s option, either by the city or by persons hired by the city or under the supervision of city employees.

    D.  When main line extensions, service connections or meters are not installed by the city, the main line extension, service connection or meter shall be installed only by bonded contractors licensed to perform such installation.

    E.   When the city determines that any installation shall be performed by the city or persons hired by the city, the applicant shall pay in advance an amount of funds equal to the approximate costs of construction and other necessary expenses. Upon completion of construction, the city shall refund any funds paid by the applicant in excess of the actual costs to be borne by the applicant and the applicant shall pay the amount, if any, by which the actual costs exceed the deposit. (District code Ch. 7 Art. I § 4.03)

 

13.04.230 Size of service connection.
    The size of the service connection shall be approved by the city in advance. Except when specifically approved by the manager, the maximum size for a single family service connection shall be one inch. The standard size for a single-family service connection shall be three-quarter-inch by five-eighths-inch. (District code Ch. 7 Art. I § 4.04)

 

13.04.240 Installation of private water line.
    The customer shall, at the customer’s own expense, install according to city standards the customer’s private water line. The private water line shall remain the sole property of the customer. (District code Ch. 7 Art. I § 4.05)

 

13.04.250 Financial responsibility for installation.
    An applicant who installs or causes to be installed any part of the city water facilities shall be financially liable for the costs of installation, and all incidents thereof. (District code Ch. 7 Art. I § 4.06)

 

13.04.260 Relocation of service connection at customer’s request.
    Upon a customer’s written request, a service connection may be relocated by the city, provided that the relocation, in the opinion of the city manager, is not detrimental to the city’s distribution system. The cost of the relocation shall be borne by the customer and shall be payable in advance to the city. The cost of the relocation shall include the applicable costs and fees for all construction (if the construction is performed by persons hired by the city), design, installation, inspection, administration, overhead and any other necessary related expenses. (District code Ch. 7 Art. I § 4.07)

 

13.04.270 Relocation of service connection at city’s request.
    Where a service connection is relocated for the convenience or protection of the city, the relocation shall be at the expense of the city provided the relocation is not made necessary by the customer. (District code Ch. 7 Art. I § 4.08)

 

13.04.280 Change of meter at customer’s request.
    A.  A customer may apply in writing to the city to change the size of an installed meter.

    B.   If the existing service connection is adequate to serve the proposed change in meter size and the city determines that the change is necessary or advisable, the city shall authorize a change. Before the meter is changed, the customer shall pay all applicable fees and charges to the city.

    C.   If the existing service connection is inadequate to serve the proposed meter change, the service connection shall be changed at the customer’s expense. Before the meter and service connection are changed, the customer shall pay all applicable fees and charges to the city. (District code Ch. 7 Art. I § 4.09)

 

13.04.290 Separate service connection.
    Separate premises, whether owned by the same or different persons, shall not be supplied with water through the same service connection. (District code Ch. 7 Art. I § 4.10)

 

13.04.300 Division of services.
    When premises currently served by the city’s distribution system are divided into two or more premises, the existing meter and service connection shall be considered to belong to the premises which the meter or service connection most directly enters, and the new premises shall require the installation of additional meter(s) and service connection(s) and payment of all applicable fees and charges. (District code Ch. 7 Art. I § 4.11)

 

13.04.310 Plans.
    A.  Each application for a permit, for which installation of water facilities is necessary, shall be accompanied by three sets of plans and specifications for the installation.

    B.   The plans shall be the exclusive property of the city.

    C.   The manager shall determine the adequacy of the proposed water facilities as to size, type and quality of materials, and as to the location of facilities to serve the proposed development, including off-tract pipelines and other appurtenances.

    D.  The city manager or engineer shall certify in writing whether the plans and specifications submitted conform to city standards. (District code Ch. 7 Art. I § 4.12)

 

13.04.320 Easements and rights-of-way.
    A.  Any applicant who installs or proposes to install water facilities shall furnish the city all necessary easements and rights-of-way for such facilities and the subsequent operation and maintenance thereof.

    B.   If the applicant cannot furnish the necessary easements and rights-of-way, the city may, at its sole option, acquire such easements and rights-of-way, subsequent to the applicant’s payment to the city of all funds necessary to cover the city’s cost of the acquisition.

    C.   Until the necessary easements and rights-of-way have been properly executed and recorded, the city shall not approve any plans for water facilities to be constructed by a person across the property of another person, the city shall not accept for public use any such water facilities and no person shall place into use any such water facilities. (District code Ch. 7 Art. I § 4.13)

 

13.04.330 Performance bond.
    The applicant shall post a surety bond, cash or other security satisfactory to the city to guarantee the faithful performance of any agreement for the applicant’s construction of the water facilities. The surety bond, cash or security shall be in the sum of one hundred percent of the estimated cost of the work, or in such other sum as may be fixed by the city. The surety bond, cash or security shall, in addition to guaranteeing the faithful performance of the work, guarantee the maintenance of the portion of the water facilities constructed by the applicant for a period of one year following the city’s written acceptance of the work. (District code Ch. 7 Art. I § 4.14)

 

13.04.340 Liability.
    The city and its officers, agents and employees shall not be liable for any injury or death of any person or damage to any property arising during or stemming from the performance of any work by applicant. The applicant shall be answerable for, indemnify and hold harmless, the city and its officers, agents and employees, including all costs, expenses, attorney’s fees and other fees and interest incurred in defending the same or in seeking to enforce this provision. The applicant shall be solely liable for any defects in the performance of the applicant’s work or for any failure, damage, injury, claim or loss which may develop therefrom. (District code Ch. 7 Art. I § 4.15)

 

13.04.350 Dedication requirements.
    An offer of dedication of the water facilities, excluding any private water lines, shall be included in any application for a permit. The city shall not accept for dedication any portion of the water facilities which are not constructed in conformity with the requirements of the main line agreement, if any, and of this chapter. (District code Ch. 7 Art. I § 4.16)

 

13.04.360 As-built plans.
    Two sets of blueline prints and one set of reproducible drawings delineating as-built water lines and appurtenances shall be filed with the city prior to, and as a condition of, the city’s approval and acceptance of construction by an applicant. No certificate of final inspection shall be issued until such prints and drawings are filed. (District code Ch. 7 Art. I § 4.17)

 

13.04.370 Inspection.
    The manager shall have the right to inspect all work during and subsequent to its construction. When the construction is completed, the work must be inspected and approved by the manager before the newly constructed water facilities may be connected to the city’s distribution system. (District code Ch. 7 Art. I § 4.18)

 

13.04.380 Certification.
    When the manager determines that all work done under the permit and main line extension agreement, if any, has been constructed according to, and meets the requirements of, all applicable provisions of this chapter, the agreement, and other city rules and regulations, and when all fees have been paid, the manager shall authorize the issuance of a certificate of final inspection and completion. (District code Ch. 7 Art. I § 4.19)

 

13.04.390 Ownership upon dedication.
    When the certificate of final inspection and completion is issued, the city shall accept the offer of dedication and authorize the connection of the new water facilities. Upon connection to the city’s distribution system, the new water facilities, excluding private water lines, shall become the exclusive property of the city. (District code Ch. 7 Art. I § 4.20)

 

Article IV. Main Line Extensions
13.04.400 Water main extension.
    Any person requesting water service from the city which necessitates an extension of the city’s main line shall apply to the city for a main line extension agreement on the forms prescribed by the city. (District code Ch. 7 Art. I § 5.01)

 

13.04.410 Assessment district formation.
    At the city’s sole option, the city may utilize any statutory or other procedure concerning assessment districts to finance the construction of the main line extension, metered service connections and related appurtenances. (District code Ch. 7 Art. I § 5.02)

 

13.04.420 Size of new main line.
    The city may require the installation of a main line larger than that necessary to adequately serve the applicant’s property. When the city requires the installation of a larger main line, the city shall either:

    A.  Pay the difference in cost, as determined by the city, between the size necessary to serve the applicant’s construction and the larger main line; or

    B.   Perform the installation itself, subsequent to the receipt from the applicant of a sum sufficient to cover necessary expenses, of the main line required by the applicant; or

    C.   Require the applicant to construct the larger line subject to reimbursement as hereinafter provided; or

    D.  A combination of subsections A through C of this section. (District code Ch. 7 Art. I § 5.03)

 

13.04.430 Reimbursement for extensions.
    When an applicant enters into a main line extension agreement with the city which requires the installation of a main line larger than that necessary to adequately serve the applicant’s property, the agreement shall provide for a refund to the applicant as follows:

    A.  Within the limits specified herein, the applicant shall receive the distribution component of the plant availability charge received by the city for upstream connections into the water main line installed or paid by the applicant;

    B.   Any amounts collected by the city for the distribution pipeline component, subject to subsection A of this section, shall be refunded to the applicant within ninety days following the city’s receipt thereof; provided, that no refund shall be made for connections made after five years from the date of completion of the main line extension;

    C.   The total amount which may be refunded to the applicant shall not exceed the net amount advanced to the city for the extension, if installed by the city, or the estimated cost, as determined by the city, for such extension if installed by the applicant, and shall not exceed the distribution pipeline component of the plant availability charge collected for the extension. (District code Ch. 7 Art. I § 5.04)

 

13.04.440 Preexisting agreements.
    Notwithstanding any section of this chapter, all main line extension agreements executed on or before the city’s adoption of this water code shall be governed by the Public Utilities Commission’s Rule 15. (District code Ch. 7 Art. I § 5.05)

 

Article V. Permits and Fees
13.04.450 Permit required.
    No persons, other than those specifically excluded by this chapter, shall uncover or cause to be uncovered, construct or cause to be altered, or connect to or cause to be connected to, any public water main or other portion of the distribution system or services owned by the city without first obtaining a permit from the city manager, paying the applicable fees, and complying with all other applicable provisions of this chapter. (District code Ch. 7 Art. I § 6.01)

 

13.04.460 Application.
    Any person legally entitled to apply for and receive a permit shall make application for a permit on forms provided by the city for that purpose. An applicant shall describe the proposed construction and location, ownership, occupancy and use of the premises in connection therewith. The manager may require, in addition to the information specified, any additional information from the applicant which will enable the manager to determine that the proposed connection complies with the provisions of this chapter. (District code Ch. 7 Art. I § 6.02)

 

13.04.470 Transfer of permit.
    A.  Upon prior written approval of the city, a person to whom a permit has been issued may transfer a permit to another person solely for the same use and premises for which the permit was issued, subject to all terms and conditions under which permit was issued. The transferee shall meet the requirements of the city relating to the transfer.

    B.   Usage of permit for a premises other than the premises for which the permit was issued shall be an unauthorized usage and shall render the permit void and invalid.

    C.   A person engaging in an unauthorized usage of the permit shall apply to the city for an appropriate permit. If the city issues the permit, the applicant shall pay the appropriate current fees and charges. (District code Ch. 7 Art. I § 6.03)

 

13.04.480 Waiver.
    The provision of this article may be waived by the manager for contractors constructing water facilities or improvements under contract with the city, or under contract awarded by the city under proceedings pursuant to any of the special procedure statutes of the state provided for the construction of water facilities and the assessing of the expenses thereof against the lands benefited thereby. (District code Ch. 7 Art. I § 6.04)

 

13.04.490 Issuance requirements.
    A.  Plan Checking. No permit shall be issued until the city manager has checked and approved the plans in accordance with the applicable provisions of this chapter.

    B.   Payment of Fees and Charges. No permit shall be issued until all fees and charges in connection therewith are paid to the city. (District code Ch. 7 Art. I §§ 6.05, 6.06)

 

13.04.500 Compliance.
    The applicant’s signature on an application for a permit or the applicant’s acceptance of any permit shall constitute an agreement by the applicant to comply with all the provisions, terms and requirements of the city’s water code, with all other rules and regulations of the city, and with the plans and specifications the applicant has filed, together with such corrections or modifications, if any, as may be permitted or required by the city in writing. This agreement shall be binding upon the applicant and the applicant’s successors in interest, and may be altered only by the city in writing upon the applicant’s written request. (District code Ch. 7 Art. I § 6.07)

 

13.04.510 Duration.
    If work under a permit is not commenced within six months from the date of issuance of the permit of if, after commencing, the work be discontinued for a period of one year, the permit shall become void and no further work shall be undertaken until a new permit shall have been secured and a new fee paid therefor at applicable rates then in effect. (District code Ch. 7 Art. I § 6.08)

 

Article VI. Rates and Charges
13.04.520 Service when service connection adequate.
    Where an existing and adequate service connection and/or meter are properly connected to the city distribution system, and which is or has been legally servicing the premises or for which a city connection permit has been issued, an applicant for water service from the city shall be entitled to such service after the applicant submits an appropriate application to the city, pays a service fee as prescribed by resolution of the city council and complies with all other regulations of the city. However, if the applicant is delinquent in any bills to the city, the applicant shall pay such bills in full prior to receiving city water service. (Ord. 89-14 § 3 (part); district code Ch. 7 Art. I § 7.01)

 

13.04.530 Service when service connection inadequate.
    Where the installation or enlargement of a main line, service connection or meter is necessary prior to the city’s supplying service to an applicant and permit fee to the city for service, if the city has sufficient water supply and system capacity to supply water, the city shall accept the application. The city shall furnish the water service subsequent to the applicant’s construction, or payment for construction, of the necessary portions of the distribution system; the applicant’s payment of all fees to the city; the applicant’s compliance with all city rules and regulations; and the applicant’s payment in full of all delinquent charges, if any, owed to the city. (District code Ch. 7 Art. I § 7.02)

 

13.04.540 Connection fees.
    A.  When the city installs a service connection or meter, the city shall collect the connection fees prescribed by resolution of the city council from the applicant prior to the installation of service connections and meters, except for service under Section 13.04.640 for temporary water service. The installation of any service connection or meter which entails unusual conditions resulting in additional costs shall be installed on the basis of actual cost.

    B.   Connection fees shall be adjusted each succeeding July 1st, commencing July 1, 1983, to reflect inflationary costs. The fees shall be increased by the ratio which the Engineering News Record Construction Cost Index (Twenty Cities) for the most recent July 1st bears to the July 1, 1982 Index.

    C.   In addition to any other charge required by this chapter, there shall be collected a fee for each parcel identified and subject to Rule 15 “Special Facilities Agreements” with Washington Water and Light Company, in an amount which the city is required to refund pursuant to such an agreement. (Ord. 89-14 § 3 (part); district code Ch. 7 Art. I § 7.03)

 

13.04.590 Service charge rate structure (cost of service).
    Service charges shall be charged by user class, reflecting the different capacity and water volume requirements for each class. Each user in a class shall pay charges in two parts:

    A.  A service charge to be paid regardless of water use; and

    B.   A volume charge to be the result of the rate for the user class applied to user’s volume usage. (Ord. 92-16 § 4)

 

13.04.591 Adoption or revision of rates.
    Charges for the services or facilities furnished by the city pursuant to this chapter shall be prescribed or revised by resolution or ordinance. (Ord. 92-16 § 4)

 

13.04.600 Annual rate adjustment.
    Annually, effective January 1 of each year, beginning January 1, 2007, fees and charges in Section 13.04.591 of this chapter shall be adjusted based on the following percentages:

 

2007

5.00%

2008

5.00%

2009

5.00%

2010

3.00%

 

(Ord. 05-9 § 2)

 

Article VII. Special Water Services
13.04.630 Outside city.
    A.  The city may provide or allow water service to persons outside its boundaries when the manager finds, and the city council concurs, that such service shall not adversely affect the water service within the city and that a surplus of water and pipeline capacity exists.

    B.   In the event that, because of increased usage or other causes, service outside the city becomes adverse to the city’s interests or the interest of city customers located within the city, or surplus water and/or pipeline capacity is no longer available for such outside use, the city may discontinue or disconnect the service outside the city one hundred twenty days after the city gives written notice to the person or premises receiving the water that such outside service is to be terminated.

    C.   Except as set forth in this section, the rules and regulations of the city shall apply to all customers outside the city.

    D.  Rates and charges to all customers outside the city shall be one hundred fifty percent of the applicable rates and charges, set forth in Article VI of this chapter.

    E.   Prior to receiving service, a customer outside the city shall deposit an amount equal to six months of the city’s applicable rates for water service.

    F.   The supply of water to persons outside the city shall not create a vested right with the person outside the city to continue to receive water service from the city nor any credit or refund for improvements made to receive such water service. (District code Ch. 7 Art. I § 8.01)

 

13.04.640 Temporary water service through a fire hydrant.
    A.  Before temporary service can be supplied through a fire hydrant, the applicant shall receive the city’s written approval and a fire hydrant permit.

    B.   All fees and deposits under the fire hydrant permit shall be paid prior to permit issuance. Monthly city equipment rental charges, deposit amounts, and water usage fees shall be set by resolution in the city’s book of imposts.

    C.   Application Procedure.

    1.   The applicant shall pay a nonrefundable application fee for connection to a meter or outlet of locations and conditions at city manager’s discretion. In addition to the application fee, the applicant shall pay a nonrefundable maintenance fee for future maintenance, testing and recalibration of the city’s equipment.

    2.   An approved reduced pressure backflow prevention device may be required by the city for temporary water service per the city’s cross connection control policy. If such a device is required by the city, the applicant may rent a backflow device from the city or provide his or her own device. In either case, such device must be tested and approved by the city prior to any water being used through the device. If the applicant supplies his or her own device, he or she will be charged a nonrefundable backflow device testing fee.

    3.   In addition to the fees described in subsections 1 and 2 of this section, the applicant shall make a quantity rate deposit toward monthly charges and water usage to be determined by the city based on the estimated duration of the temporary service and the estimated quantity of water to be used. Any overpayment shall be refunded upon verification of the final meter reading and duration of temporary service. Any excess charges shall be billed to the applicant.

    4.   In addition to payments under subsections 1 through 3 of this section, the applicant shall also pay a deposit for all city equipment to be rented. The deposit amount shall be determined by the city based upon the replacement cost of all items rented, including administrative costs. Upon termination of temporary service and return of all rented equipment, the city shall refund the deposit if the equipment and the outlet to which it was attached have not been damaged.

    5.   All charges imposed above (subsections 1 through 4 of this section) shall be paid in advance of service.

    6.   Rates for temporary service through a fire hydrant shall be set by resolution in the city’s book of imposts.

    D.  Water Trucks.

    1.   All water trucks utilizing a fire hydrant within the city as a water source must obtain a fire hydrant permit from the city, and be equipped with an approved air gap separation device or use an approved reduced pressure backflow preventer when filling the truck’s water tank.

    2.   All water trucks wishing to utilize an air gap separation device instead of an approved backflow prevention device must pay a nonrefundable inspection fee to the city, be inspected and approved by the city, and display the city-issued “Air Gap” sticker on the truck at all times when pulling water from a hydrant within the city.

    3.   City-issued air gap stickers are good for two years from the month of issuance. All trucks must be inspected bi-yearly in order to continue to use air gap separation instead of a backflow prevention device for all water usage through a fire hydrant within the city.

    E.   Fire Hydrant Permit Conditions.

    1.   The city may designate a particular hydrant or hydrants to be used under a particular permit. Any hydrant restrictions will be noted on the face of the fire hydrant permit.

    2.   The permit or a complete copy shall be kept at the job site or in the water truck and upon request must be shown to any representative of the city.

    3.   The permit is valid for one year from the date of issuance. In order to continue to obtain water through a fire hydrant after one year, the permittee must bring in the meter/backflow unit for inspection and an intermediate meter reading and apply for reissuance of the permit.

    4.   The permittee shall so conduct his or her operations as to offer the least possible obstruction and inconvenience to the public. The permittee shall be solely and completely responsible for the safety of all persons and property surrounding the hydrant or work area.

    5.   The permittee shall take whatever precautions necessary to prevent damage to all existing improvements, including above ground and underground utilities, trees, shrubbery that is not specifically shown to be removed, fences, signs, mailboxes, survey markers and monuments, buildings, structures, the city’s property, adjacent property, and any other improvements or facilities within or adjacent to the work area. If such improvements or property are damaged by the permittee’s operations, they shall be repaired or replaced at the permittee’s expense, to a condition at least as good as the condition they were in prior to the start of the permittee’s operations.

    6.   The permittee must replace all improvements in city rights-of-way and within public streets to a condition equal to or better than what existed prior to his or her entry onto the job.

    7.   All public or private facilities, including but not limited to gravel surfacing at existing canals, structures, telephone cables, roadways, curbs, gutters, parking lots, private drives, levees and embankments for creeks, ponds and reservoirs disturbed during construction shall be repaired or replaced by the permittee to match facilities existing prior to construction. In addition, the permittee shall be responsible for any settlement damage to such facilities or adjoining areas for a period of one year after acceptance of such facilities.

    8.   The permittee shall adopt all practical means to minimize traffic interference and public inconvenience, discomfort or damage. The permittee shall protect against damage to any pipes, conduits, or other structures crossing the trenching or encountered during the work and shall be responsible for any damage done to such pipes or structures, or damage to property resulting therefrom. The permittee shall repair or replace any such structures without delay.

    9.   In the event that the permittee refuses or neglects to make good any loss or damage for which he or she is responsible under this permit, the city may itself, or through the employment of others, make good any such loss or damage; the cost and expense of doing so, including any reasonable engineering, legal or consultant fees, and any costs for administrative and managerial services, shall be charged to the permittee.

    10. The permittee agrees to operate the hydrant main valve and any other valves used to control the flow of water with a pentagon spanner-type fire hydrant wrench only. Use of pipe wrenches or other devices which damage or deform the bronze operating nut is strictly prohibited. All hydrant outlet caps shall be replaced when the hydrant is not in use. Permanent attachments to fire hydrants are not permitted. Fire safety dictates that attachments to hydrants shall be removed at the end of each work day. Permittee shall cease using water from any fire hydrant at any time upon request of the city manager or designee.

    11. The permittee will be billed a monthly charge for rental of city equipment in the amount specified by resolution in the city’s current book of imposts.

    12. Water usage through the meter shall be paid first from the initial water usage fee, then from the deposits paid for city equipment.

    13. Deposits for city equipment shall be refunded upon return of the equipment to the city, less appropriate deductions for water used over the initial water usage fee and for items or elements lost, damaged, stolen, or otherwise rendered unusable as determined by the city. If the deposit amount does not cover all water usage fees above the initial amount paid and the repair or replacement of any damaged city equipment, the permittee will be billed directly.

    14. The hydrant meter and backflow assemblies must be used in the proper configuration at all times when obtaining water from any fire hydrant within the city.

    15. The permittee specifically obligates him or herself and hereby agrees to protect, hold free and harmless, defend and indemnify the city, and each of its officers, employees and agents, from any and all liability, penalties, costs, losses, damages, expenses, causes of action, claims or judgments, including attorney’s fees, which arise out of or are in any way connected with the permittee’s, his or her contractor’s, or his or her subcontractor’s agents, employees and representatives, resulting in liability irrespective of whether or not any acts or omissions of the parties to be indemnified hereunder may also have been a contributing factor to the liability.

    16. In any and all claims against the city or the engineer and his or her consultants, and each of their officers, employees and agents, by any employee of the permittee, his or her contractor, any subcontractor, anyone directly or indirectly employed by any of them, or anyone for whose actions any of them may be liable, the indemnification obligation under this section shall not be limited in any way by any limitation on the amount or type of damages, compensation or benefits payable by or for the contractor or any subcontractor under worker’s compensation statutes, disability benefit statutes, or other employee benefit statutes.

    17. Any city equipment issued for a particular construction job shall be returned to the city prior to final of any engineering permits.

    F.   Violations/Penalties.

    1.   Failure to comply with any of the permit conditions noted herein shall result in a verbal warning to the person or company that they are in violation of the city’s Municipal Code and hydrant meter policy and must immediately correct the violation. An issued fire hydrant permit may be revoked for failure to immediately correct the violation or for repeated violations.

    2.   Any person or company violating any provisions of this chapter, or any permit conditions, shall be deemed guilty of an infraction, in addition to any other city remedies, and upon conviction thereof be punishable by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for a first violation and after a prior verbal warning; not exceeding two hundred dollars for a second violation; or a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars for each additional violation. (Ord. 03-21 § 1 (part); Ord. 99-1 § 3)

 

Article VIII. Collection—Enforcement of Rates
13.04.650 Combined billing.
    All water service rates and charges may be billed on the same bill as, and collected together with, rates and charges for other city services. If all or any part of such bill is not paid, the city may discontinue any or all of the services for which the bill is rendered in the manner set forth in this article. (District code Ch. 7 Art. I § 9.01)

 

13.04.660 Billing period.
    The city shall issue bills for residential, commercial and all other forms of service rendered pursuant to this chapter at least every sixty days. The city may issue bills every thirty days for service rendered. In switching from one billing period to another billing period, the city may issue bills for a service period longer than thirty, but less than sixty days. Each bill shall specify the dates of the service period. (District code Ch. 7 Art. I § 9.02)

 

13.04.670 Liability.
    A.  The city shall bill the property owner directly for all service provided to the owner’s property.

    B.   The property owner shall be liable for payment of all city charges regardless of whether the bill is sent to the owner’s personal business or residential address, or to the address of the owner’s property to which the service is supplied. (District code Ch. 7 Art. I § 9.03)

 

13.04.690 Due date and delinquency.
    The city’s bill for service rendered is due and payable when received. Each bill shall specify the date it is issued. A bill shall be delinquent if payment for the entire amount of the bill is not received by the city by the later of:

    A.  The last day of the service period specified on the bill; or

    B.   Twenty-seven days after the date the bill is issued by the city. (District code Ch. 7 Art. I § 9.05)

 

13.04.700 Delinquency—Penalties—Partial payment.
    A.  Basic Penalty. A one-time basic penalty of ten percent of the rate for one month shall be added to each delinquent bill for the first month the bill is delinquent.

    B.   Additional Penalty. After assessing the basic penalty provided in subsection A, thereafter an additional penalty of one-half percent per month for two months and thereafter one and one-half percent per month shall be added to all delinquent charges and basic penalties remaining unpaid, until the city council requests the city finance director to include the amount of all delinquencies on the bills for taxes levied against the appropriate premises as set forth in Section 13.04.720.

    C.   Partial Payment. Moneys paid where any portion of an account is delinquent shall first be credited to the delinquent portion of the bill and then to the current billing.

    D.  Basic penalty and additional penalty may be reduced in accordance with criteria authorized by the city council. (Ord. 03-04 § 3; district code Ch. 7 Art. I §§ 9.06—9.08)

 

13.04.710 Liens.
    Delinquent charges remaining unpaid may be recorded as a lien with the county and, after recordation, shall constitute a lien upon all real property owned or thereafter acquired by the property owner in the city. The city shall include a statement to this effect on its bills to each property owner. The city may, from time to time, compile lists of such delinquent charges and record them with the county recorder as liens. Any fees paid by the city to the county in connection with such liens shall be reimbursed to the city by the property owner and shall become part of any such lien recorded. (Ord. 92-16 § 5; district code Ch. 7 Art. I § 9.09)

 

13.04.720 Collection.
    All rates, charges, penalties and interest which remain delinquent as of June 30th of each year may be collected in the same manner as the general taxes for the city for the forthcoming fiscal year, as follows:

    A.  The city shall prepare a written report, which shall be filed by the city clerk. The report shall describe each parcel of real property for which there are any delinquencies in any rates or charges for services rendered to each parcel during the preceding year, and the amount of the delinquency. The report of delinquent water charges may be combined with the report of any other delinquent charges, as long as the report identified the delinquent charges for each service for each parcel.

    B.   The city clerk shall publish notice of the report’s filing and of the time and place of hearing on the report, prior to the date set for the hearing. The notice shall be published at least once a week for two weeks. The city clerk shall also mail written notice of the report’s filing to each property owner whose property or parcel is identified as being subject to delinquent charges setting forth individually each property and each of the services and charges due for that property.

    C.   At the time stated in the notice, the city council shall hear and consider all objections or protests, if any, to the report concerning the delinquencies. Thereafter the city council may adopt, revise, change, reduce or modify any delinquency or overrule any or all objections thereto. The city council shall then make its determination on each delinquency identified in the report; the city council’s determination shall be final.

    D.  Following the city council’s hearing, on or before August 10th of each year, the city clerk shall file with the finance director a copy of the report, signed by the city clerk, stating the city council has adopted the report. The city clerk shall request the finance director to include the amount of delinquencies on the bills for taxes levied against the properties identified in the report. (District code Ch. 7 Art. I § 9.10)

 

13.04.730 Meter testing.
    The city may test meters at any time and shall test a meter upon the written request of a customer who first deposits twenty-five dollars with the city. If the test indicates the meter is registering within five percent of accuracy, the testing fee will be retained by the city to cover its cost of testing. If the test indicates the meter is more than five percent in error, the testing fee shall be refunded to the customer and the city shall repair or replace the meter at its discretion. If the meter error is over five percent in the customer’s favor, the city shall refund to the customer the estimated overcharge for a period of two billing cycles immediately preceding the meter testing. If the error is in the city’s favor, a supplemental bill may be rendered to the customer equal to the difference between the customer’s average bill for the preceding two billing cycles. (District code Ch. 7 Art. I § 9.11)

 

13.04.740 Adjustment of bills.
    The manager may adjust or grant rebates from the rates or fees provided in this chapter in the event of a dispute relating to a charge to a customer; provided, however, that all parties affected shall have a right to appeal the manager’s determination to the city council within seven days after receipt of the manager’s written decision. The decision of the city council thereon shall be final and binding on all parties. (District code Ch. 7 Art. I § 9.12)

 

Article IX. Water Conservation
13.04.750 Purpose and intent.
    The purpose of this article is to ensure compliance with all federal, state, and local requirements, including, but not limited to, the city of West Sacramento Urban Water Management Plan and the State of California Water Conservation Act of 2009 (SBX7-7), relating to water conservation and water shortage mitigation for the protection of public health, safety, and welfare by:

    Reducing the per capita water consumption throughout the city of West Sacramento;

    Protecting and conserving the city’s supply of water during specified times of emergency and/or crisis; and

 

    Minimizing and/or eliminating the waste of water through voluntary compliance or punitive action, if necessary. (Ord. 14-6 § 3)

 

13.04.760 Definitions.
    As used in this article, the following terms shall have the specified meanings:

    “Rehabilitated landscape” means any re-landscaping project that requires a permit, plan check, or design review, meets the requirements of Section 13.04.1100, and the modified landscape area is equal to or greater than two thousand five hundred square feet, is fifty percent of the total landscape area, and the modifications are completed within one year.

    “Water waste,” “waste,” or “wasted” water means:

    1.   Causing or permitting excessive water to discharge, flow, or run to waste into any gutter, sanitary sewer, water course, or storm drain, or to any adjacent property, from any tap, hose faucet, pipe, sprinkler, or nozzle. In the case of irrigation, “discharge,” “flow,” or “run to waste” means that the earth intended to be irrigated has been saturated with water to the point that excess water flows over the earth to waste.

    2.   Allowing water fixtures or heating or cooling devices to leak or discharge excessively.

    3.   Backwashing so as to discharge to waste from swimming pools, decorative basins or ponds in excess of the frequency necessary to ensure the healthful condition of the water or in excess of that required by standards for professionally administered maintenance or to address structural considerations.

    4.   Operation of an irrigation system that applies water to an impervious surface or that is in disrepair.

    5.   Irrigation of landscaping during rainfall.

    6.   Any other actions as determined by the city manager and designee. (Ord. 14-6 § 3)

 

13.04.770 Water waste prohibited.
    No person shall cause or permit any water furnished to the person’s premises by the city to be wasted or run to waste. In addition to administration of the penalties described in Section 13.04.800, the city may, pursuant to the requirements of Article X of this chapter, disconnect the city’s service to any premises and/or customer for the customer’s failure to comply with this section. The city may inspect or test meters in unmetered service to determine compliance. (Ord. 14-6 § 3)

 

13.04.780 Swimming and wading pools.
    A.  All swimming or wading pools installed after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, which have a capacity of over two thousand gallons of water, and which use water from the city distribution system or which discharge water into the city sewer system, shall be equipped with recirculating systems and filters that meet the performance requirements established by the NSF/ANSI 50-2012 performance standard effective September 2012.

    B.   Filling or discharging swimming or wading pools shall be limited to the hours between eight p.m. and seven a.m.

    C.   Pool draining and refilling shall be allowed only to the extent required for health, maintenance, or structural considerations, and must otherwise comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws and stormwater management program requirements. (Ord. 14-6 § 3)

 

13.04.790 Outdoor water use and conservation.
    A.  All new construction and rehabilitated landscapes shall be installed in accordance with city of West Sacramento Water Efficient Landscaping Code (Chapter 13.04, Article 12).

    B.   No person shall use, or cause to be used, any city water through a hose for the purpose of washing a vehicle unless the hose is equipped with an automatic shut-off nozzle attachment, and the attachment is being used to shut off flow of water at all times when the hose is not being used to wash the vehicle. (Ord. 14-6 § 3)

 

13.04.800 Penalties for violation.
    A.  Penalties shall be imposed for violation of any of the provisions of Sections 13.04.770 through 13.04.790, inclusive. Any violations occurring on separate calendar days shall be considered separate violations. The penalty for any violation shall be the amount specified in the city’s book of fees.

    B.   Issued written notices must be posted at a conspicuous place on the premises where the violation occurred, or by US mail, first class, postage prepaid addressed to the property billing address.

    C.   The penalties shall be imposed on the owner of the premises where the violation occurs regardless of whether the violation is committed by the owner of the premises or any other person. (Ord. 14-6 § 3)

 

13.04.810 Appeals.
    Any person may appeal a violation of this chapter in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 1.08 of this code. (Ord. 14-6 § 3)

 

13.04.820 Construction uses.
    Water uses for dust control, curing, compacting, cleaning or other construction use may be subject to limitations and shall not interfere with other domestic uses. Use of recycled water is encouraged where available. (Ord. 14-6 § 3)

 

13.04.830 Declaration of water shortage.
    In response to any condition necessitating increased water conservation, such as a water shortage due to drought, natural disaster or other reduction of water supply availability, or as may otherwise be required to protect public health, safety and welfare, the city manager may, in accordance with the city of West Sacramento’s Urban Water Management Plan, declare a water shortage emergency and impose revised and/or additional limitations and time restrictions on outdoor water use while the water shortage remains in effect, and no person shall use, or cause to be used, city water in violation of such limitations or restrictions while the water shortage remains in effect. (Ord. 14-6 § 3)

 

13.04.840 Access to customer premises—Compliance.
    A.  A customer receiving city water service shall provide city employees and/or contractors access to and use of the premises where city water service is received as may be required by the city’s employees or contractors to determine whether there is any violation of any of the provisions of Sections 13.04.770 through 13.04.830, inclusive, or to abate any violation thereof. If the customer refuses to allow such access, the city may seek authorization from any court of competent jurisdiction for such access and abatement.

    B.   Compliance with the provisions of this article shall be a condition of the customer receiving or continuing to receive water service. (Ord. 14-6 § 3)

 

13.04.850 Fire and other emergencies.
    Nothing in this article shall be construed to apply to the use of city water for purposes of extinguishing fire or any other similar emergency. (Ord. 14-6 § 3)

 

Article X. Enforcement
13.04.860 Authority.
    The city manager shall enforce the provisions of this chapter and, for such purpose, shall have the powers of a peace officer, if deputized or if authorized by law. Such power shall not be regarded as limitations on or otherwise affecting the powers and duties of the health officer. (District code Ch. 7 Art. I § 11.01)

 

13.04.870 Discontinuance of service.
    Service may be discontinued for any one of the following reasons:

    A.  Delinquency in the payment of any bill, except that residential service shall not be discontinued to a residential occupant receiving water through a master meter for nonpayment in any of the following situations:

    1.   During the pendency of any investigation by the city of a customer dispute or complaint,

    2.   When a customer has been granted an extension of the period for payment of a bill,

    3.   For an indebtedness owed by the customer to any other public agency or when the obligation represented by the delinquent account or other indebtedness was incurred with any public agency other than the city,

    4.   When a delinquent account relates to another property owned, managed or operated by the customer,

    5.   When a public health or building officer certifies the termination would result in a significant threat to the health or safety of the residential occupants or the public;

    B.   Delinquency in the payment of any bill, except that residential service shall not be discontinued to a residential occupant receiving service through an individual meter for nonpayment in any of the following situations:

    1.   During the pendency of any investigation by the city of a customer dispute or complaint,

    2.   When a customer has been granted an extension of the period for payment of a bill,

    3.   On the certification of a licensed physician and surgeon that to do so will be life threatening to the customer and the customer is financially unable to pay for service within the normal payment period and is willing to enter into an amortization agreement with the city and requests permission to amortize, over a period not to exceed twelve months, the unpaid balance of any bill asserted to be beyond the means of the customer to pay within the normal payment period;

    C.   The unauthorized taking of water or the taking of water in excess of the amount paid for;

    D.  Failure of the customer to maintain his or her facilities in a suitable condition to prevent waste of water;

    E.   The existence of any unprotected cross connections on the customer’s premises or the lack of adequate backflow protection at the service connection;

    F.   Any violation by the customer of any rules and regulations of the city governing water service. (Ord. 92-16 § 4)

 

13.04.871 Notice of hearing prior to discontinuance of residential service for nonpayment.
    A.  At least ten days before any proposed discontinuance of residential service for nonpayment of a delinquent account the city shall mail a notice, postage prepaid, to the customer to whom the service is billed of the proposed discontinuance. Such notice shall be given not earlier than nineteen days from the date of mailing the city’s bill for such service and the ten-day period shall not commence until five days after the mailing of the notice. In addition to the ten-day notice provided for in the preceding sentence, the city shall make a reasonable, good faith effort to contact an adult person residing at the premises of the customer by telephone or in person at least forty-eight hours prior to any discontinuance of such service.

    B.   Every notice of discontinuance of service required by this section shall include all of the following information:

    1.   The name and address of the customer whose account is delinquent;

    2.   The amount of the delinquency;

    3.   The date by which payment or arrangements for payment is required in order to avoid discontinuance;

    4.   The procedure by which the customer may initiate a complaint or request an investigation concerning service or charges, unless the city’s bill for services contains a description of that procedure;

    5.   The procedure by which the customer may request amortization of the unpaid charges;

    6.   The procedure for the customer to obtain information on the availability of financial assistance, including private, local, state or federal sources, if applicable;

    7.   The telephone number of a representative of the city who can provide additional information or institute arrangements for payment. (Ord. 92-16 § 4)

 

13.04.872 Notice and hearing prior to a discontinuance other than a discontinuance of residential service for nonpayment.
    A.  Except in health emergency situations covered by subsection B of this section, at least ten days before discontinuing service, other than the discontinuance of residential service for nonpayment of a delinquent account, which is provided for in Section 13.04.871, the city shall provide the customer with a written notice which shall specify the reason for the proposed discontinuance and inform the customer of the procedure for the availability of the opportunity to discuss the reason for the proposed discontinuance with the finance director, or designee, who is empowered to review disputes and rectify errors and settle controversies pertaining to such proposed discontinuance of service. The name and phone number of the finance director, or designee, shall be included in any such notice of proposed discontinuance given to a customer.

    B.   Water service may be discontinued immediately without notice for any situation which presents an immediate health hazard to the public water system. The water service shall be locked and remain inactive until corrective action has been approved by the city. The city shall attempt to contact the customer by telephone and shall mail a certified letter to the customer as soon as reasonably possible to set forth the reasons for the emergency. Conditions that create a basis for the immediate discontinuance of water service shall include, but are not limited to, the following items:

    1.   Direct or indirect connection between the public water system and a sewer line;

    2.   Unprotected direct or indirect connection between the public water system and a system or equipment containing contaminants;

    3.   Unprotected direct or indirect connection between the public water system and an auxiliary water system. (Ord. 92-16 § 4)

 

13.04.873 Notice of discontinuance of residential service to customers on master meters.
    A.  Whenever the city furnishes residential service through a master meter in a multi-unit residential structure, mobile home park or farm labor camp where the owner, manager or farm labor employer is listed by the city as the customer of record, the city shall make every good-faith effort to inform the residential occupants, by means of a written notice posted on the door of each residential unit at least fifteen days prior to termination, when the account is in arrears, that service will be terminated on a date specified in the notice. If it is not reasonable or practical to post the notice on the door of each residential unit, the city shall post two copies of the notice in each accessible common area at each point of access to the structure or structures. The notice shall also inform the residential occupants that they have the right to become city customers, to whom service will then be billed, without being required to pay the amount due under the delinquent account. The notice shall also specify in plain language: (1) what the residential occupants are required to do in order to prevent termination or reestablish service; (2) the estimated monthly cost of service; (3) the title, address and telephone number of a representative of the city who can assist the residential occupants in continuing service; and (4) the address and telephone number of a legal services project as defined in Section 6213 of the Business and Professions Code which has been recommended by the Yolo County bar association. The notice shall be in English and, to the extent practical, in any other language that the city determines is the primary language spoken by a significant number of the residential occupants.

    B.   Nothing in this section shall require the city to make service available to residential occupants unless each residential occupant agrees to the city’s terms and conditions of service and meets the requirements of the city’s rules and regulations. If one or more residential occupants are willing and able to assume responsibility for the entire account to the satisfaction of the city, or if there is a physical means, legally available to the city, of selectively terminating service to those residential occupants who have not met the requirements of the city’s rules and regulations, the city shall make service available to the residential occupants who have met those requirements. (Ord. 92-16 § 4)

 

13.04.874 Notice of termination of residential water service to certain individually metered customers.
    A.  Whenever the city furnishes any individually metered residential service to residential occupants in a multi-unit residential structure, mobile home park or permanent residential structures in a labor camp, as defined in Section 17008 of the Health and Safety Code, where the owner, manager or operator is listed by the city as the customer of record, the city shall make every good-faith effort to inform the residential occupants, by means of a notice, when the account is in arrears, that service will be terminated in ten days. The notice shall further inform the residential occupants that they have the right to become customers of the city without being required to pay the amount due on the delinquent account.

    B.   Nothing in this section shall require the city to make service available to residential occupants unless each residential occupant agrees to the terms and conditions of service, and meets the requirements of law and the city’s rules. If one or more of the residential occupants are willing and able to assume responsibility for the entire account to the satisfaction of the city, or if there is a physical means, legally available to the city, of selectively terminating service to the residential occupants who have not met the requirements of the city’s rules, the city shall make service available to the residential occupants who meet the requirements. (Ord. 92-16 § 4)

 

13.04.875 Discontinuance of service on weekends, holidays or after hours.
    No water service shall be discontinued to any customer or user because of any delinquency in payment on any Saturday, Sunday, legal holiday or at any time during which the business offices of the city are not open to the public. (Ord. 92-16 § 4)

 

13.04.876 Amortization of delinquent bill for residential service.
    Every complaint or request for investigation by a residential customer that is made within five days of receiving the disputed bill, and every request by a residential customer that is made within thirteen days of the mailing of the notice required by Section 13.04.871 for an extension of the payment period of a bill asserted to be beyond the means of the customer to pay in full during the normal period for payment shall be reviewed by the finance director or designee. The review shall include consideration of whether the customer shall be permitted to amortize the unpaid balance of the account over a reasonable period of time, not to exceed twelve months. Any review which has resulted in an adverse determination by the finance director or designee may be appealed to the city council. (Ord. 92-16 § 4)

 

13.04.877 Authority to settle controversies relating to discontinuance and to permit amortization of delinquent bills.
    The finance director or designee is authorized to investigate complaints and review disputes pertaining to any matters for which service may be discontinued and to rectify errors and settle controversies pertaining to such matters. The finance director or designee is also authorized, upon a proper showing by a residential customer of the customer’s inability to pay a delinquent bill during the normal period, to grant permission to amortize the unpaid balance over a reasonable period of time, not to exceed twelve months. At his or her discretion, the finance director may bring such controversies to the city council for settlement by the city council prior to the discontinuance of such service. (Ord. 92-16 § 4)

 

13.04.878 Notice required prior to discontinuance of service for failure to comply with amortization agreement.
    If an amortization agreement is authorized by the finance director or the city council, no discontinuance of service shall be effected for any residential customer complying with such agreement, if the customer also keeps the account current as charges accrue in each subsequent billing period. If a residential customer fails to comply with an amortization agreement, the city shall not discontinue service without giving notice to the customer, at least forty-eight hours prior to his or her discontinuance, of the conditions the customer is required to meet to avoid discontinuance; but the notice does not entitle the customer to further investigation by the city. (Ord. 92-16 § 4)

 

13.04.879 Third-party notification for elderly or dependent customers.
    The city shall make available to its residential customers who are sixty-five years of age older, or who are dependent adults as defined in paragraph (1) of subdivision (b) of Section 15610 of the Welfare Institution’s Code, a third-party notification service, whereby the city will attempt to notify a person designated by the customer to receive notification when the customer’s account is past due and subject to termination. The notification shall include information on what is required to prevent termination of services. The residential customer shall make a request for third-party notification on a form provided by the city, and shall include the written consent of the designated third party. The third-party notification does not obligate the third party to pay the overdue charges, nor shall it prevent or delay termination of service. (Ord. 92-16 § 4)

 

13.04.890 Public nuisance.
    Continued habitation of any building or continued operation of any commercial or industrial facility in violation of the provisions of this or any other chapter, rule or regulation of the city is declared to be a public nuisance. The city may cause proceedings to be brought for the abatement of the occupancy of the building or industrial or commercial facility during the period of such violation. (District code Ch. 7 Art. I § 11.03)

 

13.04.910 Abatement.
    During the period of any disconnection, the habitation of such disconnected premises by human beings shall constitute a public nuisance, which shall authorize the city to bring proceedings for the abatement of the occupancy of the premises during the period of the disconnection. In such event, and as a condition of restoring service, the city shall be paid reasonable attorney’s fees and costs of suit arising from such action, plus any other necessary charges for or incurred in the restoration of service. (District code Ch. 7 Art. I § 11.06)

 

13.04.920 Default—Recovery of costs.
    A.  In the event that any property owner fails to make any payment provided for in this chapter, the property owner and subject property shall be in default, and the city may declare the balance, or any remaining balance, due and payable.

    B.   In the event the city is required to bring legal action to enforce any provision of this chapter, including but not limited to the collection of delinquent fees, penalties or other charges, the city shall be entitled to recover its reasonable attorney’s fees, interest, court costs and other costs incurred by the city to bring such action. (District code Ch. 7 Art. I § 11.08)

 

13.04.930 Means of enforcement only.
    The city declares that the foregoing procedures are established as a means of enforcement of the terms and conditions of its ordinances, rules and regulations, and not as a penalty. (District code Ch. 7 Art. I § 11.09)

 

13.04.940 Cumulative remedies.
    The remedies set forth in this article for the collection and enforcement of rates, charges and penalties are cumulative and may be pursued alternatively, concurrently or consecutively. (District code Ch. 7 Art. I § 11.10)

 

13.04.950 Violation—Penalty.
    Each and every day, or part of a day that a violation of the chapter continues, shall be deemed a separate offense under this chapter and shall be punishable as such. (Ord. 03-21 § 1; district code Ch. 7 Art. I § 11.11)

 

Article XI. Protection of Drinking Water
13.04.960 Purpose.
    A.  The purposes of this article are:

    1.   To protect public water systems against actual or potential cross-connections by isolating within premises, contamination or pollution that may occur because of undiscovered or unauthorized cross-connections on premises;

    2.   To eliminate existing connections between public water systems and other sources of water that are not approved as safe and potable for human consumption;

    3.   To eliminate cross-connections between drinking water systems and sources of contamination;

    4.   To prevent the making of cross-connections in the future.

    B.   These regulations are adopted pursuant to the state of California Administrative Code, Title 17—Public Health, entitled “Regulations Relating to Cross-Connections.”

    C.   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation at any time to make or maintain or cause to be made or maintained, temporarily or permanently, for any period of time whatsoever, any cross-connection between plumbing pipes or water fixtures being served with water by the city or to maintain any sanitary fixture or other appurtenances or fixtures which, by reason of their construction, may cause or allow backflow of water or other substances into the water supply system of the city and/or the service of water pipes or fixtures of any water user of the city. (Ord. 90-13)

 

13.04.970 Definitions.
    The meanings of terms used in this article are as follows:

    “Air-gap separation” means a physical separation between the discharge end of a potable water supply pipeline and an open or nonpressure receiving vessel. An “approved air-gap separation” shall be at least double the diameter of the supply pipe measured vertically above the overflow rim of the receiving vessel and in no case shall be less than one inch.

    “Approved backflow prevention assembly” means an assembly which has passed laboratory and field evaluation tests performed by a recognized testing organization which has demonstrated their competency to perform such tests to the California Department of Health Services.

    “Approved water supply” means a water supply whose potability is regulated by a state or local health agency.

    “Auxiliary water system” means any water supply on or available to a customer’s premises other than an approved water supply.

    “AWWA standard” means an official standard developed and approved by the American Water Works Association.

    “Backflow” means a flow condition, caused by a differential in pressure, that causes the flow of water or other liquids, gases, mixtures or substances into the distributing pipes of a potable supply of water from any source other than an approved water supply.

    “Certified backflow prevention assembly tester” means a person who has been certified by the American Water Works Association (AWWA) California-Nevada Section, or the Sacramento County certification program, or have equivalent training in the opinion of the director of public works and possesses a valid “certificate of competence” issued by the department of public works.

    “Contamination” means a degradation of the quality of the potable water by any foreign substance which creates a hazard to the public health or which may impair the usefulness or quality of the water.

    “Cross-connection” means any unprotected actual or potential connection or structural arrangement between any part of a public water system used or intended to supply water for human consumption, and any source or system containing used water, industrial fluid, gas or other substance that is not or cannot be approved as safe, wholesome and potable for human consumption. Bypass arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or changeover assemblies, or other assemblies through which backflow could occur, shall be considered to be cross-connections.

    “Department” means the department of public works for the city of West Sacramento.

    “Health agency” means the California Department of Health Services or the local health agency with respect to a small water system.

    “Hearing officer” means the city manager for the city or designee.

    “Local health agency” means the county of Yolo health authority.

    “Premises” means any and all areas on a water user’s property which are served or have the potential to be served by the public water system.

    “Public water system” means any potable water supply approved by, or under the public health supervision of, a public health agency of the state of California or the county of Yolo.

    “Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly” means an assembly incorporating two internally loaded, independently operating check valves and an automatically operating differential relief valve located between the two checks, including resilient seated shut-off valves on each end of the assembly, and equipped with necessary test cocks for testing the assembly.

    “Service connection” refers to the point of connection of a water user’s piping to the water supplier’s facilities.

    “Water supplier” means the city of West Sacramento who owns and operates the approved water supply system.

    “Water user” means any person obtaining water from the city of West Sacramento approved water supply system. (Ord. 95-1 § 1 (part); Ord. 90-13)

 

13.04.980 Protection of public water system at service connection.
    A.  Where Protection is Required.

    1.   Protection shall be required at each service connection from a public water system that supplies water to premises having an auxiliary water system.

    2.   Protection shall be required at each service connection from a public water system that supplies water to premises on which any substance is or may be handled in such a manner as to permit entry into a public water system, including water originating from public water system which is or may be subjected to deterioration in sanitary quality.

    3.   Protection shall be required at each service connection to any premises that has cross-connections unless such cross-connections are abated to the satisfaction of the department.

    4.   Protection shall be required at each service connection from a public water system that supplies water to premises for which the intended use is commercial, industrial, or nonresidential.

    B.   Type of Protection. The type of protection required shall be commensurate with the degree of hazard. In determining the degree of hazard and the type of protection required, the following criteria shall be used:

    1.   At each service connection to any premises where there exists an auxiliary water system, the public water system shall be protected by an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly.

    2.   At each service connection to any premises on which an objectionable but nonhazardous substance is, or may be, handled in such a manner as to permit entry into a public water system, the public water system shall be protected by an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly.

    3.   At each service connection to any premises on which any hazardous substance is or may be handled in such a manner as to permit entry into a public water system, the public water system shall be protected by an approved air-gap separation. The air-gap shall be located as close as practicable to the service cock and all piping between the service cock and any receiving vessel shall be visible. If these conditions cannot reasonably be met, the public water system shall be protected by an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly; provided, that this alternative is in compliance with the provisions of this article and rules and regulations adopted per Section 13.04.1080 of this article.

    4.   At each service connection to any sewage treatment plant or sewage pumping station, the public water system shall be protected by an approved air-gap separation. The air-gap shall be located as close as practicable to the service cock and all piping between the service cock and any receiving vessel shall be visible. If these conditions cannot reasonably be met, the public water system shall be protected by an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly, provided that this alternative is in compliance with the provisions of this article and rules and regulations as adopted per Section 13.04.1080 of this article. (Ord. 90-13)

 

13.04.990 Customer responsibility.
    It shall be the responsibility of each water user to furnish, and install in a manner approved by the department, and keep in good working order and safe condition, any and all backflow prevention assemblies as required by this article. The city shall not be responsible for any loss or damage directly or indirectly resulting from or caused by any improper or negligent installation, operation, use, repair or maintenance of, or interfering with, any backflow prevention assembly, required by this article, by any water user or any other person. (Ord. 90-13)

 

13.04.1000 Application for certification.
    Any person desiring certification as a backflow prevention assembly tester shall make written application to the department on a form provided by, and in a manner prescribed by the department. Each application shall be accompanied by a fee, in an amount to be established by resolution of the city council. Said fee shall not be refundable or transferable. (Ord. 90-13)

 

13.04.1010 Certification of testers.
    The department will issue a “certificate of competence” to those persons who have satisfied the minimum requirements for certification as a tester for approved backflow prevention assemblies. Every person, after receiving a certificate of competence from the department shall be issued such identification as the department shall deem appropriate; and such identification shall be kept in the immediate possession of every person holding a certificate of competence while said person is testing any backflow prevention assembly within the city. Said certificate shall be valid for a period of one year and may be revoked, suspended, or not renewed by the department of public works for improper testing, repairs and/or reporting. (Ord. 90-13)

 

13.04.1020 Certification renewal.
    A certificate of competence may be renewed within ninety days from the date of expiration. Any person desiring certification renewal shall make written application to the department on a form provided by, and in a manner prescribed by the department. Each application shall be accompanied by a fee, in an amount to be set by resolution of the city council. Said fee shall not be refundable or transferable. (Ord. 90-13)

 

13.04.1030 Certification suspension or revocation.
    A.  If the department determines that a certificate holder has failed to comply with any requirement of this article, the department shall issue to the certificate holder, a written notice setting forth the acts or omissions with which the certificate holder is charged, and informing the certificate holder of their right to a hearing to show cause why the certificate of competence should not be suspended or revoked. A written request for a hearing shall be made by the certificate holder within fifteen calendar days after receipt of the notice shall be deemed a waiver of the right to hearing and the certificate of competence may be suspended or revoked.

    B.   The hearing shall be conducted within fifteen calendar days of the receipt of a request for a hearing. Upon written request of the certificate holder, the department of public works may postpone any hearing date, if circumstances warrant such action.

    C.   At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall issue a written notice of decision to the certificate holder within five working days following the hearing. In the event of a suspension or revocation, the notice shall specify the acts or omissions with which the certificate holder is charged, and shall state the terms of the suspension or that the certificate of competence has been revoked.

    D.  Upon revocation of a certificate of competence, the former certificate holder shall not be allowed to make application for a certificate of competence for a period of three years after the revocation date. (Ord. 90-13)

 

13.04.1040 Authority to inspect.
    The water user’s premises shall be available for inspection at all reasonable times to authorized representatives of the department to determine if protection of the public water system is required at the service connection(s). (Ord. 90-13)

 

13.04.1050 Testing and reports.
    A.  Any water user at whose service connection(s) any backflow prevention assemblies are installed, shall have each such assembly tested at the time of installation and annually thereafter or more often as the department may require. All such tests shall be conducted by a certified backflow prevention assembly tester possessing a valid “certificate of competence” issued by the department of public works. Backflow prevention assemblies shall be repaired or replaced at the expense of the water user whenever they are found to be defective.

    B.   Reports of tests of backflow prevention assemblies shall be filed with the department within twenty calendar days after said tests are conducted. The department shall accept said reports from only those persons who possess a valid certificate of competence as issued by the department. The water user shall pay a fee to the city for each test report filed with the city. Said fee shall be established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 90-13)

 

13.04.1060 Existing backflow prevention assemblies.
    A.  Backflow prevention assemblies in service at the time of adoption of this article which do not comply with the provisions of this article may continue in use until such time as the assembly is determined to be defective or a building, plumbing or electrical permit is issued to construct improvements on the premises; provided, that such improvements exceed five thousand dollars, as determined by the department.

    B.   Any such assembly that is determined to be defective shall be replaced by an assembly that complies with the provisions of this article. (Ord. 90-13)

 

13.04.1070 Enforcement.
    A.  The city manager or designee shall have the authority to enforce this article.

    B.   The city may require discontinuance of water service to any premises wherein violations of this article exist. Any water user who violates any of the provisions of this article, or later bypasses or renders inoperative any backflow prevention assembly installed under the provisions of this article may, in addition to other penalties prescribed, be subject to discontinuance of water service. Water service will not again be rendered until such violations have been corrected as ascertained by the city. Any violation of the provisions of this article or rules and regulations promulgated thereof, shall be an infraction, punishable by a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars nor more than five hundred dollars. Each day that a violation exists shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. (Ord. 95-1 § 1; Ord. 90-13)

 

13.04.1080 Rules and regulations.
    The city is authorized to make all necessary and reasonable rules and regulations with respect to the enforcement of this article. All such rules and regulations shall be consistent with the provisions of this article and shall be effective thirty days after being filed with the city clerk of the city. (Ord. 95-1 § 1; Ord. 90-13)

 

Article XII. Water Efficient Landscaping
13.04.1090 Purpose.
    A.  The State Legislature has found:

    1.   That the waters of the state are of limited supply and are subject to ever increasing demands;

    2.   That the continuation of California’s economic prosperity is dependent on the availability of adequate supplies of water for future uses;

    3.   That it is the policy of the state to promote the conservation and efficient use of water and to prevent the waste of this valuable resource;

    4.   That landscapes are essential to the quality of life in California by providing areas for active and passive recreation and as an enhancement to the environment by cleaning air and water, preventing erosion, offering fire protection, and replacing ecosystems lost to development; and

    5.   That landscape design, installation, maintenance and management can and should be water efficient; and

    6.   That Section 2 of Article X of the California Constitution specifies that the right to use water is limited to the amount reasonably required for the beneficial use to be served and the right does not and shall not extend to waste or unreasonable method of use.

    B.   Consistent with these legislative findings, the purpose of this chapter is to:

    1.   Promote the values and benefits of landscaping practices that integrate and go beyond the conservation and efficient use of water;

    2.   Establish a structure for planning, designing, installing, maintaining and managing water efficient landscapes in new construction and rehabilitated projects by encouraging the use of a watershed approach that requires cross-sector collaboration of industry, government, and property owners to achieve the many benefits possible;

 

    3.   Establish provisions for water management practices and water waste prevention for existing landscapes;

    4.   Use water efficiently without waste by setting a Maximum Applied Water Allowance as an upper limit for water use and reduce water use to the lowest practical amount;

    5.   Promote the benefits of consistent landscape ordinances with neighboring local and regional agencies.

    C.   Landscapes that are planned, designed, installed, managed and maintained with the watershed based approach can improve California’s environmental conditions and provide benefits and realize sustainability goals. Such landscapes will make the urban environment resilient in the face of climatic extremes. Consistent with the legislative findings and purpose of the chapter, conditions in the urban setting will be improved by:

    1.   Creating the conditions to support life in the soil by reducing compaction, incorporating organic matter that increases water retention, and promoting productive plant growth that leads to more carbon storage, oxygen production, shade, habitat and esthetic benefits.

    2.   Minimizing energy use by reducing irrigation water requirements, reducing reliance on petroleum based fertilizers and pesticides, and planting climate appropriate shade trees in urban areas.

    3.   Conserving water by capturing and reusing graywater wherever possible and selecting climate appropriate plants that need minimal supplemental water after establishment.

    4.   Protecting air and water quality by reducing power equipment use and landfill disposal trips, selecting recycled and locally sourced materials, and using compost, mulch and efficient irrigation equipment to prevent erosion.

    5.   Protecting existing habitat and creating new habitat by choosing local native plants, climate adapted non-natives and avoiding invasive plants. Utilizing integrated pest management with least toxic methods as the first course of action. (Ord. 15-9 § 2, Ord. 11-11 § 2)

 

13.04.1100 Applicability.
    A.  After December 1, 2015, and consistent with Executive Order No. B-29-15, this chapter shall apply to all of the following landscape projects:

    1.   New development projects with an aggregate landscape area equal to or greater than five hundred square feet requiring a building or landscape permit, plan check, or design review;

    2.   Rehabilitated landscape projects with an aggregate landscape area equal to or greater than two thousand five hundred square feet requiring a building or landscape permit, plan check, or design review;

    3.   Existing landscapes limited to Sections 13.04.1200 and 13.04.1210; and

    4.   Cemeteries. Recognizing the special landscape management needs of cemeteries, new and rehabilitated cemeteries are limited to Sections 13.04.1120(C), 13.04.1130(C) and 13.04.1200; and existing cemeteries are limited to Sections 13.04.1200, and 13.04.1210.

    B.   Any project with an aggregate landscape area of two thousand five hundred square feet or less may comply with the performance requirements of this chapter or conform to the prescriptive measures contained in Section 13.04.1140.

    C.   For projects using treated or untreated graywater or rainwater captured on site, any lot or parcel within the project that has less than two thousand five hundred square feet of landscape and meets the lot’s or parcel’s landscape water requirement (estimated total water use) entirely with treated or untreated graywater or through stored rainwater captured on-site is subject only to Section 13.04.1140.

    D.  This chapter does not apply to:

    1.   Registered local, state or federal historical sites;

    2.   Ecological restoration projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system;

    3.   Mined-land reclamation projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system; or

    4.   Existing plant collections, as part of botanical gardens and arboretums open to the public. (Ord. 15-9 § 2, Ord. 11-11 § 2)

 

13.04.1110 Definitions.
    The terms used in this chapter have the meaning set forth below:

    “Applied water” means the portion of water supplied by the irrigation system to the landscape.

    “Automatic irrigation controller” means a timing device used to remotely control valves that operate an irrigation system. Automatic irrigation controllers are able to self-adjust and schedule irrigation events using either evapotranspiration (weather-based) or soil moisture data.

    “Backflow prevention device” means a safety device used to prevent pollution or contamination of the water supply due to the reverse flow of water from the irrigation system.

    “Certificate of completion” means the document required under Section 13.04.1130.

    “Certified irrigation designer” means a person certified to design irrigation systems by an accredited academic institution a professional trade organization or other program such as the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s WaterSense irrigation designer certification program and Irrigation Association’s Certified Irrigation Designer program.

    “Certified landscape irrigation auditor” means a person certified to perform landscape irrigation audits by an accredited academic institution, a professional trade organization or other program such as the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s WaterSense irrigation auditor certification program and Irrigation Association’s Certified Landscape Irrigation Auditor program.

    “Check valve” or “anti-drain valve” means a valve located under a sprinkler head, or other location in the irrigation system, to hold water in the system to prevent drainage from sprinkler heads when the sprinkler is off.

    “Common interest developments” means community apartment projects, condominium projects, planned developments, and stock cooperatives per Civil Code Section 1351.

    “Compost” means the safe and stable product of controlled biologic decomposition of organic materials that is beneficial to plant growth.

    “Conversion factor (0.62)” means the number that converts acre-inches per acre per year to gallons per square foot per year

    “Distribution uniformity” means the measure of the uniformity of irrigation water over a defined area.

    “Drip irrigation system” means a method of micro-irrigation system (low pressure and low volume) wherein water is applied to the soil surface as drops or small streams through emitters. See also “Subsurface drip irrigation system.”

    “Ecological restoration project” means a project where the site is intentionally altered to establish a defined, indigenous, historic ecosystem.

    “Effective precipitation (Eppt)” or “usable rainfall” means the portion of total precipitation which becomes available for plant growth. The usable rainfall value shall be estimated as twenty-five percent of the average annual rainfall. Average annual rainfall amounts shall be determined by the city of West Sacramento parks department, and based on a combination of data from the city’s weather stations, and regional California Irrigation Management Information Systems (CIMIS) data.

    “Emitter” means a drip irrigation emission device that delivers water slowly from the system to the soil.

    “Established landscape” means the point at which plants in the landscape have developed significant root growth into the soil. Typically, most plants are established after one or two years of growth.

    “Establishment period of the plants” means the first year after installing the plant in the landscape or the first two years if irrigation will be terminated after establishment. Typically, most plants are established after one or two years of growth. Native habitat mitigation areas and trees may need three to five years for establishment.

    “Estimated total water use (ETWU)” means the total water used for the landscape as described in Section 13.04.1120(C).

    “ET adjustment factor (ETAF)” means a factor of 0.55 for residential areas and 0.45 for nonresidential areas, that, when applied to reference evapotranspiration, adjusts for plant factors and irrigation efficiency, two major influences upon the amount of water that needs to be applied to the landscape. The ETAF for new and existing (non-rehabilitated) Special Landscape Areas shall not exceed 1.0. The ETAF for existing non-rehabilitated landscapes is 0.8.

    “Evapotranspiration rate” means the quantity of water evaporated from adjacent soil and other surfaces and transpired by plants during a specified time. See also “Reference evapotranspiration.”

    “Flow rate” means the rate at which water flows through pipes, valves and emission devices, measured in gallons per minute, gallons per hour, or cubic feet per second.

    “Flow sensor” means an inline device installed at the supply point of the irrigation system that produces a repeatable signal proportional to flow rate. Flow sensors must be connected to an automatic irrigation controller, or flow monitor capable of receiving flow signals and operating master valves.

    “Friable” means a soil condition that is easily crumbled or loosely compacted down to a minimum depth per planting material requirements, whereby the root structure of newly planted material will be allowed to spread unimpeded.

    “Graywater” means untreated wastewater that has not been contaminated by any toilet discharge, has not been affected by infectious, contaminated, or unhealthy bodily wastes, and does not present a threat from contamination by unhealthful processing, manufacturing, or operating wastes. “Graywater” includes, but is not limited to, wastewater from bathtubs, showers, bathroom washbasins, clothes washing machines, and laundry tubs, but does not include wastewater from kitchen sinks or dishwashers. Health and Safety Code Section 17922.12.

    “Hardscapes” means any durable material (pervious and non-pervious).

    “Hydrozone” means a portion of the landscaped area having plants with similar water needs and rooting depth. A hydrozone may be irrigated or non-irrigated.

    “Infiltration rate” means the rate of water entry into the soil expressed as a depth of water per unit of time (e.g., inches per hour).

    “Invasive plant species” means species of plants not historically found in California that spread outside cultivated areas and can damage environmental or economic resources. Invasive species may be regulated by county agricultural agencies as noxious species. Lists of invasive plants are maintained at the California Invasive Plant Inventory and USDA invasive and noxious weeds database.

    “Irrigation audit” means an in-depth evaluation of the performance of an irrigation system conducted by a certified landscape irrigation auditor. An irrigation audit includes, but is not limited to: inspection, system tune-up, system test with distribution uniformity or emission uniformity, reporting overspray or runoff that causes overland flow, and preparation of an irrigation schedule. The audit must be conducted in a manner consistent with the Irrigation Association’s Landscape Irrigation Auditor Certification program or other U.S. Environmental Protection Agency “WaterSense” labeled auditing program.

    “Irrigation efficiency (IE)” means the measurement of the amount of water beneficially used divided by the amount of water applied. Irrigation efficiency is derived from measurements and estimates of irrigation system characteristics and management practices. The irrigation efficiencies for purposes of this chapter are 0.75 for overhead sprinkler irrigation systems and 0.81 for drip or subsurface drip irrigation systems.

    “Irrigation survey” means an evaluation of an irrigation system that is less detailed than an irrigation audit. An irrigation survey includes, but is not limited to: inspection, system test, and written recommendations to improve performance of the irrigation system.

    “Irrigation water use analysis” means an analysis of water use data based on meter readings and billing data.

    “Landscape architect” means a person who holds a license to practice landscape architecture in the state of California Business and Professions Code, Section 5615.

    “Landscape area” means all the planting areas, turf areas, and water features in a landscape design plan subject to the maximum applied water allowance calculation. The landscape area does not include footprints of buildings or structures, sidewalks, driveways, parking lots, decks, patios, gravel or stone walks, other pervious or non-pervious hardscapes, and other non-irrigated areas designated for non-development (e.g., open spaces and existing native vegetation).

    “Landscape contractor” means a person licensed by the state of California to construct, maintain, repair, install, or subcontract the development of landscape systems.

    “Landscape Development Guidelines” is a document published by the community development department of the city of West Sacramento, which defines the development requirements for trees, shrubs, and other plantings.

    “Landscape documentation package” means the documents required under Section 13.04.1120.

    “Landscape project” means total area of landscape in a project as defined in “landscape area” for the purposes of this chapter, meeting requirements under Section 13.04.1100.

    “Landscape water meter” means an inline device installed at the irrigation supply point that measures the flow of water into the irrigation system and is connected to a totalizer to record water use.

    “Lateral line” means the water delivery pipeline that supplies water to the emitters or sprinklers from the valve.

    “Low volume irrigation” means the application of irrigation water at low pressure through a system of tubing or lateral lines and low-volume emitters such as drip, drip lines, bubblers, and multi-stream, multi-trajectory rotator sprinklers. Low volume irrigation systems are specifically designed to apply small volumes of water not to exceed 0.75 inches per hour precipitation rate.

    “Main line” means the pressurized pipeline that delivers water from the water source to the valve or outlet.

    “Master shut-off valve” is an automatic valve installed at the irrigation supply point which controls water flow into the irrigation system. When this valve is closed, water will not be supplied to the irrigation system. A master valve will greatly reduce any water loss due to a leaky station valve.

    “Master Tree List” means the most current list of various tree species published regularly by the city’s parks and recreation department. Trees on the list are approved for planting in the city of West Sacramento.

    “Maximum applied water allowance (MAWA)” means the upper limit of annual applied water for the established landscaped area as specified in Section 13.04.1120(C). It is based upon the area’s reference evapotranspiration, the ET adjustment factor, and the size of the landscape area. The estimated total water use shall not exceed the maximum applied water allowance. Special landscape areas, including recreation areas, areas permanently and solely dedicated to edible plants such as orchards and vegetable gardens, and areas irrigated with recycled water are subject to the MAWA with an ETAF not to exceed 1.0. MAWA = (ETo) (0.62) [(ETAF x LA) + ((1-ETAF) x SLA)], where ETAF is 0.55 for residential areas, or 0.45 for nonresidential areas.

    “Median” is an area between opposing lanes of traffic that may be unplanted or planted with trees, shrubs, perennials, and ornamental grasses.

    “Microclimate” means the climate of a small, specific area that may contrast with the climate of the overall landscape area due to factors such as wind, sun exposure, plant density, or proximity to reflective surfaces.

    “Mined-land reclamation projects” means any surface mining operation with a reclamation plan approved in accordance with the Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975.

    “Mulch” means any organic material such as leaves, bark, straw, compost, or inorganic mineral materials such as rocks, gravel, or decomposed granite left loose and applied to the soil surface for the beneficial purposes of reducing evaporation, suppressing weeds, moderating soil temperature, and preventing soil erosion.

    “New construction” means, for the purposes of this chapter, a new building with a landscape or other new landscape, such as a park, playground, or greenbelt without an associated building.

    “Nonresidential landscape” means landscapes in commercial, institutional, industrial, and public settings that may have areas designated for recreation or public assembly. It also includes portions of common areas of common interest developments with designated recreational areas.

    “Operating pressure” means the pressure at which the parts of an irrigation system are designed by the manufacturer to operate.

    “Overhead sprinkler irrigation systems” means systems that deliver water through the air (e.g., spray heads and rotors).

    “Overspray” means the irrigation water which is delivered beyond the target area.

    “Permit” means an authorizing document issued by the city of West Sacramento for new construction or rehabilitated landscapes.

    “Pervious” means any surface or material that allows the passage of water through the material and into the underlying soil.

    “Plant factor” or “plant water use factor” is a factor, when multiplied by ETo, estimates the amount of water needed by plants. For purposes of this chapter, the plant factor range for very low water use plants is 0 to 0.1, the plant factor range for low water use plants is 0.1 to 0.3, the plant factor range for moderate water use plants is 0.4 to 0.6, and the plant factor range for high water use plants is 0.7 to 1.0. Plant factors cited in this chapter are derived from the publication “Water Use Classification of Landscape Species” or “WUCOLS.” Plant factors may also be obtained from horticultural researchers from academic institutions or professional associations as approved by the California Department of Water Resources (DWR).

    “Project applicant” means the individual or entity submitting a landscape documentation package required under Section 13.04.1120, to request a permit, plan check, or design review from the city of West Sacramento. A project applicant may be the property owner or designee.

    “Rain sensor” or “rain sensing shutoff device” means a component which automatically suspends an irrigation event when it rains.

    “Record drawings” or “as-builts” means a set of reproducible drawings which show significant changes in the work made during construction and which are usually based on drawings marked up in the field and other data furnished by the contractor.

    “Recreational area” means areas, excluding private single-family residential areas, designated for active play, recreation or public assembly in parks, sports fields, picnic grounds, amphitheaters or golf courses tees, fairways roughs, surrounds and greens.

    “Recycled water,” “reclaimed water,” or “treated sewage effluent water” means treated or recycled waste water of a quality suitable for non-potable uses such as landscape irrigation and water features. This water is not intended for human consumption.

    “Reference evapotranspiration” or “ETo” means a standard measurement of environmental parameters which affect the water use of plants, expressed in inches per unit of time. ETo is an estimate of the evapotranspiration of a large field of four- to seven-inch tall, cool-season grass that is well watered. Reference evapotranspiration is used as the basis for determination of the maximum applied water allowance to accommodate regional differences in climate. The reference evapotranspiration value is determined by the city of West Sacramento Parks department as a combination of data from the city’s weather stations and regional California Irrigation Management Information Systems (CIMIS) data.

    “Rehabilitated landscape” means any re-landscaping project that requires a permit, plan check, or design review, meets the requirements of Section 13.04.1100, and where the modified landscape area is equal to or greater than two thousand five hundred square feet.

    “Residential landscape” means landscapes surrounding single or multifamily homes.

    “Runoff” means water which is not absorbed by the soil or landscape to which it is applied and flows from the landscape area. For example, runoff may result from water that is applied at too great a rate (application rate exceeds infiltration rate) or when there is a slope.

    “Soil moisture sensing device” or “soil moisture sensor” means a device that measures the amount of water in the soil. The device may also suspend or initiate an irrigation event.

    “Soil texture” means the classification of soil based on its percentage of sand, silt, and clay.

    “Special landscape area (SLA)” means an area of the landscape dedicated solely to edible plants, recreational areas, areas irrigated with recycled water, or water features using recycled water.

    “Sprinkler head” means a device which delivers water through a nozzle.

    “Static water pressure” means the pipeline or municipal water supply pressure when water is not flowing.

    “Station” means an area served by one valve or by a set of valves that operate simultaneously.

    “Swing joint” means an irrigation component that provides a flexible, leak-free connection between the emission device and lateral pipeline to allow movement in any direction and to prevent equipment damage.

    “Submeter” means a metering device to measure water applied to the landscape that is installed after the primary utility water meter.

    “Subsurface drip irrigation system” means a method of micro-irrigation system (low pressure and low volume) wherein water is applied below the soil surface through emitters. See also “Drip irrigation system.”

    “Turf” means a ground cover surface of mowed grass.

    “Valve” means a device used to control the flow of water in the irrigation system.

    “Water conserving plant species” means a plant species identified as having a very low or low plant factor.

    “Water feature” means a design element where open water performs an aesthetic or recreational function. Water features include ponds, lakes, waterfalls, fountains, artificial streams, spas, and swimming pools (where water is artificially supplied). The surface area of water features is included in the high water use hydrozone of the landscape area. Constructed wetlands used for on-site wastewater treatment or stormwater best management practices that are not irrigated and used solely for water treatment or stormwater retention are not water features and, therefore, are not subject to the water budget calculation.

    “Watering window” means the time of day irrigation is allowed.

“WUCOLS” means the latest edition of the publication called “Water Use Classification of Landscape Species” published by the University of California Cooperative Extension and the Department of Water Resources. (Ord. 15-9 § 2, Ord. 11-11 § 2)

 

13.04.1120 Landscape documentation package.
    A.  Process. Prior to construction, the project applicant shall submit a landscape documentation package (application) to the city of West Sacramento. Such application may be rejected unless it contains the minimum number of copies requested by city staff, of all required items, as noted in subsection B.

    Such application shall also comply with all other city and state ordinances as appropriate including specifically, but not limited to, the city’s Landscape Development Guidelines, and Master Tree List. Where this chapter conflicts with the City’s Landscape Development Guidelines, Master Tree List, or other regulation documents, the most restrictive requirement(s) shall apply.

    City staff will review the application (landscape documentation) package, and may request additional information from the applicant at any time in order to obtain sufficient information to verify compliance with this chapter.

    If all required components have been submitted, and the package complies with all requirements of this chapter, the landscape documentation package shall be approved by the city, and the applicant will be notified of how to obtain a permit for construction. The applicant shall not commence installation without the proper permit(s).

    If city staff determines that the requirements of this chapter have not been met by the applicant through his or her landscape documentation package and any additional information supplied, the application shall be denied, and the applicant will be notified of the city’s determination, as well as the reason for denial. The applicant shall also be informed of re-application and/or appeal procedures, as appropriate.

    Upon approval of the landscape documentation package and issuance of the proper permit(s), the project applicant shall:

    1.   Record the date of such permit in the certificate of completion;

    2.   Submit a copy of the approved landscape documentation package along with the record drawings, and any other information to the property owner or designee.

    B.   Elements of a landscape documentation package. The landscape documentation package shall include the following six elements:

    1.   Project Information.

    a.   Date.

    b.   Project applicant.

    c.   Project address (if available, parcel and/or lot number(s)).

    d.   Total landscape area (square feet).

    e.   Project type (e.g., new, rehabilitated, public, private, cemetery, homeowner-installed).

    f.    Water supply type (e.g., potable, recycled, well).

    g.   Checklist of all documents in landscape documentation package.

    h.   Project contacts to include contact information for the project applicant and property owner.

    i.    Applicant signature and date with the statement, “I agree to comply with the requirements of the City of West Sacramento’s Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance and submit a complete Landscape Documentation Package.”

    2.   Water Efficient Landscape Table.

    a.   Water budget calculations.

    i.    Maximum applied water allowance (MAWA).

    ii.   Estimated total water use (ETWU).

    iii.  Average site ETAF for regular (non-SLA) landscape areas.

    3.   Soil analysis/report.

    4.   Landscape plan.

    5.   Irrigation plan.

    6.   Grading plan.

    C.   Water Efficient Landscape Table. A project applicant shall complete the Water Efficient Landscape Table which contains information on the plant factor, irrigation method, irrigation efficiency, and area associated with each hydrozone. Calculations are then made to show that the evapotranspiration adjustment factor (ETAF) for the landscape project does not exceed a factor of 0.55 for residential areas and 0.45 for nonresidential areas, exclusive of special landscape areas. The ETAF for a landscape project is based on the plant factors and irrigation methods selected. The maximum applied water allowance is calculated based on the maximum ETAF allowed (0.55 for residential areas and 0.45 for nonresidential areas) and expressed as annual gallons required. The estimated total water use (ETWU) is calculated based on the plants used and irrigation method selected for the landscape design. ETWU must be below the MAWA.

    1.   Water Efficient Landscape Table. A water efficient landscape table should contain at least the following information:

    a.   Hydrozone/planting area—zone or valve designations, or other designations corresponding to the landscape plan.

    b.   Irrigation method—Micro-spray, spray, rotor, bubbler, drip, subsurface drip, etc.

    c.   Irrigation efficiency—0.75 for spray, or 0.81 for drip.

    d.   Plant Factor. The plant factor used shall be from WUCOLS. The plant factor ranges from 0 to 0.1 for very low water use plants, 0.1 to 0.3 for low water use plants, from 0.4 to 0.6 for moderate water use plants, and from 0.7 to 1.0 for high water use plants.

    e.   ETAF—Plant factor (PF) divided by the irrigation efficiency (IE) for each hydrozone area.

    f.    Landscape area of each hydrozone area in square feet.

    g.   ETAF multiplied by landscape area for each hydrozone area.

    See the example water efficient landscape table below for a residential project:

 

Hydrozone/ Planting Area Description

Irrigation Method

Irrigation Efficiency (IE)

Plant Factor (PF)

ETAF (PF/IE)

Landscape Area (LA) (sq. ft.)

ETAF x LA (sq. ft.)

1

Sub Drip

0.81

0.1

0.123

7,000

864

2

Rotor

0.75

0.7

0.933

9,000

8,400

3

Spray

0.75

0.5

0.667

15,000

10,000

4

Drip

0.81

0.3

0.370

7,000

2,590

5

Low Flow

0.75

0.2

0.267

10,000

2,667

 

 

 

 

Sum

(A)

(B)

6/SLA

N/A

N/A

N/A

1.0

2,000

2,000

 

 

 

 

Sum

(C)

(D)

 

    2.   Water Budget Calculations. Water budget calculations for a landscape project compare the maximum applied water allowance (MAWA) to the estimated total water use (ETWU). For all landscape projects under this chapter, ETWU shall be less than MAWA.

    For both the ETWU and MAWA calculations, project applicants shall use the reference evapotranspiration (ETo) value as determined by the city of West Sacramento parks department.

    a.   Water budget calculations shall adhere to the following requirements:

    i.    The plant factor used shall be from WUCOLS or from horticultural researchers with academic institutions or professional associations as approved by the California Department of Water Resources (DWR). The plant factor ranges from 0 to 0.1 for very low water use plants, from 0.1 to 0.3 for low water use plants, from 0.4 to 0.6 for moderate water use plants, and from 0.7 to 1.0 for high water use plants.

    ii.   All water features shall be included in the high water use hydrozone and temporarily irrigated areas shall be included in the low water use hydrozone.

    iii.  All special landscape areas shall be identified and their water use calculated as described below.

    iv.  ETAF for new and existing (non-rehabilitated) special landscape areas shall not exceed 1.0.

    b.   MAWA Calculation. The maximum applied water allowance may include an adjustment for effective precipitation (Eppt), and be calculated using the equation:

 

     MAWA (gallons/yr) =

     (ETo - Eppt) (0.62) [(ETAF) (LA) + (1 - ETAF) (SLA)]

 

    Where:

    ETo = Reference evapotranspiration rate (inches per year)

    Eppt = 25% of the average rainfall (inches per year)

    0.62 = Conversion factor (to gallons)

    ETAF = ET adjustment factor = 0.55 residential, 0.45 nonresidential

    LA = Landscape area including SLA (square feet)

    SLA = Special landscape area (square feet)

 

    c.   ETWU Calculation.

    i.    The estimated total water use shall be calculated using the equation:

 

     ETWU (gallons/yr) =

     (ETo - Eppt) (0.62) [((ETAF) (LA)) + SLA]

 

Where:

    ETo = Reference evapotranspiration (inches per year)

    Eppt = 25% of the average rainfall (inches per year)

    0.62 = Conversion factor

    ETAF = ET adjustment factor = PF / IE

    PF = Plant factor

    IE = Irrigation efficiency

    LA = Landscape area (square feet)

    SLA = Special landscape area (square feet)

 

    ii.   Average ETAF for regular (non-SLA) landscape areas (i.e., value B divided by value A in the above example table) must be 0.55 or less for residential areas, and 0.45 or less for nonresidential areas.

    D.  Soil Analysis/Report. In order to reduce runoff and encourage healthy plant growth, a soil analysis and report shall be completed by the project applicant, or designee, as follows:

    1.   Submit soil samples to a laboratory for analysis and recommendations.

    a.   Soil sampling shall be conducted in accordance with laboratory protocol, including protocols regarding adequate sampling depth for the intended plants.

    b.   The soil analysis shall include:

    i.    Soil texture;

    ii.   Infiltration rate determined by laboratory test or soil texture infiltration rate table;

    iii.  pH;

    iv.  Total soluble salts;

    v.   Sodium;

    vi.  Percent organic matter; and

    vii. Recommendations.

    c.   In projects with multiple landscape installations (i.e., production home developments) a soil sampling rate of one in seven lots or approximately fifteen percent will satisfy this requirement. Large landscape projects shall sample at a rate equivalent to one in seven lots.

    2.   The project applicant, or designee, shall comply with one of the following:

    a.   If significant mass grading is not planned, the soil analysis/report shall be submitted to the city of West Sacramento as part of the landscape documentation package; or

    b.   If significant mass grading is planned, the soil analysis/report shall be submitted to the city of West Sacramento as part of the certificate of completion.

    3.   The soil analysis/report shall be made available, in a timely manner, to the professionals preparing the landscape design plans and irrigation design plans to make any necessary adjustments to the design plans based on information in the soil analysis report.

    4.   The project applicant, or designee, shall submit documentation verifying implementation of soil analysis/report recommendations to the city of West Sacramento with the certificate of completion.

    E.   Landscape Design Plan. For the efficient use of water, a landscape shall be carefully designed and planned for the intended function of the project. To that end, a landscape design plan meeting the following design criteria shall be submitted as part of the landscape documentation package.

    1.   Plant Material.

    a.   Any plant or tree conforming to the city’s Landscape Development Guidelines and the city’s Master Tree List may be selected for the landscape, providing the estimated total water use in the landscape area does not exceed the maximum applied water allowance. Plants within city rights-of-way or easements will be subject to review and approval by the city. Methods to achieve water efficiency shall include one or more of the following:

    i.    Protection and preservation of native species and natural vegetation;

    ii.   Selection of plants based on local climate suitability, disease and pest resistance;

    iii.  Selection of water-conserving plant, tree and turf species, especially local native plants;

    iv.  Selection of plants from local and regional landscape program plant lists;

 

    v.   Selection of trees based on the city’s Master Tree List as appropriate for the planting area.

    b.   Each hydrozone shall have plant materials with similar water use, with the exception of hydrozones with plants of mixed water use, as specified in subsection (F)(2)(d).

    c.   Plants shall be selected and planted appropriately based upon their adaptability to the climatic, geologic, and topographical conditions of the project site. Methods to achieve water efficiency shall include one or more of the following:

    i.    Use the Sunset Western Climate Zone System which takes into account temperature, humidity, elevation, terrain, latitude, and varying degrees of continental and marine influence on local climate.

    ii.   Recognize the horticultural attributes of plants (i.e., mature plant size, invasive surface roots) to minimize damage to property or infrastructure (e.g., buildings, sidewalks, power lines); allow for adequate soil volume for healthy root growth.

    iii.  Consider the solar orientation for plant placement to maximize summer shade and winter solar gain.

    d.   Turf is not allowed on slopes greater than 1:4 where the toe of the slope is adjacent to an impermeable hardscape and where 1:4 means one foot of vertical elevation change for every four feet of horizontal length.

    e.   High water use plants, characterized by a plant factor of 0.7 to 1.0, are prohibited in street medians.

    f.    A landscape design plan for projects in fire-prone areas shall address fire safety and prevention. A defensible space or zone around a building or structure is required per Public Resources Code Section 4291(a) and (b). Avoid fire-prone plant materials and flammable mulches, especially in and around parking lots.

    g.   The use of invasive plant species, such as those listed by the California Invasive Plant Council, is strongly discouraged. The use of invasive plant species within city right-of-way or easements will not be permitted.

    h.   The architectural guidelines of a common interest development, which include community apartment projects, condominiums, planned developments, and stock cooperatives, shall not prohibit or include conditions that have the effect of prohibiting the use of low-water use plants as a group.

    2.   Water Features.

    a.   Recirculating water systems shall be used for water features.

    b.   Where available, recycled water shall be used as a source for decorative water features.

    c.   Surface area of a water feature shall be included in the high water use hydrozone area of the water budget calculation.

    d.   Pool and spa covers are highly recommended.

    3.   Soil Preparation, Mulch and Amendments.

    a.   Prior to the planting of any materials, compacted soils shall be transformed to a friable condition. On engineered slopes, only amended planting holes need meet this requirement.

    b.   Soil amendments shall be incorporated according to recommendations of the soil report and what is appropriate for the plants selected (see subsection D).

    c.   For landscape installations, compost at a rate of a minimum of four cubic yards per one thousand square feet of permeable area shall be incorporated to a depth of six inches into the soil. Soils with greater than six percent organic matter in the top six inches of soil are exempt from adding compost and tilling.

    d.   A minimum three-inch layer of mulch shall be applied on all exposed soil surfaces of planting areas except in turf areas, creeping or rooting groundcovers, or direct seeding applications where mulch is contraindicated. To provide habitat for beneficial insects and other wildlife, up to five percent of the landscape area may be left without mulch. Designated insect habitat must be included in the landscape design plan as such.

    e.   Stabilizing mulching products shall be used on slopes that meet current engineering standards.

    f.    The mulching portion of the seed/mulch slurry in hydro-seeded applications shall meet the mulching requirement.

    g.   Organic mulch made from recycled or post-consumer materials shall take precedence over inorganic materials or virgin forest products unless the recycled post-consumer organic products are not locally available.

    h.   The use of flammable mulches shall be avoided as noted in subsection (E)(1)(f).

    4.   Design Content. The landscape design plan shall, at a minimum:

    a.   Delineate and label each hydrozone by number, letter, or other method;

    b.   Identify each hydrozone as low, moderate, high water, or mixed water use. Temporarily irrigated areas of the landscape shall be included in the low water use hydrozone for the water budget calculation;

    c.   Identify recreational areas;

    d.   Identify areas permanently and solely dedicated to edible plants;

    e.   Identify areas irrigated with recycled water;

    f.    Identify type of mulch and application depth;

    g.   Identify soil amendments, type, and quantity;

    h.   Identify type and surface area of water features;

    i.    Identify hardscapes (pervious and non-pervious);

    j.    Identify location and installation details, and twenty-four-hour retention or infiltration capacity of any applicable stormwater best management practices that encourage on-site retention and infiltration of stormwater. Project applicants shall refer to the city’s municipal code, Chapter 13.10 Urban Stormwater Quality Management and Discharge Control, and the Regional Water Quality Control Board for information on any applicable stormwater technical requirements. Stormwater best management practices are encouraged in the landscape design plan and examples are provided in Section 13.04.1180.

    k.   Identify any applicable rain harvesting or catchment technologies as discussed in Section 13.04.1180 and their twenty-four-hour retention or infiltration capacity;

    l.    Identify any applicable graywater discharge piping, system components and area(s) of distribution;

    m.  Contain the following statement: “I have complied with the criteria of the ordinance and applied them for the efficient use of water in the landscape design plan”; and

    n.   Bear the signature of a licensed landscape architect, licensed landscape contractor, or any other person authorized to design a landscape. (See Sections 5500.1, 5615, 5641, 5641.1, 5641.2, 5641.3, 5641.4, 5641.5, 5641.6, 6701, 7027.5 of the Business and Professions Code, Section 832.27 of Title16 of the California Code of Regulations, and Section 6721 of the Food and Agriculture Code.)

    F.   Irrigation Design Plan. This subsection applies to landscaped areas requiring permanent irrigation, not areas that require temporary irrigation solely for the plant establishment period. For the efficient use of water, an irrigation system shall meet all the requirements listed in this subsection and the manufacturers’ recommendations. The irrigation system and its related components shall be planned and designed to allow for proper installation, management, and maintenance.

    An irrigation design plan meeting the following design criteria shall be submitted as part of the landscape documentation package.

    1.   System.

    a.   Landscape water meters, defined as either a dedicated water service meter or submeter, shall be installed for all non-residential irrigated landscapes of one thousand square feet but not more than five thousand square feet (the level at which Water Code Section 535 applies) and residential irrigated landscapes of five thousand square feet or greater. A landscape water meter may be either:

    i.    A water meter on a water service specifically dedicated to landscape use; or

    ii.   A submeter on the irrigation leg of a water service which supplies both domestic and irrigation water.

    b.   Automatic irrigation controllers utilizing either evapotranspiration, soil moisture sensor data, or other such self-adjusting controllers, utilizing non-volatile memory shall be required for irrigation scheduling in all irrigation systems.

    c.   If the water pressure is below or exceeds the recommended pressure of the specified irrigation devices, the installation of a pressure regulating device is required to ensure that the dynamic pressure at each emission device is within the manufacturer’s recommended pressure range for optimal performance.

    i.    If the static pressure is above or below the required dynamic pressure of the irrigation system, pressure-regulating devices such as inline pressure regulators, booster pumps, or other devices shall be installed to meet the required dynamic pressure of the irrigation system.

    ii.   Static water pressure, dynamic or operating pressure and flow reading of the water supply shall be measured at the point of connection. These pressure and flow measurements shall be conducted at the design stage. If the measurements are not available at the design stage, the measurements shall be conducted at installation.

    d.   Rain sensors, either integral or auxiliary, that suspend or alter irrigation operation during unfavorable weather conditions shall be required on all irrigation systems, as appropriate for local climatic conditions. Irrigation should be avoided during windy or freezing weather or during rain.

    e.   Manual shut-off valves (such as a gate valve, ball valve, or butterfly valve) shall be required, as close as possible to the point of connection of the water supply, to minimize water loss in case of an emergency (such as a main line break) or routine repair.

    f.    Backflow prevention devices shall be required to protect the water supply from contamination by the irrigation system. For additional backflow prevention requirements, the project applicant shall refer to the city’s municipal code, Chapter 13.04 Water Service System, Article XI Protection of Drinking Water.

    g.   Flow sensors that detect high flow conditions created by system damage or malfunction are required for all nonresidential landscapes and residential landscapes of five thousand square feet or larger.

    h.   Master shut-off valves are required on all projects except landscapes that make use of technologies that allow for the individual control of sprinklers that are individually pressurized in a system equipped with low pressure shut down features.

    i.    The irrigation system shall be designed to prevent runoff, low head drainage, overspray, or other similar conditions where irrigation water flows onto non-targeted areas, such as adjacent property, non-irrigated areas, hardscapes, roadways, or structures.

    j.    Relevant information from the soil analysis report, such as soil type and infiltration rate, shall be utilized when designing irrigation systems.

    k.   The design of the irrigation system shall conform to the hydrozones of the landscape design plan.

    l.    The irrigation system must be designed and installed to meet, at a minimum, the irrigation efficiency criteria as described in subsection C regarding the maximum applied water allowance.

    m.  All irrigation emission devices must meet the requirements set in the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) standard, American Society of Agricultural and Biological Engineers’/International Code Council’s (ASABE/ICC) 802-2014 “Landscape Irrigation Sprinkler and Emitter Standard, All sprinkler heads installed in the landscape must document a distribution uniformity low quarter of 0.65 or higher using the protocol defined in ASABE/ICC 802-2014.

    n.   The project applicant is encouraged to inquire with the city about peak water operating demands (on the water supply system) or water restrictions that may impact the effectiveness of the irrigation system.

    o.   In mulched planting areas, the use of low volume irrigation is recommended to maximize water infiltration into the root zone.

    p.   Sprinkler heads and other emission devices shall have matched precipitation rates, unless otherwise directed by the manufacturer’s recommendations.

    q.   Head to head coverage is recommended. However, sprinkler spacing shall be designed to achieve the highest possible distribution uniformity using the manufacturer’s recommendations.

    r.    Swing joints or other riser-protection components are required on all risers subject to damage that are adjacent to hardscapes or in high traffic areas of turf.

    s.    Check valves or anti-drain valves are required on all sprinkler heads where low point drainage could occur.

    t.    Areas less than ten feet in width in any direction shall be irrigated with a drip irrigation system, subsurface drip irrigation system, or other means that produces no runoff or overspray. Such areas that fall within city rights-of-way or easements shall utilize low volume irrigation, specifically multi-stream, multi-trajectory rotator heads, or drip irrigation, if possible.

    u.   Overhead irrigation shall not be permitted within twenty-four inches of any non-permeable surface. Allowable irrigation within the setback from non-permeable surfaces may include drip, subsurface drip, or other low flow technology. The setback area may be planted or unplanted. The surfacing of the setback area may be mulch, gravel, or other porous material, subject to other applicable city regulations based on the setback area location. These restrictions may be modified if:

    i.    The landscape area is adjacent to permeable surfacing and no runoff occurs; or

    ii.   The adjacent non-permeable surfaces are designed and constructed to drain entirely to landscaping; or

    iii.  the irrigation designer specifies an alternative design or technology (including multi-stream, multi-trajectory rotator sprinklers), as part of the landscape documentation package and clearly demonstrates strict adherence to irrigation system design criteria in subsection (F)(1)(h). Prevention of overspray and runoff must be confirmed during the irrigation audit.

    v.   Slopes greater than 1:4 shall not be irrigated with an irrigation system with an application rate exceeding 0.75 inches per hour. This restriction may be modified if the landscape designer specifies an alternative design or technology, as part of the landscape documentation package, and clearly demonstrates no runoff or erosion will occur. Prevention of runoff and erosion must be confirmed during the irrigation audit.

    2.   Hydrozones.

    a.   Each valve shall irrigate a hydrozone with similar site, slope, sun exposure, soil conditions, and plant materials with similar water use.

    b.   Sprinkler heads and other emission devices shall be selected based on what is appropriate for the plant type within that hydrozone.

    c.   Where feasible, trees shall be placed on separate valves from shrubs, groundcovers, and turf to facilitate the appropriate irrigation of trees. The mature size and extent of the root zone shall be considered when designing irrigation for the tree.

    d.   Individual hydrozones that mix plants of moderate and low water use, or moderate and high water use, may be allowed if:

    i.    Plant factor calculation is based on the proportions of the respective plant water uses and their plant factor; or

    ii.   The plant factor of the higher water using plant is used for calculations.

    e.   Individual hydrozones that mix high and low water use plants shall not be permitted.

    f.    On the landscape design plan and irrigation design plan, hydrozone areas shall be designated by number, letter, or other designation. On the irrigation design plan, designate the areas irrigated by each valve, and assign a number to each valve. Use this valve number in the Hydrozone Information Table (see subsection (C)(1). This table can also assist with the irrigation audit and programming the controller.

    3.   Design Content. The irrigation design plan, at a minimum, shall contain:

    a.   Location and size of separate water meters for landscape delineate whether the landscape water supply is connected to, or separate from the domestic supply;

    b.   Location, type and size of all components of the irrigation system, including controllers, main and lateral lines, valves, sprinkler heads, moisture sensing devices, rain switches, quick couplers, pressure regulators, and backflow prevention devices;

    c.   Static water pressure at the point of connection to the public water supply;

    d.   Flow rate (gallons per minute), application rate (inches per hour), and design operating pressure (pressure per square inch) for each station;

    e.   Recycled water irrigation systems as specified in Section 13.04.1160;

    f.    The following statement: “I have complied with the criteria of the city of West Sacramento’s Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance and applied them accordingly for the efficient use of water in this irrigation design plan”; and

    g.   The signature of a licensed landscape architect, certified irrigation designer, licensed landscape contractor, or any other person authorized to design an irrigation system. (See Sections 5500.1, 5615, 5641, 5641.1, 5641.2, 5641.3, 5641.4, 5641.5, 5641.6, 6701, 7027.5 of the Business and Professions Code, Section 832.27 of Title 16 of the California Code of Regulations, and Section 6721 of the Food and Agricultural Code.)

    G.  Grading Plan. For the efficient use of water, grading of a project site shall be designed to minimize soil erosion, runoff, and water waste. A grading plan shall be submitted as part of the landscape documentation package. A comprehensive grading plan prepared by a civil engineer for other city permits may satisfy this requirement.

    1.   The project applicant shall submit a landscape grading plan that indicates finished configurations and elevations of the landscape area including:

    a.   Height of graded slopes.

    b.   Drainage patterns.

    c.   Pad elevations.

    d.   Finish grade.

    e.   Stormwater retention improvements, if applicable.

    2.   To prevent excessive erosion and runoff, it is highly recommended that project applicants:

    a.   Grade so that all irrigation and normal rainfall remains within property lines and does not drain onto non-permeable hardscapes.

    b.   Avoid disruption of natural drainage patterns and undisturbed soil.

    c.   Avoid soil compaction in landscape areas.

    3.   The grading design plan shall contain the following statement: “I have complied with the criteria of the City of West Sacramento’s Water Efficient Landscaping Ordinance and applied them accordingly for the efficient use of water in the grading plan” and shall bear the signature of a licensed professional as authorized by law. (Ord. 15-9 § 2, Ord. 11-11 § 2)

 

13.04.1130 Certificate of completion.
    A.  General. The certificate of completion shall include the following six elements:

    1.   Project information sheet that contains:

    a.   Date.

    b.   Project name.

    c.   Project applicant name, telephone, and mailing address.

    d.   Project address and location.

    e.   Property owner name, telephone, and mailing address.

    2.   Mylar and digital “as-built” record drawings in a format acceptable to the city shall be included with the certificate of completion unless this requirement is waived in writing by the city.

    3.   Certification by either the signer of the landscape plan, the signer of the irrigation plan, or the licensed landscape contractor that the landscape project has been installed per the approved landscape documentation package;

    a.   Where there have been significant changes made in the field during construction, these “as-built” or record drawings shall be included with the certification;

    b.   A diagram of the irrigation plan showing hydrozones shall be kept with the irrigation controller for subsequent management purposes.

    4.   Irrigation scheduling parameters used to set the controller (see subsection B).

    5.   Landscape and irrigation maintenance schedule (see subsection C).

    6.   Irrigation audit report (see subsection D).

    7.   Soil analysis/report, if not submitted with the landscape documentation package, and documentation verifying implementation of soil report recommendations (see Section 13.04.1120(D)).

    The project applicant shall submit the signed certificate of completion to the city of West Sacramento for review, and ensure that copies of the approved certificate of completion are submitted to the property owner or designee.

    Upon receipt of the signed certificate of completion from the project applicant, the city of West Sacramento shall approve or deny the certificate of completion. If the certificate of completion is denied, the city of West Sacramento shall provide information to the project applicant regarding reapplication, appeal, or other assistance.

    B.   Irrigation Scheduling. For the efficient use of water, all irrigation schedules shall be developed, managed, and evaluated to utilize the minimum amount of water required to maintain plant health. Irrigation schedules shall meet the following criteria:

    1.   Irrigation scheduling shall be regulated by automatic irrigation controllers.

    2.   Overhead irrigation shall be scheduled as defined by the city’s urban water management plan, unless weather conditions prevent it. Operation of the irrigation system outside the normal watering window is allowed for auditing and system maintenance.

    3.   For implementation of the irrigation schedule, particular attention must be paid to irrigation run times, emission device, flow rate, and current reference evapotranspiration, so that applied water meets the estimated total water use. Total annual applied water shall be less than or equal to maximum applied water allowance (MAWA). Actual irrigation schedules shall be regulated by automatic irrigation controllers using current reference evapotranspiration data (e.g., CIMIS) or soil moisture sensor data.

    4.   Parameters used to set the automatic controller shall be developed and submitted for each of the following:

    a.   The plant establishment period.

    b.   The established landscape.

    c.   Temporarily irrigated areas.

    5.   Each irrigation schedule shall consider for each station all of the following that apply:

    a.   Irrigation interval (days between irrigation).

    b.   Irrigation run times (hours or minutes per irrigation event to avoid runoff).

    c.   Number of cycle starts required for each irrigation event to avoid runoff.

    d.   Amount of applied water scheduled to be applied on a monthly basis.

    e.   Application rate setting.

    f.    Root depth setting.

    g.   Plant type setting.

    h.   Soil type.

    i.    Slope factor setting.

    j.    Shade factor setting.

    k.   Irrigation uniformity or efficiency setting.

    C.   Landscape and Irrigation Maintenance Schedule. Landscapes shall be maintained to ensure water use efficiency. A regular maintenance schedule shall be submitted with the certificate of completion.

    1.   A regular maintenance schedule shall include, but not be limited to:

    a.   Routine inspection.

    b.   Auditing.

    c.   Adjustment and repair of the irrigation system and its components.

    d.   Aerating and dethatching turf areas.

    e.   Topdressing with compost.

    f.    Replenishing mulch.

    g.   Fertilizing.

    h.   Pruning.

    i.    Weeding in all landscape areas.

    j.    Removing obstructions to emission devices.

    2.   Operation of the irrigation system outside the normal watering window is allowed for auditing and system maintenance.

    3.   Repair of all irrigation equipment shall be done with the originally installed components or their equivalents or with components with greater efficiency.

    4.   Project applicants are encouraged to implement established landscape industry sustainable best practices for all landscape maintenance activities.

    D.  Irrigation Audit, Irrigation Survey, and Irrigation Water Use Analysis.

    1.   All landscape irrigation audits shall be conducted by the city landscape irrigation auditor or a third party certified landscape irrigation auditor. Landscape audits shall not be conducted by the person who designed the landscape or installed the landscape.

    2.   In large projects or projects with multiple landscape installations (i.e., production home developments) an auditing rate of one in seven lots or approximately fifteen percent will satisfy this requirement.

    3.   For new construction and rehabilitated landscape projects installed after December 1, 2015, as described in Section 13.04.1100:

    a.   The project applicant shall submit an irrigation audit report with the certificate of completion to the city of West Sacramento that may include, but is not limited to:

    i.    Inspection;

    ii.   System tune-up;

    iii.  System test with distribution uniformity, reporting overspray or run off that causes overland flow; and

    iv.  Preparation of an irrigation schedule, including configuring irrigation controllers with application rate, soil types, plant factors, slope, exposure and any other factors necessary for accurate programming.

    b.   The city may administer programs that include, but are not limited to, irrigation water use analysis, irrigation audits, and irrigation surveys for compliance with the maximum applied water allowance. (Ord. 15-9 § 2, Ord. 11-11 § 2)

 

13.04.1140 Prescriptive compliance option.
    For projects with an aggregate landscape area of two thousand five hundred square feet or less, this section contains prescriptive requirements which may be used as an alternative compliance option to Sections 13.05.1120 and 13.04.1130 of this chapter. Compliance with the following items is mandatory and must be documented on a landscape plan in order to use this prescriptive compliance option.

    1.   Submit a landscape documentation package which includes the following elements:

    a.   Date.

    b.   Project applicant.

    c.   Project address (if available, parcel and/or lot number(s)).

    d.   Total landscape area (square feet), including a breakdown of turf and plant material.

    e.   Project type (e.g., new rehabilitated, public, private, cemetery, homeowner-installed).

    f.    Water supply type (e.g., potable, recycled, well) and identify the local retail water purveyor if the applicant is not served by a private well.

    g.   Contact information for the project applicant and property owner.

    h.   Applicant signature and date with statement, “I agree to comply with the requirements of the prescriptive compliance option to the City WELO.”

    2.   Incorporate compost at a rate of at least four cubic yards per one thousand square feet to a depth of six inches into landscape area (unless contra-indicated by a soil test).

    3.   Plant material shall comply with all of the following:

    a.   For residential areas, install climate adapted plants that require occasional, little or no summer water (average WUCOLS plant factor 0.3) for seventy-five percent of the plant area excluding edibles and areas using recycled water; for nonresidential areas, install climate adapted plants that require occasional, little or no summer water average WUCOLS plant factor 0.3 for one hundred percent of the plant area excluding edibles and areas using recycled water;

    b.   A minimum three-inch layer of mulch shall be applied on all exposed soil surfaces of planting areas except in turf areas, creeping or rooting groundcovers, or direct seeding applications where mulch is contraindicated.

    4.   Turf shall comply with all of the following:

    a.   Turf shall not exceed twenty-five percent of the landscape area in residential areas, and there shall be no turf in nonresidential areas;

    b.   Turf shall not be planted on sloped areas which exceed a slope of one foot vertical elevation change for every four feet of horizontal length;

    c.   Turf is prohibited in parkways less than ten feet wide, unless the parkway is adjacent to a parking strip and used to enter and exit vehicles. Any turf in parkways must be irrigated by subsurface irrigation or by other technology that creates no overspray or runoff.

    5.   Irrigation systems shall comply with the following:

    a.   Automatic irrigation controllers are required and must use evapotranspiration or soil moisture sensor data.

    b.   Irrigation controllers shall be of a type which does not lose programming data in the event the primary power source is interrupted.

    c.   Pressure regulators shall be installed on the irrigation system to ensure the dynamic pressure of the system is within the manufacturer’s recommended pressure range.

    d.   Manual shut-off valves (such as gate valves, ball valves, or butterfly valves) shall be installed as close as possible to the point of connection of the water supply.

    e.   All irrigation emission devices must meet the requirements set in the ANSI standard, ASABE/ICC 802-2014, “Landscape Irrigation Sprinkler and Emitter Standard”. All sprinkler heads installed in the landscape must document a distribution uniformity low quarter of 0.65 or higher using the protocol defined in ASABE/ICC 802-2014.

    At the time of final inspection, the permit applicant must provide the owner of the property with a certificate of completion, certificate of installation, irrigation schedule and a schedule of landscape and irrigation maintenance. (Ord. 15-9 § 2)

 

13.04.1150 Irrigation efficiency.
    For the purpose of determining estimated total water use, average irrigation efficiency is assumed to be 0.75 for overhead spray devices and 0.81 for drip system devices. (Ord. 15-9 § 2, Ord. 11-11 § 2)

 

13.04.1160 Recycled water.
    The installation of recycled water irrigation systems shall allow for the current and future use of recycled water.

    All recycled water irrigation systems shall be designed and operated in accordance with all applicable local and state laws.

    For public projects, irrigated areas within the city rights-of-way and easements, and any other cases the city deems appropriate, the city may require the use of purple irrigation piping to signify recycled water usage, although recycled water may not be available at the time. In these cases, above-ground notifications regarding purple piping (such as purple valve boxes, tags, and signage) need not be installed until recycled water is actually run through the system.

    Landscapes using recycled water are considered special landscape areas. The ET adjustment factor (ETAF) for new and existing (non-rehabilitated) special landscape areas shall not exceed 1.0. (Ord. 15-9 § 2, Ord. 11-11 § 2)

 

13.04.1170 Graywater systems.
    Graywater systems promote the efficient use of water and are encouraged to assist in on-site landscape irrigation. All graywater systems shall conform to the California Plumbing Code (Title 24, Part 5, Chapter 16) and any applicable local ordinance standards. Refer to Section 13.04.1100 for the applicability of this chapter to landscape areas less than two thousand five hundred square feet with the estimated total water use met entirely by graywater. (Ord. 15-9 § 2)

 

13.04.1180 Stormwater management and rainwater retention.
    Stormwater management practices minimize runoff and increase infiltration which recharges groundwater and improves water quality. Implementing stormwater best management practices into the landscape and grading plans to minimize runoff and to increase on-site rainwater retention and infiltration are encouraged.

    Applicants shall refer to the city’s municipal code, Chapter 13.10 Urban Stormwater Quality Management and Discharge Control, for information on the city’s stormwater technical requirements.

    All planted landscape areas are required to have friable soil to maximize water retention and infiltration. Refer to Section 13.04.1120(E)(3).

    It is strongly recommended that landscape areas be designed for capture and infiltration capacity that is sufficient to prevent runoff from impervious surfaces (i.e. roof and paved areas) from either: the one inch, twenty-four-hour rain event; the 85th percentile, twenty-four-hour rain event; and/or additional capacity as required by any applicable local, regional, state or federal regulation.

    It is recommended that stormwater projects incorporate any of the following elements to improve on-site stormwater and dry weather runoff capture:

    A.  Grade impervious surfaces, such as driveways, during construction to drain to vegetated areas.

    B.   Minimize the area of impervious surfaces such as paved areas, roof, and concrete driveways.

    C.   Incorporate pervious or porous surfaces (e.g., gravel, permeable pavers or blocks, pervious or porous concrete) that minimize runoff.

    D.  Direct runoff from paved surfaces and roof areas into planting beds or landscaped areas to maximize site water capture and reuse.

    E.   Incorporate rain gardens, cisterns, and other rain harvesting or catchment systems.

    F.   Incorporate infiltration beds, swales, basins, and drywells to capture storm water and dry weather runoff and increase percolation into the soil.

    G.  Consider constructed wetlands and ponds that retain water, equalize excess flow, and filter pollutants. (Ord. 15-9 § 2, Ord. 11-11 § 2)

 

13.04.1190 Public education.
    Education is a critical component to promote the efficient use of water in landscapes. The use of appropriate principles of design, installation, management and maintenance that save water is encouraged in the community.

    The city of West Sacramento will provide information to property owners and managers regarding the design, installation, management, and maintenance of water efficient landscapes via the city’s website, occasional neighborhood meetings, and other formats as the city deems appropriate.

    A.  Model Homes.

    1.   All model homes shall be landscaped and use signs and written information to demonstrate the principles of water efficient landscapes described in this chapter.

    2.   Signs shall be used to identify the model as an example of a water efficient landscape featuring elements such as hydrozones, irrigation equipment, and others that contribute to the overall water efficient theme. Signage shall include information about the site water use as designed per the local ordinance; specify who designed and installed the water efficient landscape; and demonstrate low water use approaches to landscaping, such as using native plants, graywater systems, and rainwater catchment systems.

    3.   Information shall be provided about designing, installing, managing, and maintaining water efficient landscapes. (Ord. 15-9 § 2, Ord. 11-11 § 2)

 

13.04.1200 Irrigation audit, irrigation survey, and irrigation water use analysis.
    This section shall apply to all existing landscapes that were installed before December 1, 2015 and are over one acre in size.

    The maximum applied water allowance for existing landscapes shall be calculated as:

 

MAWA = (ETo) (0.62) (0.8) (LA)

 

    A.  Existing Landscapes With a Water Meter. In order to evaluate water use and provide recommendations as necessary to reduce landscape water use to a level that does not exceed the maximum applied water allowance for existing landscapes, the city of West Sacramento may administer programs that include, but need not be limited to:

    1.   Irrigation water use analyses.

    2.   Irrigation surveys.

    3.   Irrigation audits.

    B.   Existing Landscapes Without a Water Meter. In order to evaluate water use and prevent and minimize water waste, the city of West Sacramento may administer programs that include, but need not be limited to:

    1.   Irrigation surveys.

    2.   Irrigation audits.

    All landscape irrigation audits shall be conducted by a certified landscape irrigation auditor. (Ord. 15-9 § 2, Ord. 11-11 § 2)

 

13.04.1210 Water waste prevention.
    No person shall cause or permit any water furnished to the person’s property by the city to run to waste due to inefficient landscape irrigation, runoff due to low head drainage, overspray, or other similar conditions where water flows onto adjacent property, non-irrigated areas, walks, roadways, parking lots, or structures.

    Restrictions regarding overspray and runoff may be modified if:

    A.  The landscape area is adjacent to permeable surfacing and no runoff occurs; or

    B.   The adjacent non-permeable surfaces are designed and constructed to drain entirely to landscaping. (Ord. 15-9 § 2, Ord. 11-11 § 2)

 

13.04.1220 Penalties.
    The requirements of this article may be enforced per the provisions of Articles IX and X of this chapter, Chapter 1.12; and any other applicable method to the extent permitted by law. (Ord. 15-9 § 2, Ord. 11-11 § 2)

Chapter 13.08 SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM
Note
*     Editor’s Note: This chapter is derived from Chapter 5, Article II of the East Yolo Community Services District Code, adopted by reference by city Ordinance No. 87-18.

 

Article I. General Provisions
13.08.005 Title.
    This chapter shall be known as the sanitary code of the city of West Sacramento. (District code Ch. 5 Art. II § 26.01)

 

13.08.010 Purpose.
    This chapter is intended to provide rules and regulations for the use and construction of sanitary sewer facilities hereafter installed, altered or repaired within the city. This chapter shall not apply retroactively; and in the event of an alteration or repair hereafter made, it shall apply only to the new materials and methods used in this chapter. (District code Ch. 5 Art. II § 26.02)

 

13.08.015 Adoption—Compliance required.
    The following rules and regulations respecting sewer construction and disposal of sewage and drainage of buildings and connection to the sewage works of the city are adopted, and all work in respect thereto shall be performed as required in this chapter and not otherwise. (District code Ch. 5 Art. II § 26.03)

 

13.08.020 Relief on application.
    When any person, by reason of special circumstances, is of the opinion that any provision of this chapter is unjust or inequitable as applied to his or her premises, he or she may make written application to the city council, stating the special circumstances, citing the applicable provision of this chapter, and requesting suspension or modification of that provision as applied to his or her premises. (District code Ch. 5 Art. II § 26.04)

 

13.08.025 Relief on own motion.
    The city council may, on its own motion, find that by reason of special circumstances any provision of this regulation and chapter should be suspended or modified as applied to a particular premises and may, by resolution, order such suspension or modification for the premises during the period of special circumstances, or any part hereof. (Ord. 94-10 § 1; district code Ch. 5 Art. II § 26.05)

 

13.08.030 Operation and maintenance engineer.
    The city council shall employ on a permanent basis a fit and qualified person or persons to perform the duties of operation and maintenance engineer, which will include providing engineering guidance in the construction, installation, connection and operation and maintenance of the plant and collection system of the city. (Ord. 91-20 § 1(A); district code Ch. 5 Art. II § 26.06)

 

13.08.035 Violation unlawful.
    Following the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, it is unlawful for any person to connect to, construct, install or provide, maintain and use any other means of sewage disposal from any building in the city except by connection to a public sewer in the manner provided in this chapter. (District code Ch. 5 Art. II § 26.07)

 

13.08.040 Definitions.
    For the purpose of this chapter the terms used herein are defined as follows:

    “Act” or “the Act” means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended 33 USC Section 1251, et seq.

    “Applicant” means the person making application for a permit for a sewer or plumbing installation and shall be the owner or his or her authorized agent of the premises to be served for the sewer for which a permit is requested.

    “Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD)” means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure, five days at twenty degrees Centigrade expressed in terms of weight and concentration (milligrams per liter (mg/l)).

    “Building” means any structure used for human habitation or a place of business, recreation or other purpose.

    “Building sewer” means that portion of a side sewer beginning at the plumbing or drainage outlet of any building or industrial facility and running to the property line or to a private sewage disposal system.

    “Categorical standards” means National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or Pretreatment Standard.

    “City council” means the city council of the city of West Sacramento.

    “City manager” or “manager” means the person appointed to administer and enforce the rules and regulations of the city or his or her designated representative. The designated representative for public services is the director of public works.

    “City sewer system” means the system of sanitary sewers designed and connected to carry away and dispose of the city’s domestic and industrial wastes, also to any annexed territory or territory served by agreement.

    “Combined sewer” means a sewer designed to receive both surface runoff and sewage.

    “Contractor” means an individual, firm, corporation, partnership or association duly licensed by the state of California to perform the type of work to be done under the permit.

    “Cooling water” means the water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added is heat.

    “Director” means the director of public works or the director’s designee.

    “Enforcement response plan” refers to the plan developed by the city to apply specific enforcement actions related to industrial pretreatment pursuant to 40 CFR 403.8(f)(5).

    “Environmental Protection Agency” or “EPA” means the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, or where appropriate the term may also be used as a designation for the Administrator or other duly authorized official of the agency.

    “Industrial user” means a source of discharge of industrial waste to the wastewater treatment plant from any nondomestic source.

    “Industrial waste” means any waste, discharge or pollutant from a nonresidential or nondomestic source.

    “Interference” means a discharge which alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources both inhibits or disrupts the sewage treatment plant; its treatment processes or operations; or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and therefore causes a violation of its NPDES permit or prevents sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with specified applicable federal statutes, regulations or permits.

    “Lateral sewer” means the portion of a side sewer lying within a public street connecting a building sewer to the main sewer and maintained by the city.

    “Lower laterals” means the portion of a side sewer connecting the main sewer and existing city cleanout.

    “Main sewer” means a public sewer designed to accommodate more than one lateral sewer.

    “Multiple dwelling” means a building for residential purposes containing more than one kitchen or having facilities for the occupancy of more than one person or families, including, but not limited to, the following: hotels, motels, auto courts, trailer courts, apartment houses, duplexes, roominghouses, boardinghouses, and dormitories.

    “National Pretreatment Standard” means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA under the Act applicable to industrial users (IUs) including the general and specific prohibitions.

    “New source” means a facility from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, identification of which began after the publication of the pretreatment standards pursuant to the Act which will apply to the facility provided certain criteria are met.

    “Outside sewer” means a sanitary sewer beyond the limits of the city not subject to the control or jurisdiction of the city.

    “Pass through” means a discharge which exits the sewer treatment plant in quantities or concentrations which alone or with discharge from other sources causes a violation of its NPDES permit.

    “Permit” means any written authorization required pursuant to this or any other regulation of the city for the installation of any sewerage works.

    “Person” means any human being, individual, firm, company, partnership, association, private corporations and cities.

    “pH” means the logarithm (base ten) of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions expressed in grams per liter of solution.

    “Pollutant” means any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, and industrial, municipal and agricultural waste discharged into water.

    “Pollution” means the manmade or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological and radiological integrity of water.

    “Pretreatment” or “treatment” means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into the sewerage system.

    “Pretreatment requirement” means any substantive or procedural pretreatment requirement, other than a National Pretreatment Standard, applicable to IUs.

    “Private sewer” means a sewer serving an independent sewage disposal system not connected with a public sewer and which accommodates one or more buildings or industries.

    “Public sewer” means a sewer lying within a street, easement or right-of-way and which is controlled by or under the jurisdiction of the city.

    “Refuse” means solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food from the handling, storage and sale of produce.

    “Sanitary sewer” means a sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted.

    “Sewage” means a combination of water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments.

    “Sewage treatment plant” or “wastewater treatment plant” means any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage.

    “Sewage works or “system” means all facilities owned or controlled by the city except private sewers, for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage.

    “Sewer” means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.

    “Shall” is considered mandatory; “may” shall be considered permissive.

    “Side sewer” means the sewer line beginning at the foundation wall of any building and terminating at the main sewer and includes the building sewer and lateral sewer together.

    “Significant industrial user (SIU)” means any categorical industrial users (CIU) as defined in 40 CFR 403, and any other industrial users (IU) which:

    1.   Discharge an average of twenty-five thousand gallons or more of wastewater per day;

    2.   Contribute wastewater which makes up five percent or more of the dry weather average hydraulic or organic capacity of the treatment plant;

    3.   Is designated as such by the local authority on the basis that it has a reasonable potential to adversely affect the sewer treatment plant operation or to violate a pretreatment standard or requirement.

    “Significant noncompliance (SNC)” means any IU whose violation meets one or more of the specific criteria listed in the city’s enforcement response plan. If the city determines that an IU is in SNC, that user must be included on the annual publication list.

    “Single-family unit” means and refers to the place of residence for a single family.

    “Standard industrial classification (SIC)” means classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1982, as amended and supplemented.

    “Standard specifications” means a set of documents now in existence or to be published containing design and construction standards for all sewerage works within the city.

    “State” means the state of California.

    “Storm sewer” or “storm drain” means a sewer which carries storm and surface or groundwaters and drainage, but excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes.

    “Stormwater” means any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting therefrom.

    “Street” means any public highway, road, street, avenue, alley, way, public place, public easement or right-of-way.

    “Suspended solids” means the total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and which is removable by laboratory filtering.

    “Toxic pollutant” means any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency under the provisions of the Act.

    “Upper laterals” means the portion of a side sewer beginning at the plumbing or drainage outlet of any building or industrial facility and running to the existing city cleanout.

    “User” means any person who contributes, causes, or permits the contribution of wastewater into the city’s sewage system.

    “Wastewater” or “sewage” means the liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water or stormwater which may be present, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed or permitted to enter the wastewater treatment plant.

    “Wastewater discharge permit” means a permit required by some users as defined in this chapter. (Ord. 18-1 § 2; Ord. 94-6 § 1; Ord. 93-6 § 1(A)—(H); Ord. 91-20 § 1(B), (C); district code Ch. 5 Art. II § 27-53)

 

Article II. Public Sewers
13.08.045 Use required.
    It is unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner upon public or private property within the city, in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal excrement, refuse or other objectionable waste. (District code Ch. 5 Art. II § 28.01)

 

13.08.050 Treatment of wastes required.
    It is unlawful to discharge to any stream or watercourse any sewage, industrial waste or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 94-10 § 1; district code Ch. 5 Art. II § 28.02)

 

13.08.055 Unlawful disposal.
    Except as provided in this chapter, it is unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, seepage pit or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. (District code Ch. 5 Art. II § 28.03)

 

13.08.060 Compliance prerequisite to occupancy.
    No building, industrial facility or other structure shall be occupied until the owner of the premises has complied with all rules and regulations of the city and/or applicable regulations of the city. (District code Ch. 5 Art. II § 28.04)

 

13.08.065 Sewer required.
    The owner of any building situated within the city and abutting on any street in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sewer of the city, is required at his or her expense to connect the building directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter within ninety days after the date of official notice to do so; provided that, the public sewer is within two hundred feet of the nearest point of the property. (District code Ch. 5 Art. II § 28.05)

 

Article III. Private Sewers
13.08.070 Sewer not available.
    Where a public sewer is not available under the provisions of Section 13.08.065, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system, complying with the provisions of this chapter. (District code Ch. 5 Art. II § 29.01)

 

13.08.075 Permit required.
    Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the city manager and the health department of the city. (District code Ch. 5 Art. II § 29.02)

 

13.08.080 Inspection required.
    A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the city. The city shall inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the city when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are covered. (District code Ch. 5 Art. II § 29.03)

 

13.08.085 Design requirements.
    The type, capacities, locations and layout of a private sewer disposal system shall comply with all requirements of the Department of Public Health of the state and the health department of the city. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any public sewer or any stream or watercourse. (District code Ch. 5 Art. II § 29.04)

 

13.08.090 Abandonment.
    At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in Section 13.08.065, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with the ordinances, rules and regulations of the city, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material as determined by the city. (District code Ch. 5 Art. II § 29.05)

 

13.08.095 Maintenance.
    The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city. (District code Ch. 5 Art. II § 29.06)

 

13.08.100 Additional requirements.
    No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by any law, ordinance, rule or regulation or by the city or of the health department of the state or city. (District code Ch. 5 Art. II § 29.07)

 

Article IV. Building Sewers—Lateral Sewers—Connections
13.08.105 Permit required.
    In accordance with Article VII of this chapter, no person shall construct a building sewer, lateral sewer to make a connection with any public sewer without first obtaining a written permit from the city and paying all fees and connection charges as required Article VII. (District code Ch. 5 Art. II § 30.01)

 

13.08.110 Requirements.
    Design and construction of building sewers and lateral sewers shall be in accordance with the requirements of the city and in accordance with city standard specifications. (District code Ch. 5 Art. II § 30.02)

 

13.08.115 Separation required.
    No two adjacent buildings fronting on the same street shall be permitted to join in the use of the same side sewer. Every building or industrial facility must be separately connected with a public sewer if the public sewer exists in the street upon which the property abuts or in an easement which will serve the property. However, one or more buildings located on property belonging to the same owner may be served with the same side sewer during the period of ownership. Upon the subsequent subdivision and sale of a portion of the lot the portion not directly connected to the public sewer shall be separately connected to a public sewer, and it is unlawful for the owner thereof to continue to use or maintain the indirect connection. (District code Ch. 5 Art. II § 30.03)

 

13.08.120 Old building sewers.
    Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, upon examination and test, to meet all requirements of the city. (District code Ch. 5 Art. II § 30.04)

 

13.08.125 Cleanouts.
    Cleanouts in building sewers shall be provided in accordance with the city plumbing code and the city standard specifications. All cleanouts shall be maintained watertight. (District code Ch. 5 Art. II § 30.05)

 

13.08.130 Correction of gravity flow.
    In all buildings in which any building sewer is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building sewer shall be lifted by artificial means approved by the city manager, and discharged to the public sewer at the expense of the owner. (District code Ch. 5 Art. II § 30.06)

 

13.08.135 Connection to public sewer—Supervision—Repair.
    The connection of the lateral sewer into the public sewer shall be made in accordance with city standard specifications and at the applicant’s expense. The connection to the public sewer shall be made in the presence of a city inspector and under his or her supervision and direction. Any damage to the public sewer shall be repaired in conformance with city standard specifications at the cost of the applicant. (District code Ch. 5 Art. II § 30.07)

 

13.08.140 Maintenance.
    A.  Upper laterals shall be maintained by the owner of the property served thereby.

    B.   Lower laterals connecting to single-family units shall be maintained by the city. However, where no cleanout has been installed or has been installed incorrectly, the entire side sewer shall be maintained by the owner of the property served thereby.

    C.   Lower laterals connecting to commercial and multiple dwelling buildings shall be maintained by the owner of the property served thereby. (Ord. 18-1 § 2; District code Ch. 5 Art. II § 30.08)

 

13.08.145 Testing.
    All building sewers and lateral sewers shall be tested in accordance with city standard specifications. (District code Ch. 5 Art. II § 30.09)

 

Article V. Public Sewer Construction
13.08.150 Permit required.
    In accordance with Article VII of this chapter, no person shall construct, extend or connect to any public sewer without first obtaining a written permit from the city and paying all fees and connection charges and furnishing bonds as required in Article VII. The provision of this article requiring permits shall not be construed to apply to contractors constructing sewers and appurtenances under contracts awarded and entered into by the city. (District code Ch. 5 Art. II § 31.01)

 

13.08.155 Standards.
    Standards for the design and construction of sewers within the city shall be in accordance with the city standard specifications adopted by the city council. Copies are on file at the offices of the city clerk and the engineering division. The engineer-consultant and city manager, with the consent of the city council, may permit modification or may require higher standards where unusual conditions are encountered. (Ord. 95-1 § 1; district code Ch. 5 Art. II § 31.02)

 

13.08.160 Plans required.
    The application for a permit for public sewer construction shall be accompanied by three complete sets of plans, profiles and specifications, complying with all applicable ordinances, rules and regulations of the city, prepared by a civil engineer registered in the state, showing all details of the proposed work based on an accurate survey of the ground. The application, together with the plans, profiles and specifications shall be examined by the engineer-consultant and city manager who shall require them to be modified as deemed necessary for proper installation. After the above review, the application, plans, profiles and specifications shall be submitted to the city council at its next regular meeting for its consideration. When the city council is satisfied that the proposed work is proper and the plans, profiles and specifications are sufficient and correct, it shall order the issuance of a permit predicated upon the payment of all connection charges, fees and furnishing bonds and deposits as required by the city. The permit shall prescribe such terms and conditions as the city council finds necessary in the public interest. (District code Ch. 5 Art. II § )

 

13.08.165 Subdivision.
    The requirements of Sections 13.08.150 and 13.08.155 shall be fully complied with before any final subdivision map shall be approved by the city council. The final subdivision map shall provide for the dedication for public use of streets, easements or rights-of-way in which public sewer lines are to be constructed. If a final subdivision map of a tract is recorded and the work of constructing sewers to serve the tract is not completed within the time limit allowed in the permit, the city council may extend the time limit or may complete the work and take appropriate steps to enforce the provisions of the bond furnished by the subdivider. (District code Ch. 5 Art. II § )

 

13.08.170 Easements or rights-of-way.
    In the event that an easement is required for the extension of the public sewer or the making of connections, the applicant shall procure and have accepted by the city council a proper easement or grant of right-of-way having a minimum width of ten feet sufficient in law to allow the laying and maintenance of such extension or connection. (District code Ch. 5 Art. II § )

 

13.08.175 Persons authorized to perform work.
    Only properly licensed contractors shall be authorized to perform the work of public sewer construction within the city. All terms and conditions of the permit issued by the city to the applicant shall be binding on the contractor. The requirements of this article shall apply to side sewers installed concurrently with public sewer construction. (District code Ch. 5 Art. II § 31.06)

 

13.08.180 Compliance with regulations.
    Any person constructing a sewer within a street shall comply with all state, city laws, ordinances, rules and regulations pertaining to the curing of pavement, opening, barricading, lighting and protecting of trenches, backfilling and repaving thereof and shall obtain all permits and pay all fees required prior to the issuance of a permit by the city. (District code Ch. 5 Art. II § 31.07)

 

13.08.185 As-built drawings.
    As a condition of final acceptance by the city, three sets of as-built drawings on cronaflex showing the actual locations of all mains, structures, wyes, laterals and other changes to the construction drawings shall be filed with the city. (District code Ch. 5 Art. II § 31.08)

 

13.08.190 Completion required.
    Before acceptance of any sewerage works by the city and prior to the admission of any sewage into the system, the sewerage works shall be tested and shall be completed in full compliance with all requirements of the city standard specifications and to the satisfaction of the city manager and the engineer-consultant. (District code Ch. 5 Art. II § 31.09)

 

13.08.195 Reimbursement agreement.
    A reimbursement agreement providing for collection and disbursement of fees for connection to a privately financed mains sewer line shall be as provided in Sections 13.08.200 through 13.08.240. (District code Ch. 5 Art. II § 31.10)

 

13.08.200 Reimbursement agreement—Purpose.
    Whenever the construction of main sewer line within the city at private expense (other than through assessment district proceedings) is completed after July 1, 1973 and the city council on advice of the city manager and engineer-consultant finds that the main sewer line when so contracted potentially will serve properties of persons other than those paying the costs of construction thereof, partial reimbursement of construction cost will be determined as provided in this article. (District code Ch. 5 Art. II § 31.10(a))

 

13.08.205 Reimbursement agreement—Application.
    Any person, firm or corporation proposing to construct a main sewer line shall make application to the city manager for a certificate of entitlement to reimbursement. If the city manager finds that the main sewer line to be constructed may reasonably be expected to benefit properties owned by persons other than those proposing to construct it and that the final construction costs as shown by itemized statements submitted are reasonable, he or she shall recommend to the city council that a certificate of entitlement to reimbursement be granted to applicant. If the city council concurs in the recommendation of the city manager, it shall, by resolution, declare the applicant entitled to partial reimbursement for construction costs. In the event of disagreement with the findings or recommendations of the city manager and engineer-consultant, applicant may appeal directly to the city council for final determination. (District code Ch. 5 Art. II § 31.10(b))

 

13.08.210 Reimbursement agreement—Term.
    Partial reimbursement for main sewer line construction cost shall be made through payment to the applicant of funds as are paid to the city as required in accordance with the provisions of this chapter until such time as the reimbursable portion of the cost of the line is fully reimbursed or ten years shall have elapsed from the date of approval of the certificate of entitlement to reimbursement by the city council. (District code Ch. 5 Art. II § 31.10(c))

 

13.08.215 Construction cost defined.
    Wherever the term “construction cost” is used in this section it will be limited to: excavation; pipe material, appurtenances and installation of same; ballast, bedding, backfill, paving materials and installation of same; sewer inspection fees and field surveying necessary for pipe installation. It will not include office engineering or overhead costs, field stake out, easement costs or any other items not listed in this section. (District code Ch. 5 Art. II § 31.10(d))

 

13.08.220 Frontage reimbursement and record.
    Where the certificate of entitlement to reimbursement relates to a main sewer line not over twelve inches in diameter, upon which other properties front, the partial reimbursement of costs shall be made from reimbursement fees paid to the city by the properties fronting thereon based on the construction cost spread over the total from fees of the property benefited, as determined by the city manager and engineer-consultant and as set forth in the frontage certificate of entitlement to reimbursement. The city will maintain a frontage reimbursement record in which the frontage reimbursement fees collected and disbursed will be accounted for by sewer project designation and applicant. (District code Ch. 5 Art. II § 31.10(e))

 

13.08.225 Area reimbursement.
    A.  Where the certificate of entitlement to reimbursement relates to a main sewer line fifteen inches in diameter or larger, partial reimbursement of the costs shall be made from area reimbursement fees paid to the city by all properties benefited. Under this type of certificate, the estimated construction cost, as determined by the city council of a hypothetical main sewer line twelve inches in diameter will be deducted from the total construction cost and this deduction will be reimbursed under Section 13.08.220, provided a front-age certificate of entitlement to reimbursement is issued.

    B.   Reimbursement of the remaining portion of the construction shall be made for area reimbursement fees computed in accordance with the following formula:

 


 

    Where C equals estimated total construction cost and city expenses of administration for the entire main sewer line system fifteen inches in diameter or larger serving all benefited properties;

    Where G equals estimated total average design flow in gallons per day from all benefitted properties;

    Where D equals two hundred fifty (estimated design flow in gallons per day from a single-family dwelling unit). This factor will be modified for other than single-family dwelling unit property developments by the proportionate relationship which these other uses bear to a dwelling unit;

    And F equals area reimbursement fee to be collected from owners to benefitted properties. (District code Ch. Art. II § 31.10(f))

 

13.08.230 Area reimbursement record.
    A.  The city will maintain an area reimbursement record in which the area certificate of entitlement to reimbursement will be entered upon approval by the city council, as a credit to the applicant or applicants entitled thereto. Area reimbursement fees collected and disbursed will be accounted for by sewer project designation and applicant. On January 2nd of each year after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, a review of each area reimbursement record will be made to determine the pro rata share which each applicant is entitled to, which has not been reimbursed. The pro rata share of entitlement to reimbursement will be adjusted by allowing a four percent increase in the share, which will be applied for each ensuing year on the amounts which have not been reimbursed; provided, the area certificate of entitlement to reimbursement is issued prior to July 1st immediately prior to the review. This amount of reimbursement will not be altered, only the pro rata shares. Reimbursement will then be made based on the adjusted pro rata shares.

    B.   Area reimbursement fees, collectible from applicants who have a credit in the same area reimbursement record, will be applied direct to their account to reduce their credit to the extent that such credit exists. In every case, city administrative fees must be paid before any reimbursement is applied to applicant’s account. (District code Ch. 5 Art. II § 31.10(g))

 

13.08.235 Designation of payee.
    The city reserves the right in granting a certificate of entitlement to reimbursement to require that a payee be named to act for and on behalf of all persons, firms or corporations interested in reimbursement where the applicant is other than an individual. (District code Ch. 5 Art. II § 31.10(h))

 

13.08.240 Special reimbursement agreements.
    Where special conditions exist, in the opinion of the city, relating to any agreement pursuant to Sections 13.08.195 through 13.08.235, they shall be the subject of a special contract between the city and the person making the public sewer main extension. (District code Ch. 5 Art. II § 31.11)

 

Article VI. Permits and Fees
13.08.320 Generally.
    No public sewer, side sewer, building sewer or other sewerage facility shall be installed, altered or repaired within the city until a permit for the work has been obtained from the city and all fees paid in accordance with the requirements of the ordinances, rules and regulations of the city. (District code Ch. 5 Art. II § 33.01)

 

13.08.325 Permit required.
    No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connection with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenances or perform any work on any lateral or building sewer without first obtaining a written permit from the city. (District code Ch. 5 Art. II § 33.02)

 

13.08.330 Application—Fee.
    A.  Any person legally entitled to apply for and receive a permit shall make such application on forms provided by the city for that purpose. He or she shall give a description of the character of the work proposed to be done and the location, ownership, occupancy and use of the premises in connection therewith. The city manager may require plans, specifications or drawings and such other information as he or she may deem necessary.

    B.   If the city manager determines that the plans, specifications, drawings, description or information furnished by the applicant is in compliance with the ordinances, rules and regulations of the city, he or she shall have issued the permit applied for upon payment of the fees prescribed by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 89-14 § 3 (part); district code Ch. 5 Art. II § 33.05)

 

13.08.335 Compliance with permit.
    After approval of the application, evidenced by the issuance of a permit, no change shall be made in the location of the sewerage works, the grade, materials or other details from those described in the permit or as shown on the plans and specifications for which the permit was issued, except with written permission from the city manager. (District code Ch. 5 Art. II § 33.05)

 

13.08.340 Agreement.
    The applicant’s signature on an application for any permit shall constitute an agreement to comply with all the provisions, terms and requirements of this and other chapters, rules and regulations of the city and with the plans and specifications he or she has filed with his or her application, if any, together with such correction or modifications as may be made or permitted by the city, if any. Such agreement shall be binding upon the applicant and may be altered only by the city upon written request for alteration from the application. (District code Ch. 5 Art. II § 33.06)

 

13.08.345 Permit—Duration.
    If work under a permit is not commenced within six months from the date of issuance of the permit or if after partial completion the work is discontinued for a period of one year, the permit shall thereupon become void and no further work shall be done until a new permit has been secured. A new fee shall be paid upon the issuance of the new permit. (District code Ch. 5 Art. II § 33.25)

 

13.08.350 Annexation charges.
    The owner or owners of lands within areas proposed to be annexed to the city shall deposit with the city manager a sum to be fixed by the city council prior to commencement of proceedings by the city council on the proposed annexation. The amount to be fixed by the city council shall be in a sum estimated to equal the engineering, legal and publication costs and all other charges which may be incurred by the city in preparing and examining maps, legal descriptions and other documents in relation thereto, and other expenses, regularly incurred in connection therewith. In addition, the city council will establish the fee per acre for such annexation plus any applicable engineering or construction costs for extension of public sewer mains in that area which may have been incurred by the city previously. (District code Ch. 5 Art. II § 33.07)

 

13.08.355 Building sewer connection charge.
    A.  Connection charges for single-family units, for multiple dwellings, commercial, industrial, public and other uses and for changes in use of existing properties, within or without the boundaries of the city, shall be paid to the city by the owner, or by any other person obligated to pay such charge, who desires the connection of any such property to the sewerage works of the city or to make any changes in existing connections thereto based on the fees prescribed by resolution of the city council.

    B.   Change of Use. If at any time after payment of a connection charge there is a change of use on the premises resulting in more than a ten-fixture unit increase in plumbing fixtures, the owner shall, prior to issuance of a change of use permit, pay the city the fees prescribed by resolution of the city council.

    C.   Values of Fixture Units. Numbers of fixture units in a facility, for purposes of computing connection charges, shall be determined from the table below:

 

Kind of Fixture

Units

Bathtub

2

Bidet

2

Dental unit or cuspidor

1

Drinking fountain

1

Floor drain

2

Interceptor for grease, oil, solids, etc.

3

Interceptor for sand, auto, wash, etc.

6

Laundry tub or clotheswasher (residential)

2

Laundry tub or clotheswasher (self-

 

service laundry, 2 units each)

2

Receptor (floor sink) indirect waste receptor, refrigerators, coffee urn, water station, etc.

1

Receptor, indirect waste receptor for commercial sinks, dishwashers, air washers, etc.

3

Showers, single stall

2

Showers, other (one unit per head)

1

Sink, bar, residential (½² min. waste)

1

Sink, bar, commercial (2² min. waste)

2

Sink, commercial or industrial, schools, etc. including dishwashers, wash-up sinks and wash fountains (2²

 

min. waste)

3

Sink, flushing rim, clinic

6

Sink and/or dishwasher (residential 2”

 

min. waste)

2

Sink, service

3

Trailer park trap (one for each trailer)

6

Urinal, pedestal

6

Urinal, stall

2

Urinal, wall (2² min. waste)

2

Urinal, wall trough (2² min. waste)

3

Wash basin (lavatories), single

1

Wash basin, in sets

2

Water closet

6

 

    D.  Drain line stubs which provide a means for fixture extension of drains should be assigned the number of fixture units listed in the following schedule:

 

Diameter of Drain Line

Fixture Units

1½ inches and smaller

2

2 inches

3

2½ inches

4

3 inches

5

4 inches

6

 

    E.   Connection charges, as prescribed by resolution of the city council, shall be adjusted wherever a component of the connection charge has been prepaid by a property owner. For this purpose, the components eligible for adjustment are treatment and collection.

    F.   Connection charges shall be adjusted each succeeding July 1st, commencing July 1, 1990, to reflect inflationary costs. The fees shall be increased by the ratio which the Engineering New Record Connection Cost Index (twenty cities) for the most recent July 1st bears to the July 1, 1989 index.

    G.  Except as set forth in subsection B of this section, no new sewer connection charge shall be required pursuant to this section for the same quality and quantity of sewage or wastewater from new or replacement facilities which have been destroyed or demolished and for which building sewer connection charges have been previously paid, unless there is a change in existing conditions. Nothing in this subsection shall constitute a waiver of any other requirements of this chapter including, but not limited to, the requirements for permits and inspections. (Ord. 89-14 § 3 (part); Ord. 88-1 § 1: district code Ch. 5 Art. II § 33.08)

 

13.08.360 Assessment connection charge.
    For any unit or lot, or part of the property which may be annexed that abuts on or can be directly served by an existing sewerage works of the city constructed or acquired pursuant to a special assessment proceeding, an additional connection charge equal to the amount which the property would have been assessed for the improvements shall also be collected and paid for the privilege of using the sewerage works. The sum shall not include any amounts for which bonds of the city are then outstanding and to which the property is or shall become subject. (District code Ch. 5 Art. II § 33.09)

 

13.08.365 Additional connection charge.
    In addition to any other fees and charges established by the ordinances, rules and regulations of the city, there shall be collected prior to connection to the sanitary sewer system of the city, special additional connection charges for any parcel, unit, lot or part of any property that abuts on or can be served by an existing main sewer or sewerage works of the city constructed by or at the expense of the city for which the parcel, unit, lot or part of any property did not pay its proportionate cost of installation. The charges shall be collected where the facilities to serve the property consist of a main sewer or any sewer manhole, pumping station or any other sewer facility, together with all appurtenances thereto, which was constructed by or for the city in order to coordinate the construction of the facilities with any street improvement program of the city, or to meet the requirements of the city for facilities to serve areas under the city general plan or for meeting the anticipated requirements for sewer service from the city, or for any other reason, which facilities where paid for by the city, which additional connection charge shall be in a sum to be computed by the city on the basis of the actual cost of the installation of the service, sewer lateral, sewer main, manhole or pumping facility, including all expenses incidental thereto and all engineering, legal, inspection and other charges, plus the loss of revenue on that money since it was first constituted. (District code Ch. 5 Art. II § 33.10)

 

13.08.370 Special connection charges.
    In addition to any other charges established in this chapter, the city may establish special connection charges for any sewer connection when, in the opinion of the city council, the circumstances of such connection necessitate the establishment of unusual conditions or necessitates the payment of charges over and above those established in this chapter. (District code Ch. 5 Art. II § 33.11)

 

13.08.375 Collection of connection charges—Lien.
    All connection charges shall be due prior to connection to the sanitary sewer system of the city; provided, however, the city council may in its sole discretion provide that any such connection charges may be paid in installments over a period of not to exceed six percent per annum, to be charged on the unpaid balance of such charges and prior interest. All charges and interest to be paid in installments shall constitute a lien against the respective lots of parcels of land to which the facilities are connected and to the extent unpaid shall be collected in the same manner as the taxes of the city; provided, the city shall have given notice to the owners of the lots or parcels affected as provided by law. (District code Ch. 5 Art. II § 33.12)

 

13.08.380 Fees—Excess water disposal.
    A.  A service charge based on the cost of collection and processing sewage plus overhead times the gallonage of water discharged, shall be charged to any person or business using the facilities of the city and discharging in excess of ten thousand five hundred gallons per month.

    B.   Billing. The city will bill the user bimonthly.

    C.   Metering. The user will provide a metering device at his or her expense, approved by the city, to determine the volume of water being discharged into the city’s system. The city may elect to utilize the reading of the water service meter to compute the service charge.

    D.  Violation. Upon violation of the requirements of this section or the failure to pay service charges within thirty days after billing, the city may upon ten days’ notice, order the user to disconnect his or her premises from the city’s facilities in the manner set forth in Section 13.08.605. (District code Ch. 5 Art. II § 33.13)

 

13.08.385 Payment of sewage use charges.
    There is levied and assessed upon each premises having any sewer connection to the city sewage system, or who are discharging sewage which ultimately passes through the city sewage system, a monthly service charge or rental as prescribed by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 89-14 § 3 (part); district code Ch. 5 Art. II § 33.14)

 

13.08.386 Service charge rate structure (cost of service).
    Service charges shall be charged by user class, reflecting the different constituent(s) and water volume requirements for each class. Each user class shall pay the higher of two charges: (1) a service charge to be the result of the rate for the user class; applied to the average volume usage for the class, or (2) a service charge to be the result of the rate for the user class applied to the user’s volume usage. (Ord. 93-11 § 4)

 

13.08.387 Adoption or revision of rates.
    Charges for the services or facilities furnished by the city pursuant to this chapter shall be prescribed or revised by resolution or ordinance. (Ord. 93-11 § 4)

 

13.08.390 Additional criteria for fee computation.
    A.  The following additional provisions are applicable to the computation of the sewer service charge for industrial customers:

    1.   Billing for services may be for a period mutually agreed upon, not exceeding twelve months, in cases in which it can be demonstrated that a uniform flow and sewage characteristic exists.

    2.   The city may require the installation of city-approved recording and sampling devices, or sewage meters, on the premises for use by the city at the customers expense. Such devices or meters shall be available for inspection at any reasonable time. Recording devices shall be capable of recording instantaneous and accumulated flows and sampling devices shall be automatic and capable of twenty-four hour storage, maintenance of temperature between thirty-five degrees and forty degrees Fahrenheit, and have a five gallon capacity. Customers shall be responsible for maintenance, repair and replacement of all sampling or recording devices and equipment. Customer shall in all events be responsible for any damage or expense in repair or replacement for which customer or his or her agent, officers or employees are responsible.

    B.   Industrial Users Discharging Nondomestic Sewage Constituents. Industrial users discharging sewage containing constituent(s) other than those normally found in domestic sewage shall be assessed an additional charge to compensate for any additional problems or costs incurred in conveying, treating or disposing of such constituent(s).

    C.   Industrial Users. The city may adopt charges and fees for industrial users which may include:

    1.   Fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the pretreatment program;

    2.   Fees for monitoring, inspection and surveillance procedures;

    3.   Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and construction;

    4.   Fees for permit applications;

    5.   Fees for handling appeals;

    6.   Other fees which may be found necessary to carry out the requirements contained in this chapter.

    D.  In addition to any other fee or charge hereunder, every industrial user shall be charged a monthly fee as established by resolution of the city council on the same bill as and collected together with other periodic charges for sewer use, the charge to ensure the monitoring, inspection and otherwise enforcement of the requirements of this chapter which apply to industrial users. These fees shall be subject to periodic review by the city.

    E.   Commercial or other nondomestic users not otherwise covered by this section shall be charged a metered rate subject to a minimum charge as established by Section 13.08.380(C). (Ord. 94-6 § 4 (part); Ord. 91-20 § 1 (H), (I); district code Ch. 5 Art. II §§ 33.14 (part), 33.15)

 

13.08.395 Permit and inspection fees.
    Fees for issuing permits and inspecting building sewers shall be as established by the city council by resolution. (Ord. 94-6 § 2: district code Ch. 5 Art. II § 33.17)

 

13.08.400 Performance bond required.
    The applicant shall post a surety bond, cash or other security satisfactory to the city to guarantee the faithful performance of any agreement for public main extension entered into with the city council. The surety bond, cash or security shall be in the sum of one hundred percent of the estimated costs of the work or in such other sum as may be fixed by the city council, and shall in addition to guaranteeing the faithful performance of the work, guarantee the maintenance of the sewer main for a period of one year following the completion and acceptance of the work by the city. (District code Ch. 5 Art. II § 33.18)

 

13.08.405 Inspection required.
    A.  All sewer construction work shall be inspected by an inspector acting for the city to ensure compliance with all requirements of the city. No sewer shall be covered at any point until it has been inspected and passed for acceptance. No sewer shall be connected to the city’s public sewer until the work covered by the permit has been completed, inspected and approved by the inspector. If the test proves satisfactory and the sewer has been cleaned of all debris accumulated from construction operations, the city manager shall issue a certificate of satisfactory completion.

    B.   For public sewer construction, the owner or owners and/or contractor shall deposit with the city manager a sum to be fixed by the city council prior to commencement of work. The sum shall be estimated to equal the cost of inspecting the work and expenses regularly incurred in connection therewith. The amount to be charged for inspection shall be on a time basis at the rate of eight dollars per hour and twelve dollars per hour for all Saturday and Sunday and holiday work and also all time in excess of eight hours per week day. Should the amount of the deposit exceed the costs incurred by the city, the excess shall be refunded to the owner or owners and/or contractor following the conclusion of the work. Should the amount of the deposit be insufficient to pay such costs incurred by the city, the owner or owners and/or contractor shall advance such additional sums as shall be necessary to pay the costs prior to the final inspection of the work. (District code Ch. 5 Art. II § 33.19)

 

13.08.410 Inspection—Notification.
    It shall be the duty of the person doing the work authorized by permit to notify the office of the city in writing that the work is ready for inspection. Such notification shall be given not less than forty-eight hours, Saturdays, Sundays and holidays excluded, before the work is ready to be inspected. It shall be the duty of the person doing the work to make sure the work will stand the tests required by the city before giving the above notification. (District code Ch. 5 Art. II § 33.20)

 

13.08.415 Condemned work.
    When any work has been inspected and the work condemned and no certification of satisfactory completion given, a written notice to the effect shall be given instructing the owner of the premises, or the agents of such owner, to repair the sewer or other work authorized by the permit in accordance with the ordinances, rules and regulations of the city. (District code Ch. 5 Art. II § 33.21)

 

13.08.420 Owner liability.
    All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of any sewer or other work for which a permit has been issued shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the work. (District code Ch. 5 Art. II § 33.22)

 

13.08.425 Street excavation permit.
    A separate permit must be secured from the city or any other person having jurisdiction thereover by owners or contractors intending to excavate in a public street for the purpose of installing sewers or making sewer connections. (District code Ch. 5 Art. II § 33.23)

 

13.08.430 Liability of city.
    The city and its officers, agents and employees shall not be answerable for any liability or injury or death to any person or damage to any property arising during or growing out of the performance of any work by such applicant, The applicant shall be answerable for, and shall save the city and its officers, agents and employees harmless from any liability imposed by law upon the city or its officers, agents or employees, including all costs, expenses, fees and interest incurred on defending same or in seeking to enforce this provision. Applicant shall be solely liable for any defects in the performance of his or her work or any failure which may develop therein. (District code Ch. 5 Art. II § 33.24)

 

13.08.435 Collection of sewer use charges.
    All sewer use rates and charges may be billed on the same bill as and collected together with rates and charges for other city services. If all or any part of such bill is not paid, the city may discontinue any or all the services for which the bill is rendered in the manner set forth in this article. (District code Ch. 5 Art. II § 33.26)

 

13.08.440 Billing period.
    The city shall issue bills for residential, commercial and all other forms of service rendered pursuant to this chapter at least every sixty days. The city may issue bills every thirty days for service rendered. In switching from one billing period to another billing period, the city may issue bills for a service period longer than thirty, but less than sixty, days. Each bill shall specify the dates of the service period. (District code Ch. 5 Art. II § 33.27)

 

13.08.445 Issuance of bills.
    A.  The city shall bill the property owner directly for all services provided to the owner’s property.

    B.   The property owner shall be liable for payment of all city charges regardless of whether the bill was sent to the owner’s personal business or residential address or to the address of the owner’s property to which the service was supplied. (District code Ch. 5 Art. II § 33.28)

 

13.08.450 Due date and delinquency.
    The city’s bill for service rendered is due and payable when received. Each bill shall specify the date it is issued. A bill shall be delinquent if payment for the entire amount of the bill is not received by the city by the later of:

    A.  The last day of the service period specified on the bill; or

    B.   Twenty-seven days after the date the bill is issued by the city. (District code Ch. 5 Art. II §33.29)

 

13.08.455 Delinquencies—Penalties—Partial payment.
    A.  A one-time basic penalty of ten percent of the rate for one month shall be added to each delinquent bill for the first month the bill is delinquent.

    B.   After assessing the basic penalty provided in subsection A of this section, thereafter an additional penalty of one-half percent per month for two months and thereafter one and one-half percent per month shall be added to all delinquent charges and basic penalties remaining unpaid, until the city council requests the city finance director to include the amount of all delinquencies on the bills for taxes levied against the appropriate premises as set forth in Section 13.08.465.

    C.   Moneys paid where any portion of an account is delinquent shall first be credited to the delinquent portion of the bill and then to the current billing.

    D.  Basic penalty and additional penalty may be reduced in accordance with criteria authorized by the city council. (Ord. 03-4 § 3; district code Ch. 5 Art. II §§ 33.30—33.32)

 

13.08.460 Liens.
    Delinquent charges remaining unpaid may be recorded as a lien with the county and, after recordation, shall constitute a lien upon all real property owned or thereafter acquired by the property owner in the city. The city shall include a statement to this effect on its bills to each property owner. The city may from time-to-time compile lists of such delinquent charges, and record them with the county recorder as liens. (District code Ch. 5 Art. II § 33.33)

 

13.08.465 Collection.
    All rates, charges, penalties and interest which remain delinquent as of June 30th of each year may be collected in the same manner as the general taxes for the city for the forthcoming fiscal year, as follows:

    A.  The city shall prepare a written report, which shall be filed by the city clerk. The report shall describe each parcel of real property for which there are any delinquencies in any rates or charges for services rendered to each parcel during the preceding year, and the amount of the delinquency. The report of delinquent sewer charges may be combined with the report of any other delinquent charges, as long as the report identifies the delinquent charges for each service for each parcel.

    B.   The city clerk shall publish notice of the report’s filing and of the time and place of hearing on the report, prior to the date set for the hearing. The notice shall be published at least once a week for two weeks. The city clerk shall also mail written notice of the report’s filing to each property owner whose property or parcel is identified as being subject to delinquent charges setting forth individually each property and each of the services and charges due for that property.

    C.   At the time stated in the notice, the city council shall hear and consider all objections or protests, if any, to the report concerning the delinquencies. Thereafter, the city council may adopt, revise, change, reduce or modify any delinquency or overrule any or all objections thereto. The city council shall then make its determination on each delinquency identified in the report; the city council’s determination shall be final.

    D.  Following the city council’s hearing, on or before August 10th of each year, the city clerk shall file with the city finance director a copy of the report, signed by the city clerk, stating the city council has adopted the report. The city clerk shall request the city finance director to include the amount of delinquencies on the bills for taxes levied against the properties identified in the report. (District code Ch. 5 Art. II § 33.34)

 

13.08.470 Adjustment of bills.
    The manager may adjust or grant rebates from the rates or fees provided in this chapter in the event of a dispute relating to a charge to a customer; provided, however, that all parties affected shall have a right to appeal the manager’s determination to the city council within seven days after receipt of the manager’s written decision. The decision of the city council thereon shall be final and binding on all parties. (District code Ch. 5 Art. II § 33.35)

 

13.08.475 Default—Recovery.
    A.  In the event that any property owner fails to make any payment provided for in this chapter, the property owner and subject property shall be in default, and the city may declare the balance, or any remaining balance, due and pay-able.

    B.   In the event the city is required to bring legal action to enforce any provision of this chapter. including but not limited to the collection of delinquent fees, penalties or other charges, the city shall be entitled to recover its reasonable attorney’s fees, interest, court costs and other costs incurred by the city to bring such action. (District code Ch. 5 Art. II § 33.36)

 

Article VII. Outside Sewers
13.08.480 Permits—Fees.
    Permission shall not be granted to connect any lot or parcel of land outside the city to any public sewer in or under the jurisdiction of the city unless a permit therefor is obtained. The regular permit and inspection fees shall be payable prior to connection. At the time the connection is made, a connection fee or fees as described in Article VII shall become due. In addition to any connection charges, an annual sewer charge as described in Section 13.08.390 shall be paid for such services on July 1st of each year for the ensuing year. Such fee shall be prorated for the period to the next June 30th, according to the number of months to run. (District code Ch. 5 Art. II § 34.01)

 

13.08.485 Special agreements.
    Where special conditions exist relating to any outside sewer, they shall be the subject of special contract between the applicant and the city. (District code Ch. 5 Art. II § 34.02)

 

13.08.490 Granting permit optional.
    The granting of permission for outside areas to connect to city sewers shall be optional with the city council. (District code Ch. 5 Art. II § 34.03)

 

13.08.495 Connection agreement.
    In no event shall such permission be granted unless the applicant shall first enter into a contract in writing whereby he or she shall bind him or herself, his or her heirs, successors and assigns to abide by all ordinances, rules and regulations in regard to the manner in which such sewer shall be used and the manner of connecting therewith, and also shall agree to pay all fees required for securing the permit and a monthly fee in the amount set by city for the privilege of using such sewer. (District code Ch. 5 Art. II § 34.04)

 

Article VIII. Enforcement
13.08.595 Violations unlawful.
    Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is unlawful and may be charged as a misdemeanor or an infraction in the discretion of the city attorney. (Ord. 94-6 § 6)

 

13.08.605 Termination or suspension of services.
    Upon determining that any of the provisions of this chapter have been violated or that a violation is threatened, the city manager shall have the authority to terminate or suspend service to property as provided in this section.

    A.  At least ten days prior to the proposed termination or suspension of services, a written notice shall be given to the customer, and to the property owner if other than the customer, setting forth the city’s intention to terminate or suspend sewer services, the effective date of the termination or suspension, and the reasons for the proposed termination or suspension. The notice shall advise the customer and owner of the name, city address, and city telephone number of the employee designated pursuant to subsection B of this section with whom the customer or owner may meet to appeal the proposed termination or suspension of services. The notice shall also advise of the availability of appeal from any suspension or termination of service pursuant to subsection D of this section.

    The notice shall be either delivered in person or mailed by first class mail, U.S. postage prepaid to the service address.

    B.   The city manager shall designate an employee to review disputed bills, rectify any errors, and settle any controversies pertaining to termination or suspension of services prior to such termination or suspension.

    C.   Except for emergency disconnections or suspensions of service pursuant to subsection F of this section, no sewer service shall be discontinued on any Saturday, Sunday, legal holiday observed by the city, or at any time during which the city’s business offices are not open to the public.

    D.  Either the customer or property owner may appeal the termination or suspension of sewer services after services have been discontinued by filing a written notice of appeal with the city manager within fifteen days of such termination or suspension. The decision of the city manager shall be the final city decision.

    E.   Reconnection.

    1.   When service has been terminated or suspended as provided in this section, the customer or property owner shall pay all unpaid charges, including penalties and interest, plus all city expenses and charges for the termination or suspension of services and the restoration of services, prior to the restoration of the terminated or suspended service.

    2.   When service has been terminated or suspended as provided in this section, the city may require prior to restoration of services that a surety bond security in a form approved by the city attorney and be provided to the city in a sum deemed adequate by the public works director, but not less than five hundred dollars, be provided to the city conditioned upon compliance with the provisions of this chapter.

    F.   Emergency Suspension and Disconnection. If a violation of the provisions of this chapter presents an emergency in which there is an immediate and serious threat to the public health, safety or welfare, sewer services may be immediately disconnected and suspended. In such a case, within twenty-four hours of disconnection and suspension, the notice specified in subsection A of this section shall be provided to the customer, and such notice shall additionally advise of the availability of the preliminary review specified in subsection B of this section. In the case of emergency disconnections and suspensions, such preliminary review shall be available upon request within twenty-four hours of the notice of disconnection and suspension. (Ord. 94-10 § 3; Ord. 94-6 § 6)

 

13.08.625 Nuisance.
    Continued habitation or occupancy of any building or premises during any period of termination or suspension of sewer services, or the continued habitation, occupancy or operation of any facility in violation of the provisions of this chapter or any ordinance, rule or regulation of the city relating to sewer use (including, but not limited to, those relating to industrial wastewater or pretreatment), is declared to be a threat to public health and a public nuisance. The city may cause proceedings to be brought enjoining and for the abatement of any such conditions.

    In such event, as a condition of reconnection, there shall be paid to the city its reasonable attorney’s fees and the costs of such action. (Ord. 94-10 § 5)

 

13.08.635 Remedies cumulative.
    Except as otherwise expressly provided by law, all of the remedies specified in this article are cumulative, and each is in addition to any other remedy provided by law. (Ord. 94-10 § 5)

Chapter 13.09 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE AND REGULATIONS
Article I. Administration and Definitions
13.09.010 Purpose and policy.
    A.  This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for direct and indirect discharges into the wastewater collection system for the city of West Sacramento and enables the city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws required by the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 USC Section 1251 et seq.).

    B.   The objectives of this chapter are:

    1.   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the wastewater collection system that will interfere with its operation or contaminate the resulting sludge;

    2.   To provide for equitable distribution of the cost of operation, maintenance and improvement of the wastewater collection system;

    3.   To protect personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and the general public;

    4.   To enable the city to comply with all federal or state laws to which its wastewater collection system is subject and to the SRCSD Consolidated Ordinance; and

    5.   To prevent the introduction of solid, semi-solid, or liquid substances not defined as sewage, wastewater, or nondomestic wastewater into the wastewater collection system.

    C.   This chapter provides for the regulation of direct and indirect discharges to the wastewater collection system and enforcement of general requirements; authorizes monitoring, compliance and enforcement activities; requires industrial user reporting; assumes that existing users’ capacity will not be preempted; and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the programs established in this chapter.

    D.  This chapter shall apply both to persons in the city and to persons outside the city who are users of the wastewater collection system. (Ord. 13-2 § 3)

 

13.09.020 Administration.
    Except as otherwise provided, the city manager shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the city manager may be delegated by the city manager to other city personnel. (Ord. 13-2 § 3)

 

13.09.030 Definitions.
    Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, or the SRCSD Consolidated Ordinance definitions differ, the following terms and phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings designated in this section.

    “Act” means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended (33 USC Section 1251 et seq.).

    “Administrator” means the Regional Administrator of Region IX, United States Environmental Protection Agency.

    Authorized Representative of Nondomestic User. An “authorized representative of a nondomestic user” may be:

    1.   A responsible corporate officer, which means a president, secretary, treasurer, or vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function; or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or the manager of one or more manufacturing, production or operation facilities employing more than two hundred fifty persons, if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures;

    2.   A general partner or proprietor if the nondomestic user is a partnership or sole proprietorship respectively;

    3.   A duly authorized representative of the individual designated above if such authorization is in writing and the representative is responsible for the overall operation of the facilities from which the indirect discharge originates or if he or she has overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company.

    The written authorization shall be submitted to the city. If an authorization is no longer accurate because a different individual, position, or office has responsibility for the overall operation of the facility or overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, a new authorization must be submitted to the city prior to or together with any reports to be signed by an authorized representative.

    “Building sewer” means that portion of a side sewer beginning at the plumbing or drainage outlet of any building or industrial facility and running to the property line or to a private sewage disposal system.

    “Cease and desist order” means a compliance directive.

    “City” means the city of West Sacramento.

    “City manager” means the city manager for the city of West Sacramento or authorized agent, representative or inspector.

    “Compliance directive” means an order, also known as a cease and desist order, given by the city manager requiring a user to come into compliance with a wastewater discharge permit or other city wastewater requirement within a specified period of time.

    “Compliance schedule” means an order issued to a user not in compliance with this chapter, which sets up a timetable and deadlines to be in compliance with the requirements of this chapter.

    “Cooling water” means the water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added is heat.

    “Correction notice” means the use of personal contact, telephone calls or reminder letters to a user for the purpose of notifying the user of a minor violation and to seek an explanation, correct a minor violation, suggest the exercise of more due care or to notify the user that subsequent violations of the same type may be dealt with more severely.

    “Discharge” or “indirect discharge” means the introduction of pollutants or wastewater into the wastewater collection system by any means.

    “Discharger” means any person discharging waste into the wastewater collection system. The term is synonymous with “user.”

    “Domestic wastewater” means any liquid, solid, sewage or waterborne waste of the type normally resulting from flushing and washing waste products from residences and lavatories.

    “Enforcement response plan” means the plan developed by the city to apply specific enforcement actions.

    “Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)” means the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.

    “Existing source” means any source of discharge, the construction or operation of which commenced prior to the publication by EPA of proposed pretreatment standards which will be applicable to such source if the pretreatment standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with Section 307 of the Act.

    “Grab sample” means a sample which is taken from a waste stream on a one-time basis without regard to the flow in the waste stream and over a period of time not to exceed fifteen minutes.

    “Grit” means the heavy suspended mineral matter present in water or wastewater such as sand, gravel or cinders.

    “Industrial user” means a discharger of industrial wastewater. Used herein, the term shall be generic.

    “Industrial wastewater” means any liquid or waterborne waste from manufacturing, processing, commercial or industrial facilities, except domestic waste, boiler blow down, and uncontaminated or noncontact cooling water; provided, however, that substantial discharge of boiler blow down closely associated with industrial activity shall be considered industrial wastewater when such discharge has a reasonable potential to affect or interfere with the wastewater collection system as determined by the city manager.

    “Interceptor” means generally, a two or more compartment tank designed to prevent undesirable materials from leaving a commercial or industrial site and entering the wastewater collection system. The tank allows adequate retention time so that wastewater may cool and the material it contains may stabilize. In this chapter, the usage of the term is generic and shall mean grease traps, sand traps, or separators wherever they may be located.

    “Lateral sewer” means the portion of a side sewer lying within a public right-of-way connecting a building sewer to the main sewer and maintained by the city.

    “Main sewer” means a public sewer designed to accommodate more than one lateral sewer.

    “National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)” means any regulation developed under the authority of Section 307(b) of the Act and 40 CFR 403.5.

    “National Pollution Discharge Elimination System permit” or “NPDES permit” means a permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act (33 USC Section 1342).

    “Natural outlet” means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater.

    “New source” means:

    1.   Any building structure, facility, installation or other source from which there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under Section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such new source if such pretreatment standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that:

    a.   The building structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located;

    b.   The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or

    c.   The production or wastewater-generating processes of the building, structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should be considered.

    2.   Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria of subsection above but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment.

    3.   Construction of a new source as defined under this subsection has commenced if the owner or operator has either:

    a.   Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on-site construction program:

    i.    Any placement, assembly or installation of facilities or equipment, or

    ii.   Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation or removal of existing buildings, structures or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or

    b.   Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contract which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this subparagraph.

    “Noncontact cooling water” means water used for cooling which does not come into direct contact with any additives, raw material, intermediate product, waste product or finished product.

    “Nondomestic wastewater” means wastewater from industrial, commercial or other nonresidential sources. The term is synonymous with industrial wastewater.

    “Notice of violation” means a written notice to a user that the city has determined that a violation of the requirements of this chapter exists and requiring the noncompliance to be corrected and explained in a timely manner.

    “Permit” means a wastewater discharge permit issued by the city.

    “Person” means any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. The masculine gender shall include the feminine and the singular shall include the plural where indicated by the context.

    “pH” means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution.

    “Pollutant” means any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, petroleum products or by-products, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, and industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste discharged into water.

    “Pollutant of concern” means any pollutant or substance, the discharge of which is prohibited by Section 13.09.080, General discharge prohibitions.

    “Pollution” means the man-made or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological and radiological integrity of water.

    “Pretreatment” means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into the wastewater collection system. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, or process changes by other means, except that increase in the use of process water or other attempts to dilute a discharge of wastewater are prohibited.

    “Sewage” means liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and wastewater from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, or institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are discharged to the wastewater collection system.

    “Sewage system” means all facilities owned or controlled by the city for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage.

    “Show cause order” means order for a user to appear before the city to explain noncompliance and why enforcement action should not be taken.

    “Side sewer” means the sewer line beginning at the foundation wall of any building and terminating at the main sewer and including the building sewer and lateral sewer together.

    “Slug discharge” means any discharge containing an unusual volume of flow or concentration of liquid, water, sewage, wastewater or pollutants.

    “Spill” means a release, whether accidental or intentional, of a material.

    “SRCSD” means the Sacramento Regional County Sanitation District. Contact and other information related to SRCSD can be found at www.srcsd.com.

    “SRCSD Consolidated Ordinance” means an SRCSD ordinance, originally adopted on February 10, 2010, and as subsequently amended, that relates to the operation and regulations of SRCSD. The current version of the SRCSD Consolidated Ordinance can be found at www.srcsd.com/ordinances.php.

    “State” means the state of California.

    “Stormwater” means any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting from it.

    “Total suspended solids” means the total suspended matter that either floats on the surface of or is suspended in water, sewage or other liquids and which is removable by laboratory filtering.

    “Toxic pollutant” means any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in 40 CFR 401.15.

    “User” means any person who discharges, contributes, causes, or permits the contribution of wastewater into the wastewater collection system.

    “Wastewater” means liquid and water-carried wastes and sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, or institutions, whether treated or untreated.

    “Wastewater collection system” means the pipelines, pump stations, manholes and other similar facilities which are owned, and operated by any of the contributing agencies discharging to SRCSD’s interceptors and/or treatment plant.

    “Wastewater discharge permit” means either an industrial wastewater discharge permit or pollution prevention permit issued by the city and establishing limitations on the discharge of wastewater.

    “Watercourse” means a channel or depression in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. (Ord. 13-2 § 3)

 

13.09.050 Severability.
    This chapter is severable. If any sentence, provision, paragraph, word or section of this chapter is invalidated by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining sentences, provisions, paragraphs, words, and sections shall not be affected and shall continue in full force and effect. (Ord. 13-2 § 3)

 

13.09.060 City nonliability.
    The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility of any person for damage to persons or property resulting from the discharge of wastewater, nor shall the city, or any officer, agent or employee of the city, be construed to be assuming any liability by reason of the performance of its or their responsibilities or duties pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 13-2 § 3)

 

13.09.070 Extraterritorial application.
    This chapter shall apply to all users of the wastewater collection system whose discharge occurs outside of city boundaries upon equal terms with its applicability within the city. (Ord. 13-2 § 3)

 

Article II. Discharge Requirements
13.09.080 General discharge prohibitions.
    A.  It is unlawful for any user to discharge, contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater at any flow rate or concentration which will cause interference with the operation or performance of the wastewater collection system. It is unlawful for any person to dump or discharge any solid, semi-solid, or liquid substance not defined as sewage, wastewater, or non-domestic wastewater into the wastewater collection system, unless allowed by permission or permit from the city or SRCSD’s Wastewater Source Control Section.

    B.   It is unlawful for any user or person to discharge the following substances into the wastewater collection system:

    1.   Chlorine Demand. Any wastewater requiring an excessive quantity of chlorine or other chemical compound used for disinfection purposes.

    2.   Corrosive Substances. Any wastewater having a pH lower than 5.0 and greater than 12 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment or personnel of the city.

    3.   Dilution Water. Any water added to wastewater for the purpose of diluting wastes which would otherwise exceed applicable maximum concentration limitations.

    4.   Discoloration. Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions.

    5.   Flammable or Explosive Substances. Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction with other substances, to cause fire or explosion, or be injurious in any other way to the wastewater collection system, or which exceed a flashpoint limit of one hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit or sixty degrees Celsius (using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21). At no time shall two successive readings on an explosion hazard meter, at the point of discharge into the sewage system (or at any point in the sewage system), be more than five percent nor any single reading over ten percent of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter. Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to: gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides and sulfides and any other substances in any quantity or concentration that the city, the state or the EPA has notified the user is a fire hazard or a hazard to the wastewater collection system.

    6.   Insecticides. Any wastewater containing algicides, fungicides, antibiotics, insecticides, strong oxidizing agents or strong reducing agents in such quantity or strength as to interfere with operation of the wastewater collection system or personnel safety hazards.

    7.   Medical Waste. Any wastewater containing medical wastes including, but not limited to, isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, or dialysis wastes except as specifically authorized by the city manager in a wastewater discharge permit.

    8.   Noxious or Malodorous Substances. Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids which either singly or by interaction with other wastes are sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life, or are sufficient to prevent entry into the wastewater collection system for maintenance and repair.

    9.   Pollutants and BOD. Any wastewater containing pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), wastes containing suspended solids, or exerting a chlorine demand released at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which will cause interference to the wastewater collection system.

    10. Slug Discharges. Any slug discharge having a flow rate, or containing concentrations or quantities of pollutants which will cause interference with the operation of the wastewater collection system.

    11. Public Nuisance. Any wastewater that causes a hazard to human life or creates a public nuisance.

    12. Radioactive Wastes. Any wastewater containing radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the city manager in compliance with any applicable state or federal regulations.

    13. Solids or Viscous Matter. Any solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the flow in the wastewater collection system such as, but not limited to: fats, oils, grease (FOG), garbage with particles greater than one-half inch in any dimension, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, wastepaper, wood, plastics, gas, tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining, or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud, or glass grinding or polishing wastes.

    14. Storm and Cooling Water. Any rainwater, stormwater, groundwater, street drainage, subsurface drainage, yard drainage, including evaporative type air cooler discharge water and noncontact cooling water.

    15. Sulfides. Any wastewater containing sulfides in sufficient quantity or strength as to cause or contribute to wastewater collection system corrosion, worker or public safety hazard.

    16. Temperature. Any liquid, vapor, solid, gas, wastewater, or substance having or developing a temperature which exceeds one hundred four degrees Fahrenheit (forty degrees Celsius).

    17. Toxic Substances. Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants, gases, vapors or fumes in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, which may cause acute worker health and safety problems, constitute a hazard to humans or animals.

    18. Trucked/Hauled Wastes. The discharge of hauled or trucked pollutants, except at points which the city manager shall designate in accordance with Section 13.09.230.

    19. Petroleum. Any petroleum oil, any nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or any amounts of products of mineral oil origin which may cause interference in the wastewater collection system.

    20. Any substance prohibited by the SRCSD Consolidated Ordinance, federal, state, or local law. (Ord. 13-2 § 3)

 

13.09.090 Interceptors required.
    A.  An interceptor shall be installed in a user’s building sewer, when in the opinion of the city manager it is necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing FOG in excessive amounts, any flammable wastes, sand, grit or other harmful ingredients. The city may require general permit coverage of interceptor users.

    B.   All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the city manager and shall be so located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall be of substantial construction, watertight and equipped with easily removable covers which, when bolted in place, are gastight and watertight. All interceptors shall be maintained by the owner, at his or her expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times.

    C.   Each user shall regularly monitor scum and sludge levels, inspect, clean and repair interceptors owned by the user. Records and costs associated with these actions shall be kept for three years and be made available for inspection by city personnel upon request. The debris from interceptors shall be disposed of through a licensed waste hauler. Waste disposal records, including receipts, shall be kept for three years and be made available for inspection by city personnel upon request.

    D.  Standards for Interceptors. All interceptors shall comply with the standards of this subsection.

    1.   Plans shall be submitted to and approval obtained from the city manager prior to the installation of any interceptor.

    2.   All drains from kitchen areas including pre-wash shall be connected to an interceptor. Toilets, lavatories and other sanitary fixtures shall not be connected to any interceptor.

    3.   All fixtures discharging into an interceptor shall be individually trapped and vented in a manner approved by the city manager.

    4.   Each interceptor shall be so installed and connected that it shall be at all times easily accessible for inspection, cleaning, and removal of the intercepted material.

    5.   Interceptors shall be maintained in efficient operating condition by periodic removal of the accumulated materials. No such collected material shall be introduced into any drainage piping, public or private or discharged into the wastewater collection system.

    6.   Each interceptor shall be constructed of durable materials satisfactory to the city manager and shall have a full-size gastight cover which can easily and readily be removed.

    7.   Interceptors required by this chapter shall not be installed until the type and/or model has been subjected to, and has fully complied with, tests acceptable to the city manager. Where existing conditions are found acceptable as determined by the city manager such facilities as presently exist will be allowed to remain in use. Whenever it shall come to the attention of the city that any interceptor is no longer acceptable or does not comply with the provisions of this section, the city manager shall suspend or revoke such approval and require corrective measures. (Ord. 13-2 § 3)

 

13.09.100 City’s right of revision.
    The city reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or permit, more stringent limitations or pretreatment requirements on discharges into the wastewater collection system, if deemed necessary to comply with the objectives of this chapter or the Act. (Ord. 13-2 § 3)

 

13.09.120 Pretreatment required.
    Users shall provide wastewater pretreatment as necessary to comply with this chapter and shall achieve compliance with all prohibitions of this chapter within the time limitations specified by EPA, the state or the city manager, whichever is more stringent. Users must provide pretreatment facilities deemed necessary by the city manager or SRCSD to protect the wastewater collection system. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be provided, operated and maintained at the user’s expense. Detailed plans describing such facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the city manager for review, and shall be acceptable to the city manager before such facilities are constructed. The review of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to comply with this chapter. Subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and acceptable to the city manager prior to the user’s initiation of the changes. (Ord. 13-2 § 3)

 

13.09.130 Slug discharges.
    In no case shall a slug discharge have a flow rate or contain concentrations or quantities of pollutants that will cause interference with operation or performance of the wastewater collection system. (Ord. 13-2 § 3)

 

13.09.140 Spill and slug control plans.
    Spill and slug control plans, if required, will be administered in accordance with the SRCSD Consolidated Ordinance, Chapter 2. (Ord. 13-2 § 3)

 

13.09.150 Intentional spills.
    No user shall intentionally release or discharge a spill into the wastewater collection system. (Ord. 13-2 § 3)

 

13.09.160 Maintenance of side sewers.
    All users shall keep that portion of their side sewer which constitutes a building sewer in good repair at their own expense, and shall be liable for any damages which may result from their failure to do so. (Ord. 13-2 § 3)

 

Article III. Fees and Charges
13.09.170 Fees—General.
    It is the purpose of this article to provide for the recovery of costs from users of the wastewater collection system for the implementation of the programs established in this chapter. Except as provided in Section 13.09.190, all users shall pay to the city a monthly sewer service charge as established from time to time by the city council.

    Users of the SRCSD sewer system shall pay, in addition to city fees and charges, sewer use charges and fees in accordance with the SRCSD Consolidated Ordinance. Sewer rates, fees, and billing information can be found at www.srcsd.com. (Ord. 13-2 § 3)

 

13.09.180 City charges and fees.
    In addition to the monthly sewer service charge, the city may, from time to time, adopt charges and fees to recoup the cost of administering this chapter. These fees may include:

    A.  Monthly service fees for reimbursement of the cost of setting up and operating the programs established by this chapter;

    B.   Fees for monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures, including the cost of collection and analysis of a user’s discharge, and reviewing monitoring reports submitted by users;

    C.   Fees for reviewing spill and slug control plans and construction of facilities, and responding to spill or slug discharge incidents;

    D.  Fees for filing appeals;

    E.   Fees for permit applications, including the cost of processing such applications;

    F.   Fees for the cost of stenographic recordation of testimony and preparation of transcripts in any proceeding taken under this chapter;

    G.  Fees for consistent removal (by the city) of pollutants otherwise subject to pretreatment standards; or

    H.  Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained in this chapter. (Ord. 13-2 § 3)

 

13.09.190 Adoption of city fees.
    Fees and charges for the administration and enforcement of this chapter shall be established by the city council by resolution and posted in the Book of City Imposts. (Ord. 13-2 § 3)

 

Article IV. Wastewater Discharge Permits
13.09.200 Wastewater discharges prohibited.
    It is unlawful for any person to discharge, dump, spill or release any wastewater to any storm drain, natural outlet, or watercourse within the city. (Ord. 13-2 § 3)

 

13.09.210 Wastewater discharge permits in general.
    SRCSD may issue wastewater discharge permits to users. (Ord. 13-2 § 3)

 

13.09.220 Application signatures and certification.
    All wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports must be signed by an authorized representative of the user in accordance with SRCSD’s Consolidated Ordinance, Chapter 2. (Ord. 13-2 § 3)

 

13.09.230 Permit application.
    A.  Users required, or who may be required, to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall complete and file with SRCSD a wastewater discharge permit application in the form prescribed by SRCSD. The application must be completed and submitted as required by SRCSD’s Consolidated Ordinance.

    B.   SRCSD shall evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. After evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished, SRCSD may issue a wastewater discharge permit subject to appropriate conditions or may deny the permit application. (Ord. 13-2 § 3)

 

13.09.240 Wastewater discharge permit conditions.
    Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions of SRCSD’s Consolidated Ordinance, sewer use charges and fees established by both the city and SRCSD, and all other applicable statutes and regulations. (Ord. 13-2 § 3)

 

13.09.250 Permit modification in general.
    Any permit modifications shall be made in accordance with SRCSD’s Consolidated Ordinance. (Ord. 13-2 § 3)

 

13.09.260 Emergency suspension of service.
    A.  The city manager or SRCSD may immediately suspend a user’s discharge, after notice to the user, whenever such emergency suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which in the city manager’s or SRCSD’s opinion appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial danger to the health or welfare of persons or threatens to substantially interfere with the operation of the wastewater collection system, or which presents, or may present, a danger to the environment. Such notice shall, where time permits, be in the form of a cease and desist order. Where, in the city manager’s or SRCSD’s opinion, the danger posed by the discharge is such that it is infeasible, impractical or dangerous to take the time necessary to issue a cease and desist order, the notice to the user may be in the form of a telephone call to the user or to the emergency contact listed in the user’s wastewater discharge permit.

    B.   Any user notified of an emergency suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its discharge into the wastewater collection system. In the event of a user’s failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order or inability of the city manager or SRCSD to contact the user, the city manager may take such steps as the city manager or SRCSD deems necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the wastewater collection system or danger to any individuals, including immediate severance of the sewer connection or discontinuing water service. The city manager or SRCSD may allow the user to recommence its discharge only after the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the city manager or SRCSD that the period of emergency has passed, unless proceedings are initiated by SRCSD to permanently terminate the user’s discharge pursuant to SRCSD’s Consolidated Ordinance.

    A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge requiring an emergency suspension shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any further occurrence, to the city manager or SRCSD prior to the date of any show cause or termination hearing. Such user shall reimburse the city or SRCSD for all costs which the city or SRCSD may incur as a result of such discharge or the imposition of an emergency suspension.

    C.   Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension. (Ord. 13-2 § 3)

 

13.09.270 Permit renewal.
    Permit renewals shall be completed in accordance with SRCSD’s Consolidated Ordinance, Chapter 2. (Ord. 13-2 § 3)

 

13.09.280 Wastewater discharge permit transfer.
    Wastewater discharge permit transfers shall be made in accordance with SRCSD’s Consolidated Ordinance, Chapter 2. (Ord. 13-2 § 3)

 

13.09.290 Revocation or suspension of permit.
    Revocation or suspension of permits shall be made in accordance with SRCSD’s Consolidated Ordinance, Chapter 2. (Ord. 13-2 § 3)

 

Article V. Reporting Requirements for Users
13.09.300 User baseline monitoring reports.
    Baseline monitoring reports, if required by a user’s wastewater discharge permit, shall be completed in accordance with SRCSD’s Consolidated Ordinance, Chapter 2. (Ord. 13-2 § 3)

 

13.09.310 Periodic compliance/self-monitoring reports.
    Periodic compliance/self-monitoring reports, if required, shall be made in compliance with SRCSD’s Consolidated Ordinance, Chapter 2. (Ord. 13-2 § 3)

 

13.09.320 Reports on changed conditions.
    Each user shall notify the city manager and SRCSD in writing of any planned changes to the user’s operations or system which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater at least ninety days before the change.

    A.  The city manager and SRCSD may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition.

    B.   The SRCSD may issue a wastewater discharge permit in accordance with the SRCSD Consolidated Ordinance, Chapter 2, or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions.

    C.   For purposes of this requirement changes include, but are not limited to, flow increase of twenty percent or greater, the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants, and changes as described in SRCSD’s Consolidated Ordinance, Chapter 2. (Ord. 13-2 § 3)

 

13.09.330 Episodic reports.
    A.  In the case of any discharge of a nonroutine or episodic nature, including, but not limited to, accidental discharges, spills, a noncustomary batch discharge, or a slug load, all users (whether or not such users are required to possess a waste discharge permit) shall immediately telephone and notify the city manager, and SRCSD as required by SRCSD’s Consolidated Ordinance, Chapter 2, of the incident. This notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user.

    B.   Within five days following such a spill, slug load, accidental discharge or other discharge of a nonroutine or episodic nature, the user shall submit a report, in a form prescribed by SRCSD’s Consolidated Ordinance, to the city manager and SRCSD describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the wastewater collection system, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this chapter or SRCSD’s Consolidated Ordinance. (Ord. 13-2 § 3)

 

13.09.340 Notification of discharge of hazardous wastes.
    A.  All users shall notify in writing the city manager, the state RWQCB, SRCSD, and the EPA regional waste management division director of any discharge which, if otherwise disposed of, would be considered a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR Part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the industrial user discharges more than one hundred kilograms of such waste per calendar month into the wastewater collection system, the notification shall also contain the following information to the extent such information is known as readily available to the industrial user: an identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the waste stream discharged during that calendar month, and an estimation of the mass of constituents in the waste stream expected to be discharged during the following twelve months. All notifications must take place within one hundred eighty days of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. Industrial users who commence discharging after the effective date of said ordinance shall provide the notification no later than one hundred eighty days after the discharge of the listed or characteristics hazardous waste. Any notification under this section need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged; however, notifications of changed discharges must be submitted under Section 13.09.340.

    B.   In the event new regulations are promulgated pursuant to Section 3001 of Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, Pub. Law 94-580, 90 Stat. 2806, (42 USC 6921), identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, industrial users shall notify in writing the city manager, the state RQWCB, and the EPA regional waste management division director of the discharge of such substance within ninety days of the effective date of such regulation.

    C.   In the event of any notification made under this section, the industrial user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical. (Ord. 13-2 § 3)

 

13.09.350 Other reports from users.
    In addition to those reports required by this article and SRCSD’s Consolidated Ordinance, all users, whether or not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit, shall provide appropriate reports to the city manager and SRCSD as the city manager and SRCSD may require. (Ord. 13-2 § 3)

 

13.09.360 Monitoring facilities and location.
    A.  Any user required to have a waste discharge permit shall provide and operate at the user’s own expense, monitoring facilities as required by SRCSD’s Consolidated Ordinance, Chapter 2, to allow inspection, sampling and flow measurement of discharge in the building sewer and/or internal drainage systems prior to discharge into the wastewater collection system. The monitoring facility shall be situated on the user’s premises, but the city manager may, when such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship to the user, allow the facility to be constructed in the public street or sidewalk area. The monitoring facility shall be located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles. There shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole or facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The precise location shall be specified in the user’s wastewater discharge permit.

    B.   The facility, sampling and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the user. The facility shall be readily accessible to city personnel at all times. Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the city’s requirements and all applicable local construction standards specifications. Construction shall be completed within ninety days following written notification by the city.

    C.   If no sampling location or monitoring location has been specified in accordance with this section, or the facilities to permit such monitoring have not been provided, then the sampling location shall be considered to be the final stage of the last interceptor or other pretreatment facility located on the property from which the discharge is made. In the event that no interceptor or other pretreatment facility exists, then the sampling location shall be the nearest point at which sampling is reasonably practicable after discharge to the sewage system as determined by the city manager, and both the owner of the property from which the discharge occurs and the industrial user shall be held responsible for all waste discharge violations measured at that point, the origin of which cannot be conclusively determined by the city. (Ord. 13-2 § 3)

 

13.09.370 Date of submission of reports—Certification.
    Any written reports required by this chapter or SRCSD’s Consolidated Ordinance, Chapter 2 shall be deemed to have been submitted on the date of receipt of the report. Any written reports required by this chapter shall be certified as provided in Section 13.09.230. (Ord. 13-2 § 3)

 

13.09.380 Recordkeeping requirements.
    A.  All users required to have a wastewater discharge permit shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying by the city and SRCSD, all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this chapter and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements.

    B.   Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses and other information as required by SRCSD’s Consolidated Ordinance. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user or the city which relates to such monitoring, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the city manager. (Ord. 13-2 § 3)

 

13.09.390 Right of entry/search warrants.
    A.  Whenever necessary to ascertain compliance with the provisions of this chapter and SRCSD’s Consolidated Ordinance, or whenever there is reasonable cause to believe that there exists a violation of this chapter or SRCSD’s Consolidated Ordinance, an authorized agent or employee of the city or SRCSD may enter onto any premises or into any building for the purpose of inspecting facilities, records relating to pretreatment or to take samples.

    B.   In those situations when the owner and/or occupant refuse entry, entry may be obtained under a search warrant issued by a duly authorized magistrate. The city attorney is authorized to seek such warrants upon the request of the city manager.

    C.   Nothing in this section shall be read to limit the immediate right of entry without a warrant:

    1.   In any emergency situation; or

    2.   Where entry is permitted under the Constitution or any state or federal law. (Ord. 13-2 § 3)

 

13.09.400 Inspection and sampling.
    A.  The city or SRCSD may inspect the facilities of any user to ascertain whether the purpose of this chapter is being met and all requirements are being complied with. Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is created or discharged shall allow the city, SRCSD, or their representative ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination or in the performance of any of their duties. The city shall have the right to copy such records.

    B.   The city, SRCSD, RWQCB, and EPA shall have the right to set up on the user’s property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering. Where a user has security measures in force which would require proper identification and clearance before entry into their premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with their guards so that upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the city, SRCSD, RWQCB and EPA will be permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities. (Ord. 13-2 § 3)

 

13.09.410 Sampling, analysis and test procedures.
    A.  All analysis and testing by the city, SRCSD, or users required by this chapter shall conform to procedures established by the administrator pursuant to Section 304(g) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR Part 136 and amendments thereto or with any other test procedures approved by the administrator. Sampling shall be performed in accordance with the techniques approved by the administrator. Where 40 CFR Part 136 does not include a sampling or analytical technique for the pollutant in question, sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with the techniques approved by EPA or found in the EPA publication, “Sampling and Analysis Procedures for Screening of Industrial Effluent for Priority Pollutants,” April 1977.

    B.   If sampling by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the city manager and SRCSD within twenty-four hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user must also resample and submit results of this resampling to the city manager and SRCSD within thirty days.

    C.   Except as indicated in subsection D of this section, the user shall collect wastewater samples using flow proportional composite collection techniques. In the event flow proportional sampling is infeasible, the city manager or SRCSD may authorize the use of time proportional composite sampling or a minimum of four grab samples where the user demonstrates to the city manager’s and SRCSD’s satisfaction that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous discharge limits.

    D.  Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab sample collection techniques. (Ord. 13-2 § 3)

 

13.09.420 Confidential information.
    Information and data regarding a user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits, monitoring programs or from inspections shall be public records available to the public or other governmental agencies without restriction, pursuant to the Public Records Act (Government Code Section 6250 et seq.), unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city and SRCSD that the release of such information would divulge information, processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user pursuant to the Public Records Act. Any such request must be asserted at the time of submission of the information or data. Pursuant to 40 CFR 403.14, effluent data (including wastewater characteristics and constituents) shall not be recognized as trade secrets. (Ord. 13-2 § 3)

 

Article VI. Enforcement and Penalties
13.09.430 Publication of users in significant noncompliance.
    SRCSD shall annually publish in the largest newspaper of general circulation within the service area a list of the users that were in significant noncompliance of their wastewater discharge permit at least once during the twelve previous months. (Ord. 13-2 § 3)

 

13.09.440 Permitted users correction notice/notice of violation/enforcement actions.
    Whenever a user is in noncompliance of their wastewater discharge permit issued by SRCSD, all notices, enforcement actions and penalties shall be issued and enforced in accordance to SRCSD’s Consolidated Ordinance. (Ord. 13-2 § 3)

 

13.09.450 Correction notice/notice of violation/show cause hearing.
    A.  Whenever the city manager finds that any user has violated, is violating, threatens to violate, or continues to violate, this chapter and the city manager determines that the violation is minor in nature, the city manager may issue a correction notice to the user.

    B.   Whenever the city manager finds that any user has violated, is violating, threatens to violate, or continues to violate, this chapter, the city manager may serve upon such user a written notice of violation containing the city manager’s findings. Within thirty days of the date of the notice of violation, the user shall submit to the city manager a technical report and response consisting of an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention of reoccurrences thereof, including specific required actions and proposed dates for completion of such action. Submission of this response shall not relieve the user of liability for any violations occurring either before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the city manager to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation.

    C.   As a part of a notice of violation or in lieu thereof, a user may be ordered by the city manager to show cause why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. A show cause order shall be served on the user specifying the time and place of the hearing regarding the violation, the reasons why the action is to be taken, the proposed enforcement action, and directing that the user show cause before the city manager why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The show cause order shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten days before the hearing. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.

    D.  In the event of the issuance of a show cause order pursuant to this section, the city manager shall conduct the hearing and:

    1.   Issue in the name of the city notices of hearing requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in such hearings;

    2.   Take the evidence; and

    3.   Prepare a report of the evidence and hearing, together with recommendations for action thereon. (Ord. 13-2 § 3)

 

13.09.460 Cease and desist orders/compliance directives.
    A.  When the city manager finds that a user has violated, is violating, threatens to violate, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, or that the user’s past violations are likely to recur, the city manager may issue a cease and desist order (also known as a compliance directive) to the user directing the user to cease and desist all such violations and further directing the user to:

    1.   Immediately comply with all such requirements; and

    2.   Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge upon such schedule as the city manager may order.

    B.   Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. (Ord. 13-2 § 3)

 

13.09.470 Nuisance—Injunctive relief—Recovery of damages.
    A.  Continued habitation of any building or premises during any period of termination or suspension of sewer services, or the continued habitation, occupancy or operation of any facility in violation of the provisions of this chapter or any ordinance, rule or regulation of the city related to sewer use (including, but not limited to, pretreatment requirements), is declared to be a threat to public health and a public nuisance. Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, or a wastewater discharge permit, is hereby declared to be a threat to public health and a public nuisance.

    B.   When the city manager finds that any person or user has violated, is violating, threatens to violate, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter the city manager may request that the city attorney bring an action in the name of the city for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance, of the order, or other requirement imposed by this chapter on activities of the user. The city attorney may also seek such other legal and/or equitable remedies as are appropriate, including a requirement for the user to conduct environmental remediation or that the user pay such actual and compensatory damages as may have been incurred by the city.

    C.   A complaint for injunctive relief or for damages shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. (Ord. 13-2 § 3)

 

13.09.480 Administrative civil liability.
    A.  In General. Pursuant to the provisions of Government Code Section 54740.5 and regardless of whether or not a cease and desist order or a notice of violation has previously been issued, upon determining that any industrial user is violating the terms of any federal or state regulation or law relative to the discharge of industrial wastewater or pretreatment, or any of the provisions of this chapter relative to the discharge of industrial wastewater or pretreatment, the city manager may serve an administrative civil liability complaint upon such industrial user by personal service or by certified mail, U.S. postage prepaid, at the address indicated on the permit or at the service address if no permit exists. The administrative complaint shall indicate the nature of the violations found by the city manager, the provisions of law authorizing civil liability to be imposed, and the amount of the proposed civil penalty.

    B.   Hearing. The administrative complaint shall inform the industrial user served that a hearing will be conducted within sixty calendar days after service before a hearing officer designated by the city council. The industrial user who has been issued an administrative complaint may waive the right to a hearing, in which case the city shall not conduct a hearing, and the proposed civil penalty shall be paid. If, after a hearing, it is found that the industrial user has violated any reporting or discharge requirements, the hearing officer may assess a civil penalty against that industrial user. In determining the amount of the civil penalty, the hearing officer may take into consideration all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the economic benefit derived through any noncompliance, the nature and persistence of the violation, the length of time over which the violation occurs and corrective action, if any, attempted or taken by the industrial user.

    C.   Appeal. Any aggrieved person may appeal the decision of the hearing officer to the city council by filing a written appeal with the city clerk within thirty days of the hearing officer’s decision. The appeal shall be held within thirty days of its filing, and upon hearing the appeal, the city council may take into consideration the same factors as the hearing officer in determining the amount of the civil penalty.

    D.  Service of Orders. Copies of orders imposing administrative civil penalties after either hearing or appeal shall be served by personal service or by registered mail upon the party served with the administrative complaint and upon other persons who appeared at the hearing or appeal and requested a copy.

    E.   Amount of Civil Penalty. Civil penalties may be imposed as follows:

    1.   In an amount not to exceed two thousand dollars for each day for failure or refusal to furnish technical or monitoring reports;

    2.   In an amount not to exceed three thousand dollars for each day for failure or refusal to timely comply with any compliance schedule established in a cease and desist order;

    3.   In an amount not to exceed five thousand dollars for each day for discharges in violation of any waste discharge limitation, or permit condition, issued or adopted by the city relating to industrial wastewater;

    4.   In an amount not to exceed ten dollars per gallon for discharges in violation of any suspension or termination of service, cease and desist order (other than the compliance schedules thereof), or other orders or prohibitions issued or adopted by the city.

    F.   Payment of Civil Penalty—Lien on Real Property. Unless appealed, orders setting administrative civil penalties shall become effective and final upon their issuance, and payment shall be made within thirty calendar days. Any civil penalties which have remained delinquent for a period of sixty calendar days (i.e., have not been paid for ninety days after becoming final) shall constitute a lien against the real property from which the discharge originated which resulted in the imposition of the civil penalty. The lien shall be of no force or effect until recorded with the county recorder and when recorded shall have the force, effect and priority of a judgment lien and continue for ten years from recordation unless sooner released. The lien shall be renewable in accordance with the provisions of Sections 683.110 to 683.220 inclusive of the Code of Civil Procedure.

    G.  Judicial Confirmation. The city attorney is authorized, at his or her option, to petition the superior court to confirm any order establishing civil penalties pursuant to the provisions of Government Code Section 54740.5(g).

    H.  Deposit of Penalties. All moneys collected pursuant to this section shall be deposited in a special account as designated by the finance director, and shall be utilized for the monitoring, treatment, and control of discharges into the wastewater collection system.

    Notwithstanding any other provision of this article to the contrary, no civil penalties shall be recoverable under this section for any violation for which civil liability is recovered pursuant to Section 13.09.500. (Ord. 13-2 § 3)

 

13.09.490 Judicial petition for civil liability.
    In any case where an industrial user violates any requirement adopted or ordered by the city pursuant to Government Code Section 54739(a)(1) or (2), the city may petition the superior court to impose, assess, and recover the sums provided in Government Code Section 54740; provided, however, that notwithstanding any other provision of this article to the contrary, no civil penalties shall be recoverable under this section for any violation for which administrative civil liability is recovered pursuant to Section 13.09.490. (Ord. 13-2 § 3)

 

13.09.500 Remedies cumulative.
    Except as otherwise expressly provided by law, all of the remedies specified in this article are cumulative, and each is in addition to any other remedy provided by law. (Ord. 13-2 § 3)

 

13.09.510 Criminal penalties.
    Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, or a wastewater discharge permit, is unlawful and may be charged as a misdemeanor or infraction in the discretion of the city attorney. (Ord. 13-2 § 3)

 

13.09.520 Falsifying information.
    Any person who knowingly makes any false statement, representation or certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this chapter, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 13-2 § 3)

 

13.09.530 No city liability for damages.
    This chapter shall not be construed to limit the responsibility or liability of any person for damage to persons or property which may occur as a result of the discharge of wastewater nor shall the city, nor any agency thereof, be considered as assuming any liability in connection with the discharge of such wastewater by reason of the performance of its duties under this chapter. (Ord. 13-2 § 3)

Chapter 13.10 URBAN STORMWATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT AND DISCHARGE CONTROL
Article I. Administration and Definitions
13.10.010 Purpose and intent.
    The purpose of this chapter is to protect and promote the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city and to protect and enhance watercourses, fish and wildlife habitat by:

    A.  Minimizing discharges other than storm runoff to the stormwater conveyance system or watercourses;

    B.   Responding to the discharge of spills, preventing and controlling the discharge of spills to the stormwater conveyance system or watercourses, and prohibiting dumping or disposal of materials other than stormwater;

    C.   Reducing pollutants in urban stormwater discharges to the maximum extent practicable;

    D.  Requiring operators of construction sites, new or redeveloped land, and industrial and commercial facilities to install, implement, or maintain appropriate best management practices (BMPs); and

    E.   Requiring newly developed and redeveloped lands to reduce the rate and quantity of stormwater runoff, prevent stormwater pollution through stormwater management controls, and properly maintain these management controls.

    This chapter is intended to assist in the protection and enhancement of the water quality of watercourses, water bodies, and wetlands in a manner pursuant to and consistent with the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251 et seq.), Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act (California Water Code Section 13000 et seq.) and the Phase II Small Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit, Water Quality Order No. 2013-0001-DWQ, General Permit No. CAS000004 (Phase II Stormwater Permit) or subsequent revisions and amendments thereto. (Ord. 15-2 § 3)

 

13.10.020 Agricultural exemption.
    A.  Agricultural lands, as defined in Title 8 Chapter 28, are exempt from the provisions of this chapter.

    B.   This exemption, and as provided in Title 8 Chapter 28, shall not invalidate any provision contained in the Health and Safety Code, city weed abatement ordinance, Fish and Game Code, Food and Agricultural Code, or Division 7 (commencing with Section 13000) of the Water Code if the agricultural operation, or appurtenance thereof, constitute a nuisance, public or private, as specifically defined or described in any such provision. (Ord. 15-2 § 3)

 

13.10.030 Definitions.
    Any terms defined in the Phase II Stormwater Permit, the federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. Section 1251 et seq.) and acts amendatory thereof or supplementary thereto, and/or defined in the regulations for the stormwater discharge permitting program issued by the Environmental Protection Agency on November 16, 1990 (as may from time to time be amended) as used in this chapter shall have the same meaning as in said act or regulations. Such terms include, but are not limited to, the following:

    “Authorized enforcement official” means the following city officials: city manager or other staff designated by the city manager.

    “Best management practices” or “BMPs” mean schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to the municipal stormwater conveyance system and waters of the United States. BMPs include, but are not limited to: treatment facilities to remove pollutants from stormwater; operating and maintenance procedures; facility management practices to control runoff, spillage or leaks of non-stormwater; sludge or waste recycling or disposal; drainage from materials storage; erosion and sediment control practices; and the prohibition of specific activities, practices, and procedures and such other provisions as the city determines appropriate for the control of pollutants.

    “City” means the city of West Sacramento.

    “City manager” means the city manager for the city of West Sacramento or authorized representative.

    “Clean Water Act” means the federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. Section 1251 et seq.) and any subsequent amendments thereto.

    “Construction activity” means private and public construction projects resulting in land disturbance. Such activities include, but are not limited to, clearing and grubbing, paving, grading, disturbances to ground such as stockpiling, excavating and demolition. Construction projects disturbing more than one acre of land are subject to compliance with the SWRCB-issued NPDES General Permit No. CAS000002 establishing waste discharge requirements (“WDRs”) for discharges of stormwater runoff associated with construction activity, as amended from time to time.

    “Development” means construction, rehabilitation, redevelopment, or reconstruction of any public or private residential project, industrial, commercial, retail, transportation, institutional, or other nonresidential project including public agency projects.

    “Development runoff requirements” means the provisions in the Phase II Stormwater Permit that contain design standards or performance criteria to address both the construction and post-construction phase impacts of new projects and redeveloped projects on stormwater quality and quantity.

    “Discharge of a pollutant” means the addition of any pollutant or combination of pollutants to waters of the United States from any point source within the jurisdiction of the city. The term includes addition of pollutants to waters of the United States from: surface runoff which is collected or channeled by man; discharges through pipes, sewers, or other conveyances owned by a state, municipality, or other person which do not lead to a treatment works; and discharges through pipes, sewers, or other conveyances, leading into privately owned treatment works. (See definition of pollutant.)

    “Erosion” means the physical detachment of soil due to wind or water. Often the detached fine soil fraction becomes a pollutant transported in storm water runoff.

    “Erosion control” means BMPs used to minimize soil detachment.

    “Erosion and sediment control plan” means a plan prepared to control erosion and minimize pollutant, including sediment, discharges from a development or other construction activity.

    “Hazardous materials” means any material, including any substance, waste or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of or otherwise managed (California Health and Safety Code Section 25117).

    “Illicit connection” means any physical connection to the stormwater conveyance system which is not expressly authorized by the city after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

    “Illicit discharge” means any nonpermitted or nonexempt discharge to the stormwater conveyance system that violates this chapter or is prohibited under federal, state, or local statutes, ordinances, codes, or regulations, or which degrades the quality of receiving waters. The term illicit discharge includes all non-stormwater discharges not composed entirely of stormwater, and discharges that are identified under Section 13.10.090 of this chapter. The term does not include discharges that are regulated by an NPDES permit (other than the NPDES permit for discharges from the MS4).

    “Incidental irrigation runoff” means unintended amounts (volume) of runoff, such as unintended, minimal over-spray from sprinklers that escapes the landscaped area of intended use. Water leaving an intended use area is not considered incidental if it is part of the facility design, if it is due to excessive application, if it is due to intentional overflow or application, or if it is due to negligence.

    “Industrial activity” means activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined in 40 CFR Section 122.26(b)(14) and consistent with SWRCB-issued NPDES General Permit No. CAS000001 establishing waste discharge requirements (“WDRs”) for discharges of stormwater runoff associated with industrial activities excluding construction activity, as amended from time to time.

    “Low impact development (LID)” means a sustainable practice that benefits water supply and contributes to water quality protection. LID uses site design and stormwater management to maintain the site’s pre-development runoff rates and volumes. The goal of LID is to mimic a site’s predevelopment hydrology by using design techniques that infiltrate, filter, store, evaporate, and detain runoff close to the source of rainfall.

    “Maximum extent practicable (MEP)” means a standard for water quality that applies to all MS4 operators regulated under the NPDES program. Since no precise definition of MEP exists, it allows for maximum flexibility on the part of MS4 operators as they develop and implement their programs to reduce the discharge of pollutants to the maximum extent practicable, including management practices, control techniques and system, design and engineering methods, and such other provisions as the administrator or the state determines appropriate for the control of pollutants.

    “National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit” means a general, group and individual National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit issued by the United States Environmental Protection Agency, the State Water Resources Control Board (SWRCB), or a California Regional Water Quality Control Board pursuant to the Clean Water Act that authorizes discharges to waters of the United States. The California Regional Water Quality Control Board, Central Valley Region (Regional Board), and the SWRCB have adopted general stormwater discharge permits, including but not limited to, the general construction activity and general industrial activity permits.

    “Non-stormwater discharge” means any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater.

    “Phase II stormwater permit” means the NPDES general stormwater permit applicable to the city, Water Quality Order No. 2013-0001-DWQ, General Permit No. CAS000004, and any subsequent amendment, reissuance or successor to this NPDES permit.

    “Pollutant” means anything that causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: dredged soil; incinerator residue; filter backwash; biological materials; munitions; chemical wastes; radioactive materials; heat; dumped yard wastes; rock, sand and cellar dirt; industrial, municipal and agricultural waste discharged into water; sediment; commercial and household carpet washing waste water; paints, varnishes and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter or other wrecked or discarded or abandoned equipment, objects, articles and accumulations so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, sewage sludge, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes and manure; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure (including, but not limited to, sediments, slurries and concrete rinsates); and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.

    “Pollution” means the human-made or human-induced alteration of the quality of waters by waste to a degree which unreasonably affects, or has the potential to unreasonably affect, either the waters for beneficial uses or the facilities which serve these beneficial uses (California Water Code Section 13050).

    “Porter-Cologne Act” means the Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act and as amended (California Water Code Section 13000 et seq.).

    “Post-construction BMPs” mean structural and non-structural controls which detain, retain, or treat runoff to minimize the discharge of runoff and pollutants from a development site for the life of the project after final stabilization is attained.

    “Premises” means any building, lot, parcel, real estate, or land or portion of land whether improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.

    “Runoff control plan” means the plan that meets the post-construction requirements of the Phase II permit and runoff control requirements of Section 15.08.280.

    “Sediment control” means best management practices used to trap and/or retain detached soil before discharging off a construction site.

    “Storm drain system” means publicly-owned stormwater drainage conveyance facilities operated by the city or privately-owned stormwater drainage conveyance facilities operated by private entities by which stormwater is collected and/or conveyed to waters of the United States, including, but not limited to, any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, gutters, curbs, ditches, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, reclamation ditches, natural and human-made or altered drainage channels and reservoirs, which are not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW) as defined at 40 CFR 122.2.

    “Stormwater” or “storm runoff” means any surface runoff, stormwater runoff, snow melt runoff and drainage consisting entirely of water from rain storm events.

    “Stormwater conveyance system” has the same meaning as “storm drain system.”

    “Stormwater facilities operation and maintenance plan” means a plan identifying the locations and characteristics of stormwater management facilities on a newly developed or redeveloped site and describing maintenance activities, schedules, and responsibilities to ensure the ongoing proper operation of those facilities.

    “Stormwater management facility” means any device designated to detain, retain, filter, or infiltrate stormwater.

    “Urban runoff” means stormwater runoff from an urbanized area, including streets and adjacent domestic and commercial properties that carry pollutants of various types into the storm drain system and watercourses.

    “Urbanized area” means a densely settled core of census tracts and/or census blocks that have population of at least fifty thousand, along with adjacent territory containing nonresidential urban land uses as well as territory with low population density included to link outlying densely settled territory with the densely settled core.

    “Watercourse” means a channel or depression in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently.

    “Waters of the United States” means surface watercourses and water bodies as defined at 40 CFR Section 122.2 including all natural waterways and definite channels and depressions in the earth that may carry water, even though such waterways may only carry water during rains and storms and may not carry stormwater at and during all times and seasons. (Ord. 15-2 § 3)

 

13.10.040 Conflicts with other laws.
    In the event of any conflict between this chapter and any federal or state law, regulation, order, or permit, the requirement that establishes the higher standard for public health or safety shall govern. Nothing in this chapter shall preclude enforcement of any other applicable law, regulation, order, or permit. (Ord. 15-2 § 3)

 

13.10.050 Applicability.
    The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all dischargers and potential dischargers located within the incorporated area of the city and all dischargers located outside the city limits that discharge either directly or indirectly into the city stormwater conveyance system. (Ord. 15-2 § 3)

 

13.10.060 Responsibility for administration.
    Except as otherwise provided, the city manager shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the city manager may be delegated by the city manager to other city personnel. In administering this chapter, the city manager has the authority to request and require the submittal of information deemed necessary to assess compliance with this chapter and the Phase II Stormwater Permit.

    Where storm drains and/or watercourses have been accepted for maintenance by a public agency legally responsible for certain storm drains and/or watercourses, then the responsibility for enforcing the provisions of this chapter may be assigned to such agency (through contract or agreement executed by the city and such agency) with respect to those storm drains and/or watercourses for which they have accepted maintenance. (Ord. 15-2 § 3)

 

13.10.070 Severability.
    If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of the chapter which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end, the provisions of this chapter are severable. The city council hereby declares that it would have adopted the ordinance codified in this chapter irrespective of the invalidity of any particular portion thereof. (Ord. 15-2 § 3)

 

13.10.080 Ultimate responsibility of discharger.
    The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this chapter are minimum standards; therefore, this chapter does not intend nor imply that compliance by any person will ensure that there will be protection from liability including civil penalties or that there will be no contamination, pollution nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants into waters of the United States caused by said person. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city of West Sacramento, or any agent or employee thereof for any damages that result from any discharger’s reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. (Ord. 15-2 § 3)

 

Article II. Discharge Prohibitions
13.10.090 Prohibited discharges.
    No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the storm drain system or watercourses any materials, including, but not limited to, pollutants or waters containing any pollutants other than stormwater. The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illicit discharge to the storm drain system is prohibited.

    The prohibition shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered by the state of California under the authority of the United States Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted by the city for any discharge to the storm drain system. (Ord. 15-2 § 3)

 

13.10.100 Exemptions to discharge prohibition.
    A.  Discharges from the following activities will not be considered a source of pollutants to the storm drain system and to waters of the United States, provided any pollutant discharges are identified and appropriate control measures to minimize the impacts of such discharges are developed and implemented, and, therefore, they shall not be considered illegal or prohibited discharges unless determined to cause a violation of the provisions of the Porter-Cologne Act, Clean Water Act or this chapter.

    1.   Water line flushing;

    2.   Individual residential car washing;

    3.   Diverted stream flows;

    4.   Rising groundwaters;

    5.   Uncontaminated ground water infiltration (as defined at 40 C.F.R. Section 35.2005(20)) to separate storm sewers;

    6.   Uncontaminated pumped groundwater;

    7.   Discharges from potable water sources;

    8.   Foundation drains;

    9.   Air conditioning condensation;

    10. Springs;

    11. Water from crawl space pumps;

    12. Footing drains;

    13. Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;

    14. Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges; and

    15. Incidental irrigation runoff from landscaped areas provided the conditions in subsection C of this section are met.

    B.   Discharges or flows from firefighting activities are excluded from the effective prohibition against non-stormwater and need only be addressed where they are identified as significant sources of pollutants to waters of the United States.

    C.   Consistent with Section 13.04.1190, irrigation systems must be designed to conserve water and prevent water leaving the area of application. Persons responsible for controlling irrigation systems shall prevent excessive irrigation runoff by:

    1.   Detecting and correcting leaks from the irrigation system within seventy-two hours of discovering the leak;

    2.   Properly designing and aiming sprinkler heads to only irrigate the planned application area;

    3.   Not irrigating during precipitation events; and

    4.   Where recycled water is used for irrigation, designing and managing holding ponds to such that no discharge occurs unless it is the result of the twenty-five-year, twenty-four-hour storm event. Any releases from holding ponds must be reported to the regional board and the city within twenty-four hours of the discharge.

    D.  With written concurrence of the regional board, the city may exempt in writing other non-stormwater discharges which are not a source of pollutants to the storm drain system or waters of the United States. (Ord. 15-2 § 3)

 

13.10.110 Prohibition of illicit discharges and illicit connections.
    A.  The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the city storm drain system and/or the commencement or continuance of illicit discharges to the city storm drain system is prohibited.

    B.   Upon the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, any person who maintains, uses or causes maintenance or use of an illicit connection shall have thirty days from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter to disconnect and discontinue such use of such connection.

    C.   Any person responsible for a discharge, spill, or pollutant release shall promptly cease and desist discharging and/or cleanup and abate such a discharge as directed by the authorized enforcement official.

    D.  The city may perform clean-up and abatement work and recover its costs from the responsible person as provided in Section 13.10.310. (Ord. 15-2 § 3)

 

13.10.120 Waste disposal prohibitions.
    Except for pollutants lawfully disposed of by way of containers or at a licensed dumping ground, no person shall throw, deposit, leave, maintain, keep or permit to be thrown, deposited, placed, left or maintained, in or upon any public or private lot of land or other premises in the city, driveway, parking area, street, alley, sidewalk, business place, component of the storm drain system or waters of the United States, any refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter or other discarded or abandoned objects, articles and accumulations, so that the same might be or become a pollutant discharged to water or may cause or contribute to pollution. Wastes deposited in streets in proper waste receptacles and yard waste deposited in the street in accordance with local regulations for the purposes of collection are exempted from this prohibition.

    The occupant or tenant, or in the absence of occupant or tenant, the owner, lessee or proprietor of any premises in the city in front of which there is a paved sidewalk shall maintain said sidewalk free of dirt or litter to the maximum extent practicable. Sweepings from said sidewalk shall not be swept or otherwise made or allowed to go into the gutter or roadway. (Ord. 15-2 § 3)

 

13.10.130 NPDES stormwater discharge general permits.
    Any person conducting an industrial or construction activity, or other discharger, described in any general stormwater permit addressing such discharges, as may be adopted by the United States Environmental Protection Agency, SWRCB, or the Regional Water Quality Control Board, shall provide permit registration documents, comply with, and undertake all other activities required by any general stormwater permit applicable to such discharges.

    Proof of compliance with said stormwater general permit will be submitted to the city manager within thirty days of request by the city manager. Proof of compliance with said construction permit shall be submitted to the city manager prior to ground disturbance. Proof of compliance shall include a copy of the notice of intent (“NOI”) submitted to the SWRCB, stormwater pollution prevention plan (“SWPPP”) for said activity, and waste discharge identification number provided by the SWRCB upon their receipt of complete permit registration documents.

    The city manager shall, at any time, inspect facilities and sites subject to general stormwater permits to ensure compliance with the measures outlined in the SWPPP for said facilities and sites and implement enforcement measures as outlined in Article IV of this chapter.

    Each discharger identified in an individual NPDES permit relating to stormwater discharges shall comply with and undertake all activities required by such permit.

    Any discharge that would result in or contribute to a violation of the Phase II Stormwater Permit and any amendment, revision or reissuance thereof, either separately considered or when combined with other discharges, is prohibited. Liability for any such discharge shall be the responsibility of the person(s) so causing or responsible for the discharge, and such persons shall defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city in any administrative or judicial enforcement action relating to such discharge. (Ord. 15-2 § 3)

 

Article III. Regulations and Requirements
13.10.140 Requirement to prevent, control and reduce stormwater pollutants.
    A.  Any person engaged in activities which will or may result in pollutants entering the city storm drain system shall undertake all practicable measures to cease such activities, and/or eliminate or reduce such pollutants. Such activities shall include, but not be limited to, ownership and use of parking lots, gasoline stations, industrial facilities, commercial facilities, ground disturbing activities, and stores fronting city streets.

    B.   Authorization to Require Best Management Practices. The city may require the implementation of BMPs for any activity, operation or facility that may cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of stormwater, the storm drain system or waters of the United States. Where BMP requirements are promulgated by the city or any federal, state of California or regional agency for any activity, operation or facility which would otherwise cause the discharge of pollutants to the storm drain system or water of the United States, every person undertaking such activity or operation, or owning or operating such facility shall comply with such requirements. (Ord. 15-2 § 3)

 

13.10.150 Best management practices for ground disturbing activities, new development, and redevelopment.
    Any person performing ground disturbing activities in the city shall implement appropriate BMPs to prevent the discharge of construction wastes or pollutants from construction materials, tools, and equipment from entering the storm drain system or watercourses.

    A.  Authorization to Review. The city has the authority to review designs and proposals for construction activities and new development and redevelopment sites to determine whether adequate BMPs will be installed, implemented, and maintained during construction and after final stabilization (post-construction).

    B.   Erosion and Sediment Control. All construction plans and applications submitted to the city pursuant to any permit application shall consider the potential for erosion and sedimentation at the construction site, and shall include appropriate erosion and sedimentation controls as identified in Section 15.08.180 of this code.

    C.   Post-Construction Best Management Practices. New development and redevelopment projects will be required to implement post-construction BMPs to control the volume, rate, and potential pollutant load of stormwater runoff, including, but not limited to, requirements to minimize the generation, transport, and discharge of pollutants, pursuant to Section 15.08.280 of this code.

    D.  Runoff Control Plan Requirements. All construction plans and applications submitted to the city pursuant to any permit application shall consider the potential for runoff at the construction site, and to the extent applicable, shall comply with runoff control requirements as specified in Section 15.08.280 of this code. (Ord. 15-2 § 3)

 

13.10.160 Compliance with best management practices.
    A.  Every person undertaking any activity or use of a premises that may cause or contribute to stormwater pollution or contamination, illicit discharges, or non-stormwater discharges, such as, but not limited to, construction activities, landscaping, landscaping maintenance, shall: (1) comply with best management practices guidelines or pollution control requirements established or imposed by the authorized enforcement official; (2) implement appropriate BMPs to prevent the discharge of wastes or contaminants from materials, tools and equipment from entering the storm drain system; and (3) properly operate and maintain any treatment control device or other measures utilized on the premises to prevent or reduce, to the maximum extent practicable, stormwater pollution or contamination, illicit discharges or non-stormwater discharges, as required by the authorized enforcement official.

    B.   Persons owning or operating a parking lot, gas station, areas of pavement or similar facility shall clean the same as frequently and thoroughly as practicable in a manner that does not result in discharge of pollutants to the city’s storm drain system.   C.         The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall provide reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the storm drain system or watercourses. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes shall be provided and maintained at the owner or operator’s expense.

    D.  Maintenance Agreement. Commercial and industrial facility owners implementing post-construction BMPs that require maintenance shall enter into a maintenance agreement with the city for the maintenance of such features. (Ord. 15-2 § 3)

 

13.10.170 Requirement to eliminate illicit discharges.
    Notwithstanding the requirements of Section 13.10.240 of this chapter, the city manager may require by written notice that a person responsible for an illicit discharge immediately, or by a specified date, discontinue the discharge and, if necessary, take measures to eliminate the source of the discharge to prevent the occurrence of future illicit discharges. (Ord. 15-2 § 3)

 

13.10.180 Requirement to eliminate or secure approval for illicit connections.
    A.  The city manager may require by written notice that a person responsible for an illicit connection to the storm drain system eliminate or secure approval for the connection by a specified date, regardless of whether or not the connection or discharges to it had been established or approved prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

    B.   If, subsequent to eliminating a connection found to be in violation of this chapter, the responsible person can demonstrate that an illicit discharge will no longer occur, said person may request city approval to reconnect. The reconnection or reinstallation of the connection shall be at the responsible person’s expense.

    C.   If any person fails to disconnect an illicit connection upon notification by the city manager, the city manager may direct that such connection be disconnected from the storm drain system. The city may pursue the recovery of costs for such disconnection. (Ord. 15-2 § 3)

 

13.10.190 Watercourse protection.
    Every person owning or occupying property adjacent to or through which a watercourse passes, or such person’s lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property reasonably free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation and other obstacles that would and/or could pollute, contaminate or significantly obstruct the flow of water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse. The owner or lessee shall not remove healthy bank vegetation beyond that actually necessary for maintenance, nor remove said vegetation in such a manner as to increase the vulnerability of the watercourse to erosion. The property owner shall be responsible for maintaining and stabilizing that portion of the watercourse that is within their property lines in order to protect against erosion and degradation of the watercourse. The property owner shall be responsible for obtaining and complying with any and all required permits that are required for conducting these activities. (Ord. 15-2 § 3)

 

13.10.200 Damage to the storm drain system.
    It is unlawful for any person to maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is part of the storm drain system. (Ord. 15-2 § 3)

 

13.10.210 Requirement to remediate.
    Whenever the city manager finds that a discharge of pollutants is taking place or has occurred which will result in or has resulted in pollution of stormwater, the storm drain system or waters of the United States, the city manager may require by written notice to the owner of the property and/or the responsible person that the pollution be remediated and the affected property restored within a specified time pursuant to the provisions of Sections 13.10.250 through 13.10.280 of this chapter. (Ord. 15-2 § 3)

 

13.10.220 Requirement to monitor and analyze.
    The city manager may require by written notice of requirement that any person engaged in any activity and/or owning or operating any facility which may cause or contribute to stormwater pollution, illicit discharges and/or non-stormwater discharges to the storm drain system or waters of the United States, to undertake at said person’s expense such monitoring and analyses and furnish such reports to the city as deemed necessary to determine compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 15-2 § 3)

 

13.10.230 Containment and notification of spills.
    Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illicit discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the storm drain system or waters of the United States from said facility, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment and cleanup of such release.

    The first revision of the business plan for any facility subject to the city’s hazardous materials inventory and response ordinance shall include a program for compliance with this chapter, including the prohibitions on non-stormwater discharges and illicit discharges, and the requirement to reduce stormwater pollutants to the maximum extent practicable.

    A.  Hazardous Spills. In the event of such a release of a hazardous material said person shall immediately notify emergency response officials of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services (9-1-1). Said person should also notify the public works department immediately. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the city’s public works department within three business days of the phone notice.

    B.   Non-Hazardous Spills. In the event of a release of non-hazardous materials that has been contained and cleaned up, said person shall notify the city’s public works department in person or by phone or facsimile no later than four p.m. of the next business day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the public works department within three business days of the phone notice.

    If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years. (Ord. 15-2 § 3)

 

13.10.240 Authority to inspect.
    A.  Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any provision of this chapter, or whenever the city manager, or representative of the city manager, has cause to believe that there exists, or potentially exists, in or upon any premises any condition which constitutes a violation of this chapter, the city manager may enter and inspect such premises (including, but not limited to, facilities, equipment, practices, or operations that may be situated outside the premises or at field sites) at all reasonable times to inspect and copy records related to stormwater compliance and to inspect the same for any or all of the following situations, as determined by the authorized enforcement official:

    1.   Routine inspections to ensure implementation of BMPs and other requirements of this chapter;

    2.   Active or potential stormwater discharges;

    3.   Whenever there is reasonable cause to believe that there exists any condition which constitutes a violation of the provisions of this chapter or the Phase II stormwater permit;

    4.   Actual violations of this chapter or the Phase II stormwater permit;

    5.   Whenever necessary to enforce any of the provisions of this chapter or the Phase II stormwater permit; or

    6.   To perform any duty imposed upon the official by this chapter.

    B.   The authorized enforcement official must present proper credentials, and obtain consent from the owner or occupant, to enter. In the event the owner or occupant refuses entry after a request to enter and inspect has been made, the city is hereby empowered to seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining such entry. (Ord. 15-2 § 3)

 

13.10.250 Authority to sample, establish sampling devices and test.
    During any inspection as provided herein, the city manager may take any samples and perform any testing deemed necessary to aid in the pursuit of the inquiry or to record site activities. This authority may include the installation of sampling and metering devices on private property, or requiring the person owning or occupying the premises to supply samples.

    If a business has a history of violations of any of the provisions of this chapter or the city manager determines the business has a reasonable potential for violating any provisions of this chapter, the city manager may require the business to conduct self-monitoring of its stormwater discharges, stormwater conveyance system and the facility’s potential to impact the stormwater conveyance system at their own expense. (Ord. 15-2 § 3)

 

13.10.260 City inspection of stormwater conveyance system.
    City staff will inspect and monitor the stormwater conveyance system to determine if illicit connections are present and if illicit discharges are entering the stormwater conveyance system. If illicit discharges are detected, city staff will inspect the system to determine the source of the illicit discharge. City staff will notify the city manager upon the detection of illicit connections and illicit discharges so that the provisions of this chapter can be implemented. Regular inspection of the stormwater conveyance system will be conducted pursuant to the requirements of the Phase II Stormwater Permit. The city will impose a fee (based upon a fee schedule) for inspections of private stormwater collection system discharges to the city system. (Ord. 15-2 § 3)

 

13.10.270 Fees.
    A.  Plan Checking Fee. The plan checking fee shall be charged for evaluation and approval of erosion and sediment control and runoff control plans. Prior to accepting plans and specifications for review, the full amount of the fees shall be paid. This fee shall be set by resolution of the city council.

    B.   Inspection Fee. Inspection fees shall be charged for the cost of inspections required pursuant to Sections E.6.c, E.9.b, E.10.c and E.12.h of the Phase II stormwater permit. This fee shall be set by resolution of the city council.

    C.   Additional fees may be charged for plan checking and inspection if changes to the project are proposed under the original application for permit, or any other circumstances that in the discretion of the city manager warrants additional fees. Additional fees shall be charged at the rate set by resolution of the city council for city staff time for a one hour minimum per occurrence.

    D.  Administrative Fees. Administrative fees shall be charged for the costs associated with city oversight of operation and maintenance of post-construction storm water management measures pursuant to Section E.12.h of the Phase II stormwater permit. This fee shall be set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 15-2 § 3)

 

Article IV. Enforcement
13.10.280 Notice of violation.
    A.  Whenever the city manager finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this chapter, the city manager may order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible person. Such notice may order, without limitation, any or all of the following:

    1.   The performance of monitoring, analyses and reporting;

    2.   The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;

    3.   That violating discharges, practices or operations shall cease and desist;

    4.   The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property;

    5.   Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs; and

    6.   The implementation or maintenance of source control or treatment BMPs.

    B.   If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the established deadline, the work may be done by the city or a contractor designated by the city manager and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator pursuant to Section 13.10.310 of this chapter. A notice issued under this chapter shall identify the provisions of this chapter which have been violated, and shall state the recipient has the right to appeal as set forth in Section 1.08.020 of this code.

    C.   Said notice shall be served upon recipient by: (1) personal service; (2) deposit in United States mail, postage pre-paid for first class delivery; or (3) facsimile service with confirmation of receipt. Where recipient is the owner of the subject property, the address for notice shall be the address from the most recently issued equalized assessment roll or as otherwise appears in the current records of the county. Where the owner or occupant cannot be located after reasonable efforts, notice of violation shall be deemed delivered after posting on the subject property for a period of ten days. (Ord. 15-2 § 3)

 

13.10.290 Appeal.
    Any person may appeal a violation of this chapter in accordance with the provisions of Section 1.08.020 of this code. (Ord. 15-2 § 3)

 

13.10.300 Summary abatement.
    The city manager is authorized to require immediate abatement of any violation of this chapter that constitutes an immediate threat to the health, safety or wellbeing of the public. If any such violation is not abated immediately as directed by the city manager, the city is authorized to enter onto private property and to take any and all measures required to remediate the violation. Any expense related to such remediation undertaken by the city shall be fully reimbursed by the property owner and/or whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any provision of this chapter, or whenever the city manager has cause to believe that there exists, or potentially exists, in or upon any premises any condition which constitutes a violation of this chapter, the city manager may enter such premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same and to inspect and copy records related to stormwater compliance. In the event the owner or occupant refuses entry after a request to enter and inspect has been made, the city is hereby empowered to seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining such entry. (Ord. 15-2 § 3)

 

13.10.310 Abatement by city.
    If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal under Section 13.10.280 of this chapter, within ten days of the decision of the city council upholding the decision of the city manager, then the city or a contractor designated by the city manager shall enter upon the subject private property and is authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. If entry is refused, the city manager shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry, including, but not limited to, commencing proceedings to obtain an inspection warrant pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure, Sections 1822.50 et seq., as now existing or hereinafter amended. (Ord. 15-2 § 3)

 

13.10.320 Charging cost of abatement/liens.
    Within thirty days after abatement of the nuisance by city, the city manager shall notify the property owner of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the amount of the assessment with the city clerk within fifteen days. The city clerk shall set the matter for public hearing by the city council. The decision of the city council shall be set forth by resolution and shall be final.

    If the amount due is not paid within ten days of the decision of the city council or the expiration of the time in which to file an appeal under this section, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. A copy of the resolution shall be turned over to the county auditor so that the auditor may enter the amounts of the assessment against the parcel as it appears on the current assessment roll, and the tax collector shall include the amount of the assessment on the bill for taxes levied against the parcel of land. (Ord. 15-2 § 3)

 

13.10.330 Violations.
    The remedies set forth in this chapter are cumulative and may be pursued alternatively, concurrently or consecutively.

    A.  Misdemeanors. A violation of or failure to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punished as set forth in Section 1.12.020 of this code.

    B.   Administrative Enforcement. In addition to any other enforcement powers and or remedies provided by this chapter, any violations of this chapter shall be subject to enforcement remedies, penalties and abatement provided by Chapter 19.20 of this code. (Ord. 15-2 § 3)

 

13.10.340 Compensatory action.
    In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties, and remedies authorized by this chapter, the city manager may identify and require alternative compensatory actions for a violator, including, but not limited to, storm drain stenciling, attendance at compliance workshops and/or storm channel cleanup. (Ord. 15-2 § 3)

 

13.10.350 Public nuisance.
    Any condition caused or allowed to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter constitutes a threat to the public health, safety and welfare, and is hereby deemed and declared a public nuisance and may be abated in the manner provided by the city’s municipal code. (Ord. 15-2 § 3)

 

13.10.360 Acts potentially resulting in a violation of the Federal Clean Water Act and/or California Porter-Cologne Act.
    Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or any provision of any requirement issued pursuant to this chapter may also be in violation of the Clean Water Act, the Porter-Cologne Act and/or other laws and may be subject to the sanctions of those acts including civil and criminal penalties. Any enforcement action authorized under this chapter shall also include written notice to the violator of such potential liability. (Ord. 15-2 § 3)

Title 14 (RESERVED)

Title 15 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
Chapter 15.04 MOBILE HOMES
Chapter 15.06 MOBILE HOME PARK CHANGE OF USE
Chapter 15.07 MOBILE HOME PARK RENT INCREASE NOTIFICATION
Chapter 15.08 GRADING
Chapter 15.09 EXPEDITED PERMITTING PROCESS FOR ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATIONS
Chapter 15.10 SMALL RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS
Chapter 15.11 ELECTRIC AND BARBED WIRE FENCES
Chapter 15.12 BUILDING CODE
Chapter 15.14 CALIFORNIA FIRE CODE
Chapter 15.16 ENCROACHMENT PERMITS
Chapter 15.18 UNDERGROUNDING OF UTILITIES
Chapter 15.40 RELATING TO AFFORDABLE HOUSING
Chapter 15.50 200 YEAR FLOOD PROTECTION

Chapter 15.04 MOBILE HOMES
Article I. Enforcement Authority
15.04.010 Purpose.
    The purpose of this article is to appoint and designate the building and site inspection division of the community development department as the enforcement authority to enforce the provisions of Sections 18300, 18613 and 18614 of the Health and Safety Code of the state, as amended by Chapter 803, Laws of 1975; Chapter 640, Laws of 1973; and Chapter 1273, Laws of 1975. (County code § 7‑5.01)

 

15.04.020 Designated.
    Pursuant to the provisions of Sections 18300, 18613 and 18614 of the Health and Safety Code of the state, as amended, the building and site inspection division of the community development department is designated as the enforcement authority to enforce all the laws and regulations of the state and city applicable to or regulating the location, installation, emplacement or setting up of all manufactured housing and/or mobile homes, and any connection to such structures to any utility service or device, on any site or location, except within a mobile home park. (County code § 7‑5.02)

 

15.04.030 Permit required—Fees.
    No person shall locate, install, emplace, set up or connect to any utility service or device any manufactured housing and/or mobile home on any site or location, except within a mobile home park, without first applying for and obtaining a permit to do so from the building and site inspection division of the community development department and paying all the fees for such permit according to the schedule of fees adopted by resolution by the city council. (County code § 7‑5.03)

 

15.04.040 Requirements.
    A.  The building inspection department shall issue the permit described in Section 15.04.030 for an application which is accompanied by the plans, specifications and data required by the laws and regulations of the state and this article upon the full payment of all fees required by this article and state laws, and upon making the findings set forth in this article. In the event an applicant for a permit does not submit adequate, correct or complete data, plans and specifications, the building inspection department shall so notify the applicant. In the event the applicant then resubmits his or her application, an additional application filing fee shall be collected.

    B.   The permit shall be issued if the building and site inspection division makes all the following findings:

    1.   That the mobile home has been certified under the National Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (42 USC Section 541, et seq.);

    2.   That, if the mobile home is to be installed on a foundation, the foundation system complies with the plans and specifications required by the regulations of the Department of Housing and Community Development of the state;

    3.   That, if the mobile home is to be installed on a foundation, the manufacturer, dealer or purchaser of the mobile home has provided plans and specifications designed by a state licensed architect or engineer covering the installation of an individual mobile home on a foundation and such additional engineering as required by the building inspection department due to the particular circumstances of the site;

    4.   That the utility connections, site grading, waste treatment facilities, accessory equipment and/or structures, and all other work to be done comply with all regulations which are applicable to them, and that a building permit has been issued for such work if required by such regulations;

    5.   That the community development director has approved the site plan pursuant to Article II of this chapter; and

    6.   That all conditions of site plan approval have been satisfied. (County code § 7‑5.04)

 

15.04.050 Reinspection.
    In the event the installation, emplacement or setting up of a mobile home, or its placement on a foundation, or its connection to a utility service fails to comply with city or state laws or regulations, the building inspection department shall notify the applicant for the permit of the deficiencies. The applicant shall then perform the necessary corrective work and request a reinspection within ten days after the date of the notice. The fee for the reinspection shall be paid upon the request for reinspection. (County code § 7‑5.05)

 

15.04.060 Certificate of occupancy.
    At the time the building inspection department issues a certificate of occupancy for any mobile home placed on a foundation, the building inspection department shall cause to be recorded with the county recorder a document particularly describing the real property upon which the mobile home has been installed on a foundation and the fact that a mobile home has been affixed to the property. A copy of the document shall be forwarded to the county assessor. (County code § 7‑5.06)

 

15.04.070 Violation—Penalty.
    Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and may be punished as provided in Chapter 1.12 of this code. (County code § 7‑5.07)

 

Article II. Installations
15.04.080 Purpose.
    The purpose of this article is to set forth the requirements regarding the installation of mobile homes in the mobile home combining zone (MHF) or in the agricultural (A) zones of the city. (County code § 8‑4.101)

 

15.04.090 Authority.
    This article is enacted pursuant to the authority set forth in Section 65852.3 of the Government Code of the state Sections 18300 and 18551 of the Health and Safety Code of the state and administrative regulations adopted pursuant thereto; the state Planning Law set forth in Title 7 of the Government Code of the state; and the city’s general police power provided in Section 7 of Article XI of the Constitution of the state. (County code § 8‑4.102)

 

15.04.100 Scope.
    This article shall apply only to mobile homes located outside mobile home parks, which mobile homes are placed on foundations. (County code § 8‑4.103)

 

15.04.110 Definitions.
    For the purpose of this article, the words set out in this section shall have the following meanings:

    “Director” means the city community development director or his or her successor in duty and function, or the director’s designate.

    “Foundation” means a foundation system for a mobile home which meets the mobile home foundation system standards approved by the Department of Housing and Community Development of the state, pursuant to Section 18551 of the Health and Safety Code of the state.

    “Mobile home” means and shall be limited to those mobile homes constructed or purchased after January 1, 1974, and certified under the National Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (42 USC Section 5401, et seq.) and/or which bear an insignia of approval issued by the Department of Housing and Community Development of the state, which mobile homes are designed and equipped, and are intended to be used to contain not more than one residential dwelling unit. “Mobile home” shall not include a recreational vehicle, commercial coach or factory‑built housing as defined in Section 19971 of the Health and Safety Code of the state.

    “Mobile home combining zone (MHF)” means an area zoned as being compatible for the installation of mobile homes pursuant to Chapter 17.64 of this code. (County code § 8‑4.201 C 8‑4.204)

 

15.04.120 Compliance.
    It shall be a violation of this article for any person to install a mobile home on a foundation unless the director has approved the site plan for the parcel upon which the mobile home will be located pursuant to Sections 15.04.130 through 15.04.160, all the design criteria set forth in Sections 15.04.170 through 15.04.200 and all the conditions on the approval of the site plan have been satisfied. (County code § 8‑4.301)

 

15.04.130 Site plan approval—Required—Procedure.
    A.  No mobile home shall be approved for installation on a foundation unless a site plan for the proposed mobile home has been approved by the director pursuant to Sections 15.04.130 through 15.04.160.

    B.   The procedures for the site plan review is as set forth in Chapter 17.61, and the director’s decision shall be appealable to the planning commission and the city council as set forth in Chapter 17.61.

    C.   On an appeal, the planning commission and the city council shall apply the requirements of this article. (County code § 8‑4.401)

 

15.04.140 Site plan approval—Findings.
    No site plan for the installation of a mobile home on a foundation shall be approved unless all the following findings are made in the affirmative:

    A.  That the mobile home owner has provided adequate written evidence that he or she owns or holds title to the real property where the mobile home is to be installed, and the installation of a mobile home on a foundation would not violate any covenant, condition or restriction of record. Such evidence shall take the form of a preliminary title report, issued by a licensed title company for the purpose of title insurance, and a copy of any recorded restrictive covenant. “Owns or holds title to the real property” means that the applicant is seized of an undivided fee interest in the subject parcel, whether or not the fee is subject to a security interest by deed of trust or mortgage;

    B.   That the applicant has provided written consent from any person who holds legal title to the mobile home to install the mobile home on a foundation system, the consent of sufficient specificity to enable the director to verify the consent;

    C.   That the location of a dwelling on the proposed property is a permitted or accessory use in the zone or, if a conditional use permit is required, that the use permit has been issued and all conditions have been satisfied;

    D.  That the property is zoned within a mobile home combining zone (MHF) as required by Chapter 17.64, or a mobile home on a foundation is a permitted or approved conditional use in the zone;

    E.   If the property is zoned within a mobile home combining zone (MHF), and the zone embodies design standards for mobile homes, that the mobile home proposed to be installed complies with the design standards applicable within the particular mobile home combining zone (MHF);

    F.   That the parcel in question was created in conformity with and complies with all the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act of the state;

    G.  That the proposed use is consistent with the general plan;

    H.  That the proposed use conforms to all the applicable requirements of federal or state laws or regulations and all other applicable requirements of this code and/or the general plan. Conformity shall be evidenced by the written comments of all agencies with jurisdiction regarding their requirements to ensure compliance with the laws and/or regulations each enforces or by their absence of comment within the comment period;

    I.    That the design of the proposed installation conforms to all the design criteria set forth in Sections 15.04.170 through 15.04.200; and

    J.    That all other approvals and/or permits required for the particular parcel and installation in question to be issued by the city, except the building permit, have been issued and/or approved. (County code § 8‑4.402)

 

15.04.150 Site plan approval—Conditions.
    The director may conditionally approve a site plan subject to the conditions as are required to enable the proposed use to comply with all the findings set forth in Section 15.04.140. Such conditions shall be satisfied before a building permit is issued for the subject improvements and may include a cash deposit, bonds and/or contractual agreements satisfactory to the city to meet the required conditions at the time specified in therein. (County code § 8‑4.404)

 

15.04.160 Site plan approval—Fees.
    A.  All applicants for site plan approval pursuant to Sections 15.04.130 through 15.04.150 shall pay a fee in the amount set by the city council by resolution to the community development department; the applications shall not be certified as complete for acceptance until the fee is received. The fee shall be in addition to any other fee required by this code or other laws or regulations for the application in question.

    B.   The fee referenced in this section shall be waived if a fee for a use permit and/or a variance processed in conjunction with the same site plan approval has been paid. The fee shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, fees paid for the processing of land division maps. (County code § 8‑4.405)

 

15.04.170 Design criteria—Purpose.
    The purpose of Sections 15.04.180 through 15.04.200 is to set forth uniform standards and criteria for the design, dimensions, facilities and related structures and improvements of mobile homes proposed to be located on foundations, so as to ensure their compatibility for use within the area in question, and to ensure compliance with any design criteria applicable in the particular mobile home combining zone (MHF) in which they are located, so as to allow such uses to locate in the areas proposed with reasonable harmony with the existing structures and reasonably minimize damage to the natural or manmade environment of the area or to the value of properties within the area.

    B.   The design criteria are intended to be applied so as to maximize the harmony between the existing structures within the area and the proposed mobile home uses and to ensure compatibility between the mobile home uses and the design criteria met by conventionally built dwellings within the area. (County code § 8‑4.501)

 

15.04.180 Design criteria—Generally.
    No mobile home shall be located on a foundation outside a mobile home park in any zone in the incorporated portions of the city unless all the following criteria are met:

    A.  The mobile home shall be occupied only as a single‑family residential use.

    B.   The mobile home shall be subject to and comply with all the zoning provisions of this code applying to residential structures in the subject zone.

    C.   The mobile home shall be attached to a permanent foundation system which complies with the requirements of the Department of Housing and Community Development of the state.

    D.  The mobile home shall have a floor area of sufficient size to be compatible with existing dwellings in the area or as required by the mobile home combining zone (MHF).

    E.   A storage building of at least eighty square feet in interior floor space and enclosed with full walls shall be provided on the lot with the mobile home, unless a garage is provided pursuant to subsection J of this section.

    F.   In all areas zoned mobile home combining zone (MHF), the mobile home shall be covered with an exterior material and color compatible with that used on conventional dwellings in the surrounding area and approved by the director. The exterior covering material shall extend to the ground, except that when a solid concrete or masonry perimeter foundation is used, the exterior covering material need not extend below the top of the foundation but shall meet the requirements of the applicable building codes.

    G.  The mobile home shall have a roof of not less than three‑inch rise for each twelve inches of horizontal run, and be constructed of a roofing material and color compatible with that used for conventional dwellings in the surrounding area, and be approved by the director.

    H.  The director may require the construction of a porch or porches when it is necessary to render the design of the mobile home compatible with existing dwellings in the surrounding area.

    I.    The mobile home shall have a roofline and eave extension compatible with those on conventional dwellings in the surrounding area.

    J.    Parking shall be provided as required by the applicable provisions of this code. The requirement for a garage and its minimum area shall be as set forth in the design standards established pursuant to Chapter 17.64 for the particular mobile home combining zone (MHF) in question. When attached, the garage shall not be supported in any fashion by the mobile home. The garage shall be constructed of the same or a similar material and color on the exterior and roof surface as the mobile home exterior and color. The construction of the garage shall be subject to applicable building permit requirements.

    K.  The grading, landscaping and irrigation required for the mobile home site shall be the same as that of other conventional dwellings in the surrounding area.

    L.   The level of the floor of the mobile home shall be the same as that of other conventional dwellings in the surrounding area; provided, however, in no event shall the level of the floor be less than that required by Title 18 relating to floodplain management. (County code § 8‑4.502)

 

15.04.190 Design criteria—Existing structures.
    A mobile home may be attached to an existing conventional structure or another mobile home earlier installed on a foundation with the approval of the director. The director shall not approve such use unless all the following findings are made:

    A.  That the mobile home will comply in all respects with Sections 15.04.130 through 15.04.160 and all other federal, state and city regulations regarding the placement of mobile homes on foundations; and

    B.   That the roof design, color and material and the siding material and color shall reasonably match the structure to which the mobile home is proposed to be attached. (County code § 8‑4.503)

 

15.04.200 Design criteria for attaching conventional structures.
    A structure of conventional construction may be added to a mobile home which has been installed in compliance with Sections 15.04.120 through 15.04.150 and shall be constructed in conformity with the Uniform Building Code and applicable state regulations. (County code § 8‑4.504)

 

15.04.210 Variances.
    A.  The director may authorize variances to the design criteria set forth in Sections 15.04.160 through 15.04.190.

    B.   The findings required to grant a variance pursuant to this section shall be those set forth in Article 29 of Chapter 2. (County code § 8‑4.601—8‑4.602)

 

15.04.220 Violation—Penalty.
    The installation of a mobile home on a foundation without an approved site plan or in violation of the conditions of approval shall constitute a violation of this chapter and, in addition, shall constitute a violation of the zoning provisions set forth in Title 17 and shall be abated pursuant to Article 31 of Chapter 2. (County code § 8‑4.701)

Chapter 15.06 MOBILE HOME PARK CHANGE OF USE
15.06.010 Purpose and intent.
    The stated purpose and intent of this chapter is to ensure that any proposed change of use of an existing mobile home park or a portion thereof to any other use is preceded by adequate notice, that the social and fiscal impacts of the proposed change of use are adequately defined prior to consideration of a proposed change of use, and that relocation and other assistance is provided to identified park residents, consistent with the provisions of the ordinance codified in this chapter and California Government Code Sections 65863.7 and 66427.4, and relevant portions of the California Civil Code. (Ord. 08-19 § 3)

 

15.06.020 Definitions.
    “Applicant” means any person, firm, corporation, partnership, or other entity owning or representing a mobile home park who applies to change the use of that mobile home park or a portion thereof.

    “Change of use” means using an existing mobile home park or a portion thereof for a purpose other than the rental or the holding out for rent of two or more mobile home sites to accommodate mobile homes used for human habitation, and shall not mean the adoption, amendment, or repeal of a park rule or regulation.

    “Comparable mobile home park” means any other mobile home park substantially similar in terms of park conditions, amenities, and other relevant factors.

    “Impact report” means the required report on the impact of the change of use upon the displaced residents pursuant to California Government Code Section 65863.7(a), which the applicant shall file as part of the change of use permit application.

    “Mobile home” means a structure as defined in California Civil Code Section 798.3.

    “Mobile home owner” means a person who owns or has an ownership interest in a mobile home within a mobile home park.

    “Mobile home park” means an area of land where two or more mobile home sites are rented, or held out for rent, to accommodate mobile homes used for human habitation. Mobile home park shall not include a mobile home subdivision of stock cooperative. A mobile home park is not a recreational vehicle park as defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 18862.39.

    “Mobile home site” means an area within a mobile home park being occupied by or designated for occupancy by an individual mobile home.

    “Mobile home tenant” means a person who occupies a mobile home within a mobile home park pursuant to a bona fide lease or rental agreement with the mobile home owner and who, during his or her tenancy, was not the owner or member of the immediate household of the mobile home owner.

    “Resident” means a person lawfully residing in a mobile home park, including mobile home owners, mobile home tenants or members of the immediate household of the mobile home owners or mobile home tenants. (Ord. 08-19 § 3)

 

15.06.030 Vacancy notice.
    The following shall apply when any mobile home park in the city has either twenty vacant mobile home sites or a vacancy rate of twenty-five percent or greater of the total number of mobile home sites in existence in the mobile home park, whichever occurs first, and such was not caused by physical disaster, including, but not limited to, fire, flood, storm, earthquake, landslide, or by another natural condition beyond the control of the owner or operator of the mobile home park:

    A.  The owner or operator of the mobile home park shall file with the city manager a written notice informing the city of the current vacancy rate and the number of vacant mobile home sites. For purposes of this chapter, a mobile home site is “vacant” when it is either:

    1.   Unoccupied by a mobile home; or

    2.   Occupied by a mobile home in which no person resides unless site rent is being paid.

    B.   The written notice to the city manager from the owner or operator of the mobile home park shall clearly state any known reason why there are twenty vacant mobile homes within the mobile home park or why the vacancy rate is in excess of twenty-five percent, and whether or not the property owner intends to convert the mobile home park or a portion thereof to another use.

    C.   If it is determined that the owner or operator of the mobile home park intends to apply for a change of use permit, the city manager or his or her designee shall immediately inform the property owner or operator of the requirements of this chapter.

    The city shall monitor vacancies within the city’s mobile home parks to ensure compliance with the vacancy notice requirement. Should the city choose to send a written inquiry regarding vacancy to a park owner or operator, the park owner or operator shall file with the city manager a written notice per subsection A no later than one month following the written inquiry from the city. (Ord. 08-19 § 3)

 

15.06.040 Change of use permit requirement.
    Any applicant desiring to convert a mobile home park or a portion thereof to any other use, to close a mobile home park or a portion thereof, or to cease to use all or any portion of the land as a mobile home park shall apply for a change of use permit, in addition to any necessary discretionary land use permit application, such as a tentative or parcel subdivision map or a conditional use permit. The city manager or designee shall review the change of use permit application, and shall make a final determination regarding the change of use permit or shall forward a recommendation on the change of use permit to the city council for final action. The consideration of a change of use permit shall require a noticed public hearing in the manner set forth in California Government Code Section 65905. At a minimum, each application for a change of use permit shall include the following and any additional information as may be required by this chapter or the city manager or designee:

    A.  A detailed narrative description of the proposed use to which the mobile home park or a portion thereof is to be converted or the reason for the closure or cessation of use of the mobile home park or a portion thereof.

    B.   The proposed timetable for the change of use and development, closure or cessation of use of the site.

    C.   A statement from the applicant that the rent at the mobile home park shall not be increased, unless as provided in a valid lease entered into prior to filing an application for a change of use, for two years from the date of the filing of the change of use application or until change of use of the mobile home park, whichever is earlier.

    D.  A report on the impact of the change of use of the mobile home park or a portion thereof on the residents of the mobile home park pursuant to Section 15.06.050, and a relocation plan addressing the availability of replacement housing for existing residents of the mobile home park pursuant to Section 15.06.060.

    E.   The application for a change of use permit shall include evidence of compliance with the requirements of California Civil Code Section 798.56 and California Government Code Section 65863.8 regarding notification of the mobile home park residents and mobile home owners concerning the proposed change of use.

    F.   Documentation satisfactory to the city manager or designee, including receipts and other financial documents, demonstrating that the applicant has the financial means to mitigate the impact of the change of use as provided in the relocation plan.

    No change of use permit application shall be deemed complete and processing for consideration will not commence until all of the required component parts of the permit application provided above have been reviewed and approved as to their completeness by the city manager or designee. (Ord. 08-19 § 3)

 

15.06.050 Impact report.
    Any applicant filing an application for a change of use permit to convert a mobile home park or a portion thereof to another use shall file a report on the impact of the change of use upon the residents of the mobile home park. At a minimum, the impact report shall include the following, as well as any other information deemed necessary and appropriate by the city manager or designee:

    A.  Detailed information on the mobile homes and mobile home sites within the mobile home park including, but not limited to, the following:

    1.   The total number of mobile home sites in the park and the number of sites occupied;

    2.   The length of time each site has been occupied by the present resident(s) thereof;

    3.   Whether each site is occupied by a mobile home owner or mobile home tenant;

    4.   The age, size, and type of mobile home occupying each site;

    5.   The monthly rent currently charged for each site, including any utilities or other costs paid by the present resident(s) thereof; and

    6.   The name and mailing address of each mobile home owner and mobile home tenant on three sets of gummed labels for the mailing of notice for public hearings.

    B.   A detailed analysis of the impact of the change in use upon the displaced residents of the mobile home park, including the availability of adequate mobile home sites in comparable mobile home parks in the city and the immediate surrounding area, and the estimated costs of moving a mobile home and on-site personal property, and any direct or indirect costs associated with a relocation to another mobile home park.

    C.   A list of the names, addresses, and telephone numbers of one or more relocation consultants, with an explanation of the services the consultant will perform at the applicant’s expense for the residents to be displaced. These services shall include, but not be limited to, assistance in locating a suitable replacement mobile home park, coordination of moving the mobile home and personal property, and any other tasks necessary to facilitate the relocation to another comparable mobile home park. (Ord. 08-19 § 3)

 

15.06.060 Relocation plan.
    A relocation plan for residents, excluding mobile home tenants, of the mobile home park shall be submitted for review and approval as part of the application for a change of use permit. The relocation plan shall provide, at a minimum, the following:

    A.  For those mobile homes that can be physically relocated, the relocation consultant shall work with the households to locate mobile home sites in comparable mobile home parks within thirty miles of the city. The relocation plan shall provide for the applicant to pay all reasonable moving expenses to a comparable mobile home park within thirty miles of the city to any nontenant resident who relocates from the mobile home park after city approval of the change of use permit. The reasonable costs of relocation and moving expenses shall include the costs of relocating a displaced homeowner’s mobile home, accessories, and on-site personal property, including the costs for disassembly, removal, transportation, and reinstallation of the mobile home and accessories at the new site, and replacement or reconstruction of the garage, blocks, skirting, porches, decks, awnings, storage sheds, or earthquake bracing, if necessitated by the relocation; indemnification for any damage to personal property of the nontenant residents caused by the relocation, reasonable living expenses of displaced nontenant park residents from the date of actual displacement to the date of occupancy at the new site; and payment of any security deposit required at the new site. When any resident has given notice of his or her intent to move prior to city approval of the change of use permit, eligibility to receive moving expenses shall be forfeited.

    B.   The relocation plan shall also identify those mobile homes that cannot be relocated due to their physical condition or due to a lack of available sites at comparable mobile home parks. The applicant shall be required to offer to purchase any mobile home that cannot be relocated in conformance with this chapter and to provide the nontenant resident with the option of a replacement housing payment. The nontenant resident shall elect whether to sell his or her mobile home to the applicant or whether to receive a replacement housing payment from the applicant. The nontenant resident may make this election after the purchase price for his or her mobile home has been determined.

    1.   Any offer to purchase a mobile home will be made at its in-place market value. Such value shall be determined after consideration of relevant factors, including the value of the mobile home in its current location, as well as the blocks and any garage, skirting, porches, decks, awnings, storage sheds, and earthquake bracing, and assuming the continuation of the mobile home park in its current condition, and not considering the effect of the change of use on the value of the mobile home. If the parties cannot agree as to the in-place market value of a mobile home, a state-certified appraiser with experience in establishing the value of mobile homes shall be selected by the relocation consultant, and paid for by the applicant, to determine the in-place market value. Should the applicant or the mobile home owner disagree with the appraised value, each disagreeing party may request at his or her expense an appraisal from a different state-certified appraiser. The in-place market value shall then be the average of all of the appraisals. If the mobile home owner is a disagreeing party, the cost of his or her appraisal shall be advanced by the applicant and deducted from the mobile home owner’s relocation compensation. A nontenant resident may accept the applicant’s offer to purchase his or her mobile home at any point prior to closure of the mobile home park or a portion thereof. Upon acceptance of the applicant’s offer to purchase the mobile home, the nontenant resident shall transfer title for the mobile home to the applicant.

    2.   The replacement housing payment shall be in the form of six months’ free site rent and utilities (assuming utilities are calculated separately from rent) or their monetary equivalent or in any combination provided the total value of the replacement housing payment equals six months’ free site rent and utilities. In calculating the six months’ rent amount, the applicant shall use the actual site rent in effect on the date of the filing of the change of use application. In calculating the six months’ utilities amount, the applicant shall use the average monthly amount of the utilities charged the nontenant resident for the previous twelve months. Upon relocation of the nontenant resident, title to the mobile home shall be transferred to the applicant. Agreement to such transfer shall be a condition of receipt of the relocation housing payment. Whether the nontenant resident opts to sell his or her mobile home to the applicant or to accept the replacement housing payment, the applicant shall be responsible for the reasonable costs of the relocation of all of the nontenant resident’s on-site personal property.

    C.   Notwithstanding subsections A and B of this section, and in order to facilitate a proposed change of use, a resident and applicant may agree to a mutually satisfactory relocation agreement. To be valid, however, such an agreement shall: (1) be in writing; (2) include a provision stating that the resident is aware of the provisions of this chapter; (3) include a copy of this chapter as an attachment; (4) include a provision in at least ten-point type which clearly informs the resident that it has the right to seek the advice of an attorney of its choice prior to signing the agreement with regard to its rights under such agreement; and (5) be drafted in the form and content otherwise required by applicable state law.

    D.  The relocation plan will also address how the applicant proposes to give priority to those mobile home residents residing in the mobile home park at the time the relocation plan is prepared in the leasing or purchasing of housing at the former mobile home park site in the event that the mobile home park or a portion thereof is converted to new housing. (Ord. 08-19 § 3)

 

15.06.070 Findings.
    In approving a change of use permit for a mobile home park or a portion thereof, the city manager or designee or the city council shall find that the application being reviewed meets the following requirements in addition to the other requirements of this chapter:

    A.  That the residents of the mobile home park have been adequately notified of the proposed change of use, including information pertaining to the anticipated timing of the proposed change of use.

    B.   That any nontenant residents displaced as a result of the change of use shall be compensated by the applicant for all adverse impacts created as a result of relocation in accordance with Section 15.06.060. The applicant must demonstrate the ability to satisfy this requirement as provided in Section 15.06.040(F). (Ord. 08-19 § 3)

 

15.06.080 Conditions of approval.
    The city manager or designee or the city council shall impose any necessary and appropriate conditions of approval to satisfy and implement the intent, purpose, and content of this chapter. In addition, any other necessary and appropriate conditions of approval to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the city may be imposed. In all cases, approval is conditioned on the applicant providing all mobile home owners and residents within applicant’s mobile home park with at least six months’ notice of intent to change the use of the mobile home park or a portion thereof and relocate all mobile homes after all city approvals. (Ord. 08-19 § 3)

 

15.06.090 Modification and revocation.
    A.  Modification.

    1.   After a change of use permit has been approved and after the applicant has executed a certificate of acceptance of the conditions of any approval, the applicant may file a request for a modification of the conditions imposed, including the additions or deletions of any condition. Modification may be granted on the grounds that there has been a change in circumstances or new information has come to light, which could not reasonably have been known or considered at the time of the hearing(s) on the application. No modification shall be granted unless it is consistent with the requirements of this chapter.

    2.   Any application for modification shall be subject to the notice and hearing procedures set forth in this chapter for a change of use permit. The decision in connection with a modification request shall take place in the same manner as the initial approval.

    B.   Revocation.

    1.   The city manager or designee may initiate revocation proceedings on the grounds that the mobile home park owner or applicant has violated the provisions of this chapter or the terms of the approval of the change of use. The city manager or designee shall specify in written notice provided to the mobile home park owner the grounds asserted for revocation of the approval of the change of use and shall set a hearing before the city council to consider the revocation not sooner than forty-five days and not later than sixty days after the written notice is provided to the mobile home park owner.

    2.   Notice of a revocation proceeding shall be sent to the mobile home park owner by certified mail, return receipt requested or personal delivery, together with notice that any response by the mobile home park must be filed at least twenty days prior to the date set for the revocation hearing.

    3.   The city council shall render its findings and decision concerning revocation within ninety days after initiating revocation proceedings. (Ord. 08-19 § 3)

 

15.06.100 Appeals.
    Appeal of any approval or disapproval made by the city manager or designee under this chapter shall be to the city council. Any approval or disapproval must be appealed by the applicant or any affected mobile home park resident or mobile home owner within fifteen calendar days of the date of the approval or disapproval. The city manager or designee may refer an application directly to the city council. (Ord. 08-19 § 3)

 

15.06.110 Enforcement.
    Noncompliance with the requirements of this chapter shall be considered a misdemeanor per Section 1.12.010 of this code. (Ord. 08-19 § 3)

Chapter 15.07 MOBILE HOME PARK RENT INCREASE NOTIFICATION
15.07.010 Purpose and intent.
    The stated intent of this chapter is as follows:

    A.  To ensure that the city remains informed of rent increases at mobile home parks; and

    B.   To encourage park owners to enter into long-term rental agreements with park tenants in order to stabilize rents for mobile home park sites. (Ord. 09-7 § 3)

 

15.07.020 Definitions.
    “Mobile home” means a structure meeting the definition set forth in California Civil Code Section 798.3.

    “Mobile home park” means any land where two or more mobile home sites are rented or held out for rent to accommodate mobile homes used for human habitation. A mobile home park shall not include a mobile home subdivision or stock cooperative. A mobile home park is not a recreational vehicle park as defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 18862.39.

    “Mobile home site” means an area within a mobile home park being occupied by or designated for occupancy by an individual mobile home.

    “Park owner” means a person or entity that has a controlling ownership interest in a mobile home park.

    “Park tenant” means a person who rents a mobile home site within a mobile home park.

    “Rent increase notice” means a written notification of a rent increase provided by a park owner in accordance with Section 15.07.030 of this chapter, on a form provided by the city. (Ord. 09-7 § 3)

 

15.07.030 Rent increase notice.
    A.  A park owner shall provide the city with a rent increase notice whenever the rent on any park tenant in any mobile home park in the city is increased by any amount; and

    B.   A park owner shall file such notice with the city manager not fewer than ninety days before the rent increase is to take effect; and

    C.   At a minimum, each rent increase notice for each site shall include the following and any additional information as may be required by this chapter or the city manager or designee:

    1.   Current site rent (before rent increase);

    2.   The amount of the rent increase;

    3.   The effective date of the rent increase;

    4.   The reason for the rent increase;

    5.   The address and number of the mobile home site subject to the noticed rent increase; and

    6.   The date(s) and amount(s) of each rent increase within the twelve-month period prior to the rent increase notice (if none, the date and amount of the previous rent increase) for the affected mobile home site. (Ord. 09-7 § 3)

 

15.07.040 Monitoring.
    The city shall use the information contained in the rent increase notices to monitor rent increases within mobile home parks. Staff shall maintain a written record of mobile home park site rent increases for the purpose of measuring the effectiveness of the city’s mobile home park site rent stabilization efforts. (Ord. 09-7 § 3)

 

15.07.050 Sunset.
    This chapter is repealed when the city council approves a final report prepared by city staff that concludes that the goal of mobile home park site rent stabilization has been substantially accomplished. (Ord. 09-7 § 3)

 

15.07.060 Enforcement.
    Noncompliance with the requirements of this chapter shall be considered a misdemeanor per Section 1.12.010 of this code. (Ord. 09-7 § 3)

Chapter 15.08 GRADING
15.08.010 Purpose.
    This chapter establishes standards for the preparation of sites and construction activities to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the public by protecting against unwarranted or unsafe grading, drainage works or other aspects of site development as follows:

    A.  To establish standards and procedures for grading and excavation so as to minimize hazards to life and limb, protect against erosion, maintain the natural environment, and protect the safety, use and stability of public rights-of-way and drainage channels;

    B.   To assure that projects approved under this chapter will be free from harmful effects of runoff, including inundation and erosion, and that neighboring and downstream properties will be protected from drainage problems resulting from new developments; and

    C.   To assure proper restoration of vegetation and soil systems disturbed by grading or fill activities authorized under this chapter. It is intended through this chapter to maintain an attractive and healthy landscape and to control against dust and erosion and their consequent effects on soil structure and water quality. (Ord. 88‑20 § 1)

 

15.08.020 Scope.
    This chapter sets forth rules and regulations to control excavation, grading and earthwork construction, including fills and embankments; establishes the administrative procedure and standards for issuance of permits; and provides for approval of plans and inspection of grading construction. (Ord. 88‑20 § 2)

 

15.08.030 Applicability.
    This chapter and the requirement to obtain a grading permit shall apply to all grading activity proposed to be commenced after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, even though the proposed development may have previously been approved by the city by way of a tentative map, rezoning, use permit or other permit or entitlement for use. Similarly, the existence of a subdivision improvement agreement, owner participation agreement or other agreement between the city and the landowner or developer shall not excuse compliance with this chapter, unless expressly provided by the terms of such agreement. (Ord. 88‑20 § 21(a))

 

15.08.040 Construction.
    A.  The adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter is not intended to repeal or replace Chapter 70, “Excavation and Grading,” of the Uniform Building Code as adopted by the city. Rather, this chapter shall supplement Chapter 70 of the Uniform Building Code.

    B.   If any irreconcilable inconsistency exists with the provisions of this chapter and Chapter 70 of the Uniform Building Code, the provisions of this chapter shall govern. (Ord. 88‑20 § 20)

 

15.08.050 Definitions.
    For the purpose of this chapter, the definitions in this section shall be construed as follows:

    “As-graded” means the surface conditions existing on completion of grade.

    “Bedrock” means in place, solid rock.

    “Bench” means a relatively level slope excavated into earth material on which fill is to be placed.

    “Borrow” means earth material acquired from an off‑site location for use in grading on a site.

    “Certification” means a written confirmation concerning the completion of the work.

    “City council” means the city council of the city of West Sacramento.

    “City manager” means the city manager of the city or designee.

    “Civil engineer” means a professional engineer registered in the state to practice in the field of civil engineering.

    “Clearing” means the removal of surface vegetation and debris.

    “Compaction” means the densification of a fill by mechanical means.

    “Earth material” means any rock, natural soil or fill and/or any combination thereof.

    “Engineering geologist” means a geologist experienced and knowledgeable in engineering geology.

    “Erosion” means the wearing of the ground surface as a result of movement of wind, water and/or ice.

    “Excavation” means the mechanical removal of earth material.

    “Existing grade” means the grade prior to grading.

    “Fill” means a deposit of earth material placed by artificial means.

    “Finished grade” means the final grade of the site which conforms to the approved plan.

    “Grade” means the vertical location of the ground surface relative to known elevation.

    “Grading” means any excavation or fill or combination thereof.

    “Planning commission” means the planning commission of the city.

    “Rough grade” means the stage at which the grade approximately conforms to the approved plan.

    “Site” means any lot or parcel of land or contiguous combination thereof, under the same ownership where grading is performed, proposed or permitted.

    “Slope” means an inclined ground surface the inclination of which is expressed as a ratio or horizontal distance to vertical distance.

    “Soil” means naturally occurring surficial deposits, overlaying bedrock.

    “Soil engineer” means a professional engineer registered in the state to practice in the field of soil engineering.

    “Soil engineering” means the application of soil mechanics in the investigation, evaluation and design of civil works involving the use of earth materials and the inspection and testing of the construction thereof. (Ord. 95-1 § 1 (part); Ord. 88‑20 § 6)

 

15.08.060 Permit—Required.
    Unless exempted under Section 15.08.060, no person shall perform any grading without first obtaining a grading permit from the city manager or designee. A separate permit shall be required for each site and may cover both excavations and fills. (Ord. 95-1 § 1 (part); Ord. 88‑20 § 7(a))

 

15.08.070 Permit—Exemptions.
    The following activities are exempt from the requirement to obtain a grading permit, unless such activity may endanger adjacent property; cause increased erosion, sedimentation and rate of water runoff; direct or impair the flow of water within a watercourse; or cause a public nuisance:

    A.  An excavation below finished grade for swimming pools, basements, footings of buildings, retaining walls or other structures authorized by a valid building permit, or trench excavations for the purpose of installing underground utilities;

    B.   Cemetery graves;

    C.   Excavation for wells;

    D.  Mining, quarrying, excavating, processing, stockpiling of rock, sand, gravel, aggregate or clay as authorized in Title 18, for which a use permit has been granted; provided such operations do not affect the lateral support or increase the stresses in or pressure upon any adjacent or contiguous property;

    E.   Exploratory excavations under the direction of a soil engineer or engineering geologist;

    F.   Excavations for installation of underground storage tanks where the capacity of individual tanks does not exceed five thousand gallons each, or when authorized by a valid city permit;

    G.  Any work performed within a public right‑of‑way or easement for the construction or maintenance of public facilities performed by or under the supervision of the city or other governmental agency;

    H.  The repair, maintenance or construction of flood protection levees performed by or under the supervision of a governmental agency;

    I.    Grading operations resulting in excavations and fills less than two feet in depth when the volume of grading is less than two hundred cubic yards;

    J.    Grading operations resulting in a volume of less than two hundred cubic yards;

    K.  Grading and clearing performed exclusively for agriculture purposes;

    L.   Clearing of land when the affected area is one acre or less. (Ord. 88‑20 § 4)

 

15.08.080 Application.
    To obtain a permit, the applicant shall first file an application in writing to the city manager or designee on a form furnished for that purpose. Every application shall:

    A.  Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit for which application is made;

    B.   Describe the site on which the proposed work is to be performed by lot, block, tract, and house and street address, or similar description that will readily identify and definitely locate the proposed building or work;

    C.   Indicate the quantities of work involved;

    D.  State the valuation of the proposed work;

    E.   Describe the purpose or purposes for the proposed grading and the contemplated use or uses of the site. If the proposed grading is a prerequisite to, or an initial step regarding, some future residential, commercial, industrial or other land development on the site, then the application shall explain the nature and extent of the future development and the status of the required discretionary permits and other entitlements for use that are required from the city and other federal, state and local agencies;

    F.   Be signed by the permittee, or his or her authorized agent, who may be required to submit evidence to demonstrate such authority;

    G.  Give such other information as may be required by the city manager or designee. (Ord. 95-1 § 1; Ord. 88‑20 § 7(b))

 

15.08.090 Plans and specifications.
    A.  When required by the city manager or designee, each application for a grading permit shall be accompanied by two sets of plans and specifications and supporting data, consisting of a soil engineering report and engineering geology report. The plans and specifications, if required, shall be prepared and signed by a civil engineer.

    B.   Information. When required, plans shall be drawn to scale and shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the nature and extent of the work proposed, and show in detail that they will conform to the provisions of this chapter and all relevant laws, ordinances, rules and regulations. The first sheet of each set of plans shall give the location of the work and the name and address of the owner and the person by whom they were prepared. The plans shall include the following information:

    1.   General vicinity of the site;

    2.   The boundaries of the site and accurate contours of existing grade, and details of terrain and area drainage;

    3.   Limiting dimensions, elevations and finish contours to be achieved by the grading and proposed drainage channels‑related construction;

    4.   Locations of significant trees and shrubs;

    5.   Detailed plans of all surface and subsurface drainage devices, walls, cribbing, dams and other protective devices to be constructed with or as a part of the proposed work, together with a map showing the drainage area and the estimated runoff of the area served by any drains;

    6.   Location of existing and proposed buildings or structures on the site and the location of any buildings or structures on land of adjacent owners which are within fifteen feet of the property or which may be impacted by the proposed grading operations.

    C.   Specifications shall contain information covering construction and material requirements. (Ord. 88‑20 § 7(c), (d))

 

15.08.100 Soil engineering report.
    A.  When required, the soil engineering report shall include data regarding the nature, distribution and strength of existing soils; conclusions and recommendations for grading procedures and design for correction measures when necessary; and opinions and recommendations covering adequacy of sites to be developed by the proposed grading.

    B.   Recommendations included in the report and approved by the city manager or designee shall be incorporated in the grading plans and specifications. (Ord. 95-1 § 1; Ord. 88‑20 § 7(e))

 

15.08.110 Engineering geology report.
    A.  When required, the engineering geology report shall include an adequate description of the geology of the site, conclusions and recommendations regarding the effect of geologic conditions on the proposed development, and opinions and recommendations covering the adequacy of sites to be developed by the proposed grading.

    B.   Recommendations included in the report and approved by the city manager or designee shall be incorporated in the grading plans or specifications. (Ord. 95-1 § 1; Ord. 88‑20 § 7(f))

 

15.08.120 Fees.
    A.  Application Fee. The application fee for each grading permit or renewal of such permit shall be set by resolution of the city council and shall be paid in full at the time application is made.

    B.   Plan Checking Fee. The plan checking fee shall be based on the estimated volume of excavation and fill proposed for the site, plus the estimated cost of implementing the best management practices required by Sections 15.08.180 and 15.08.280 of this chapter. Prior to accepting plans and specifications for review, the full amount of the fees shall be paid. This fee shall be set by resolution of the city council.

    C.   Inspection Fee. An inspection fee shall be paid prior to issuance of a grading permit. The fee shall be based on the estimated volume of excavation and/or fill proposed for the site, plus the estimated cost of implementing the best management practices required by Sections 15.08.180 and 15.08.280 of this chapter. This fee shall be set by resolution of the city council.

    D.  Additional fees may be charged for plan checking and inspection if changes to the project are proposed under the original application for permit, or any other circumstances that in the discretion of the director of public works warrants additional fees. Additional fees shall be charged at the rate set by resolution of the city council for city staff time for a one hour minimum per occurrence. For cases where a change in volume of grading work to that originally indicated by application or valid permit results, the plan checking and inspection fees shall be adjusted based on the schedules of fees set by resolution of the city council with additional fees charged for city staff time to review and process the change. (Ord. 15-2 § 4; Ord. 95-1 § 1; Ord. 88‑20 § 8)

 

15.08.130 Permit—Completion—Appeal.
    A.  Within thirty calendar days after receiving an application, the city manager or designee shall determine in writing whether the application is complete and shall notify the applicant of such determination. If the application is determined not to be complete, the city manager or designee shall specify those parts of the application that are incomplete and shall indicate a list and thorough description of the specific information needed to complete the application.

    B.   If the application is determined not to be complete, the applicant may appeal this determination by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk within fifteen days from the date of the city’s written determination. The board of appeals shall then consider the appeal and affirm, reverse or modify the city manager’s determination. (Ord. 95-1 § 1; Ord. 88‑20 § 7(g))

 

15.08.140 Issuance.
    A.  The completed application, including plans and specifications if required, shall be reviewed by the city manager or designee. If the proposed grading involves greater than twenty thousand cubic yards or a clearing in excess of ten acres, then the application shall also be submitted to the planning commission to determine whether the application and the proposed grading and/or clearing are consistent with the city’s general plan and any applicable specific plan. The city manager or designee may also submit the application to other city departments for review for compliance with other applicable ordinances, laws and policies.

    B.   The application shall be approved by the city manager or designee and a grading permit shall be issued only if all of the following are satisfied:

    1.   The city manager or designee determines that the application substantially complies with this chapter and all other applicable ordinances, statutes, regulations, policies and other laws;

    2.   If applicable, the planning commission determines that the application is consistent with the city’s general plan and any applicable specific plans;

    3.   The contemplated use or uses of the site and future development, if any, are permitted under existing zoning and all required discretionary permits or other discretionary entitlements for use have been fully approved by the city and by other applicable federal, state and local agencies. For purposes of this chapter, discretionary permits or entitlements for use shall be defined as any permit, license, agreement or entitlement for use, the approval or adoption of which requires the exercise of judgment or deliberation by the particular public agency or governing body, as distinguished from situations where the public agency or body merely has to determine whether there has been compliance or conformity with applicable statutes, ordinances, regulations, policies, laws or earlier approvals or agreements; and

    4.   The requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act, CEQA Guidelines and local implementing regulations have been fully complied with.

    C.   If the application is approved, the director of public works shall issue a written grading permit to the applicant. The permit shall be in a form as provided by the city manager or designee and shall include, at a minimum, the work to be performed with reference to the application and approved plans and specifications, if any, the deadline by which the work must be completed, and an indemnification provision in favor of the city. (Ord. 95-1 § 1; Ord. 88‑20 § 9)

 

15.08.150 Inspection.
    The permittee is to notify the city manager or designee when the grading work is ready for final inspection. Final approval will not be granted until all work has been completed in accordance with this chapter and the plans, specifications and conditions of the grading permit, and the work has been finally inspected as provided in Sections 15.08.180 through 15.08.240. At the discretion of the city manager or designee, the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, building or other permits, or the acceptance of public improvements may be postponed until the grading work is satisfactorily completed. (Ord. 95-1 § 1; Ord. 88‑20 § 10)

 

15.08.160 Suspension.
    A.  A grading permit may be suspended or revoked by the city manager or designee if:

    1.   Conditions at the site vary significantly from those shown on the approved plans;

    2.   Construction does not conform to this chapter or to the approved grading permit, including approved plans and specifications, if any;

    3.   The site is left in a condition hazardous to the public or to adjacent properties, and permittee does not comply with reasonable requirements to correct the conditions;

    4.   The permittee does not comply with reasonable requirements to safeguard the workmen, the public or other persons acting in a lawful manner;

    5.   The permittee, in connection with the operations for which the permit was issued, fails to operate his or her equipment properly on public roads; or allows materials to encroach, obstruct or be deposited within a public road right‑of‑way or within a drainage channel in a manner not authorized by the permit; or causes unauthorized obstruction or diversion of drainage channels;

    6.   The permittee fails to have a qualified inspector, working under the supervision of a registered civil engineer, on the site during operations when so required by the permit, or fails to have the work under proper supervision at all times; or

    7.   Conditions exist on the site which constitute a threat to health, safety or welfare of the public.

    B.   Prior to the suspension or revocation of a permit, the city manager or designee shall provide the permit holder written notice of intention to suspend or revoke the permit, which notice shall specify the grounds for such intended action and the time and place for the holding of a conference between the city manager or designee and the permit holder and/or their authorized representatives to review the grounds for the proposed action.

    C.   Upon receipt of the notice of intended suspension or revocation, the permit holder shall cease all work in connection with the permit, with the exception of work necessary to correct any condition cited in the notice of proposed action as a ground for suspension and/or revocation and work of an emergency nature.

    D.  Within a reasonable time following the conclusion of the conference, the city shall render its written decision, either revoking the permit, suspending the permit or authorizing the permit holder to proceed with the work. Such action may be with or without conditions. If the permit holder is dissatisfied by the decision, he or she may appeal to the board of appeals by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk within fifteen days from the date of the written notice and by paying a filing fee set by resolution of the city council. The board of appeals shall consider the appeal and shall affirm, reverse or modify the decision.

    E.   If the permittee fails to correct the objectionable or emergency conditions as required by the city manager or designee, the city may cause the work necessary to correct the conditions to be done, and the city may take appropriate action against permittee’s security, if any, to cover the cost of performing such work.

    F.   Any permit which has been suspended may be either reinstated or revoked by the city manager or designee at the sole discretion of the city manager or designee.

    G.  In cases where a permit has been suspended or revoked, the permittee shall not be entitled to refund of any portion of fees paid. The city shall not be responsible for any losses incurred by the permit holder resulting from such suspension or revocation. (Ord. 95-1 § 1; Ord. 88‑20 § 11)

 

15.08.170 Trees.
    The city manager or designee may require as a condition of the grading permit that certain trees on the site remain, and specify how such trees shall be protected during grading operations. (Ord. 95-1 § 1; Ord. 88‑20 § 15)

 

15.08.180 Erosion control.
    Any person performing ground disturbing activities in the city shall implement appropriate best management practices (BMPs) to prevent the discharge of construction wastes or pollutants from construction materials, tools, equipment, or soil from entering the storm drain system or watercourses.

    A.  Authorization to Review. The city has the authority to review designs and proposals for construction activities and new development and redevelopment sites to determine whether adequate BMPs will be installed, implemented, and maintained during construction and after final stabilization (post-construction).

    B.   Erosion and Sediment Control. All construction plans and applications submitted to the city pursuant to any permit application shall consider the potential for erosion and sedimentation at the construction site, and shall include appropriate erosion and sedimentation controls as identified in subsection D of this section.

    C.   Erosion and Sediment Control Plan Requirements.

    1.   When required by the city, a project shall have an erosion and sediment control plan (ESCP) that addresses erosion and sediment control and pollution prevention during the construction phase and final stabilization control measures. The ESCP shall be implemented year round and must be updated to reflect changing conditions on the project site.

    2.   Implementation of an approved ESCP by the applicant shall be a condition precedent to the issuance of a grading permit, building permit or a construction permit for a project subject to this section. Subsequent changes to the ESCP must be submitted to the city for review and approval.

    3.   The city manager may issue guidance and requirements specifying the content of ESCPs. The city will provide references to current guidance manuals and BMP information on request. The city shall collect a fee in accordance with the fee schedule to ensure compliance with the ESCP. The fee schedule would be adopted under a separate resolution.

    D.  Construction-Phase BMPs. BMPs include erosion and sediment controls and pollution prevention practices. Erosion control BMPs may include, but are not limited to, scheduling and timing of grading activities, timely revegetation of graded areas, the use of hydroseed and hydraulic mulches, and installation of erosion control blankets. Sediment control may include properly sized detention basins, dams, or filters to reduce entry of suspended sediment into the storm drain system and watercourses, and installation of construction entrances to prevent tracking of sediment onto adjacent streets. Pollution prevention practices may include designated washout areas or facilities, control of trash and recycled materials, tarping of materials stored on-site, and proper location of and maintenance of temporary sanitary facilities. The combination of BMPs used, and their execution in the field, must be customized to the site using up-to-date standards and practices.

    E.   Slopes. The faces of any slope created by grading shall be prepared and maintained to control against erosion. This control may consist of planting, landscaping materials or other means. If planting is required by the city manager or designee or as a condition of approval of the tentative map, building or other permits, the planting plan shall be approved by the city’s community development department. The protection for the slopes shall be installed as soon as practicable and prior to final inspection or approval. Where cut slopes are not subject to erosion due to the erosion resistant character of the materials, such protection may be omitted in the discretion of the city manager or designee

    F.   Other Devices. Where necessary, check dams, cribbing, riprap or other devices or methods may be required by the city manager or designee to control erosion and provide safety.

    G.  The following basic design principles and standards shall be incorporated in grading operations to control erosion and reduce sedimentation:

    1.   Stripping or burning of vegetation, grading or other soil disturbance shall be done in a manner which will minimize soil erosion.

    2.   Existing natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented where necessary. Site development shall be accomplished so that existing trees not specifically required by the grading permit to be protected can be preserved whenever possible and practical.

    3.   Exposure of soil to erosion by removal of vegetation shall be limited to the smallest area practical and for the shortest time practical. Soil exposure shall not exceed an area in which development can be completed during a single construction season to ensure that soils are stabilized and vegetation is established well in advance of the rainy season (October 15th through April 15th).

    4.   Facilities shall be constructed to retain sediment produced on site.

    5.   Sediment basins, sediment traps, diversions or similar required measures shall be installed well in advance of any clearing or grading and maintained through any such operations until removal is authorized by the director of public works.

    6.   Temporary seeding, mulching or other suitable stabilization measures shall be used to protect exposed areas subject to erosion during development and in advance of the rainy season (October 15th through April 15th).

    7.   Permanent control structures and final vegetation should be installed as soon as practical in the development, and a long-range maintenance plan developed and adhered to.

    8.   Provisions shall be made to accommodate the increased runoff caused by altered soil surface conditions during and after development.

    9.   Surface runoff rates in excess of predevelopment level shall be retarded where needed by appropriate structural and vegetation measures.

    10. Slopes created by grading shall not be steeper than two horizontal to one vertical, unless a thorough geological and engineering analysis indicates that steeper slopes are safe and appropriate erosion control measures are specified.

    11. Cuts and fills shall not encroach upon natural watercourses, their floodplains or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other properties.

    12. Disposal of cleared vegetation and excavation materials shall be done in a manner which reduces the risk of erosion and shall strictly conform to the provisions of the approved grading permit. Topsoil shall be conserved for reuse in revegetation of disturbed areas whenever possible.

    13. Proposed development and roadway alignments should be fitted to the predevelopment topography and soils to minimize erosion.

    14. Waterways shall be designed to avoid erosion as much as practical. Wide channels should be constructed with flat slopes, and the channel and slopes should be lined with grass or other appropriate vegetation or other material. Every effort must be made to preserve natural channels and drainageways. (Ord. 15-2 § 4; Ord. 95-1 § 1; Ord. 88‑20 § 16)

 

15.08.190 Grading inspection.
    All grading operations for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the city manager or designee. When required by the city manager or designee, special inspection of grading operations and special testing shall be performed in accordance with the provisions of Sections 15.08.220 and 15.08.230. (Ord. 95-1 § 1; Ord. 88‑20 § 17(a))

 

15.08.200 Grading designation.
    All grading in excess of five thousand cubic yards, based on the estimated volume of excavation and fill, shall be performed in accordance with the approved grading plan prepared by a civil engineer and shall be designated as “engineered grading.” Grading involving less than five thousand cubic yards shall be designated “regular grading,” unless the permittee, with the approval of the city manager or designee, chooses to have the grading performed as engineered grading. (Ord. 95-1 § 1; Ord. 88‑20 § 17(b))

 

15.08.210 Regular grading requirements.
    A.  The city manager or designee may require inspection and testing by an approved testing agency. The testing agency’s responsibility shall include, but need not be limited to, certification concerning the inspection of cleared areas and benches to receive fill, and the compaction of fills.

    B.   When the city manager or designee has cause to believe that geologic factors may be involved, the grading operation will be required to conform to engineered grading requirements. (Ord. 95-1 § 1; Ord. 88‑20 § 17(d))

 

15.08.220 Engineered grading requirements.
    For engineered grading, it shall be the responsibility to the civil engineer who prepares the approved grading plan to incorporate all recommendations from the soil engineering and engineering geology reports into the grading plan. He or she shall be responsible for the professional inspection and certification of the grading within his or her area of technical specialty. This responsibility shall include, but need not be limited to, inspection and certification as to the establishment of line, grade and drainage of the development area. The civil engineer shall act as the coordinating agent in the event the need arises for liaison between the other engineers, other professional consultants, the contractor and the city manager or designee. The civil engineer shall also be responsible for the preparation of revised plans and the submission of as-graded grading plans upon the completion of the work. (Ord. 95-1 § 1; Ord. 88‑20 17(c))

 

15.08.230 Certification.
    A.  Soil engineering and engineering geology reports shall be required as specified in Section 15.08.100 and 15.08.110. During grading, all necessary reports, compaction data and soil engineering and engineering geology recommendations shall be submitted to the civil engineer and the city manager or designee by the soil engineer and the engineering geologist.

    B.   The soil engineer’s area of responsibility shall include, but need not be limited to, the professional inspection and certification concerning the preparation of ground to receive fills, testing for required compaction, stability of all finish slopes and the design by buttress fills, where required, incorporating data supplied by the engineering geologist.

    C.   The engineering geologist’s area of responsibility shall include, but need not be limited to, professional inspection and certification of the adequacy of natural ground for receiving fills and the stability of cut slopes with respect to geological matters, and the need for subdrains or other groundwater drainage devices. He or she shall report his or her findings to the soil engineer and the civil engineer for engineering analysis.

    D.  The city manager or designee shall inspect the project at the various stages of the work requiring certification and at any more frequent intervals necessary to determine that adequate control is being exercised by the professional consultants. (Ord. 95-1 § 1; Ord. 88‑20 § 17(c))

 

15.08.240 Notification of noncompliance.
    If, in the course of fulfilling their responsibility under Sections 15.08.190 through 15.08.230, the civil engineer, the soil engineer, the engineering geologist or the testing agency finds that the work is not being done in conformance with this chapter or the approved grading permit and plans, the discrepancies shall be reported immediately in writing to the person in charge of the grading work and the city manager or designee. Recommendations for corrective measures, if necessary, shall be submitted. (Ord. 95-1 § 1; Ord. 88‑20 § 17(e))

 

15.08.250 Transfer of responsibility.
    If the civil engineer, the soil engineer, the engineering geologist or the testing agency of record are changed during the course of work, the work shall be stopped until the replacement has agreed to accept the responsibility within the area of their technical competence for certification upon completion of the work. (Ord. 88‑20 § 17(f))

 

15.08.260 Completion.
    Upon completion of the rough grading work and at the final completion of the work, the city manager or designee may require the following reports and drawings and supplements thereto:

    A.  An as-graded grading plan prepared by the civil engineer, including original ground surface elevations, as-graded ground surface elevations, lot drainage patterns and locations and elevations of all surface and subsurface drainage facilities. The civil engineer shall provide certification that the work was done in accordance with the final approved grading plan;

    B.   A soil grading report prepared by the soil engineer including locations and elevations of field density tests, summaries of field and laboratory tests and other substantiating data and comments on any changes made during grading, and their effect on the recommendations made in the soil engineering investigation report. The soil engineer shall provide certification as to the adequacy of the site for the intended use;

    C.   A geologic grading report prepared by the engineering geologist including a final description of the geology of the site, including any new information disclosed during the grading and the effect of same on recommendations incorporated in the approved grading plan. The engineering geologist shall provide certification as to the adequacy of the site for the intended use as affected by geologic factors. (Ord. 95-1 § 1; Ord. 88‑20 § 18)

 

15.08.270 Performance bond.
    A.  The city manager or designee may require performance bonds in such form and amounts as may be deemed necessary to assure that the work, if not completed in accordance with the approved plans and specifications, will be corrected to eliminate hazardous conditions.

    B.   In lieu of a performance bond, the applicant may file some other form of improvement security as provided by Government Code Section 66499, et seq.; provided, however, that the form and amount of financial security shall be subject to the approval of the city manager or designee. (Ord. 95-1 § 1; Ord. 88‑20 § 13)

 

15.08.280 Runoff control.
    New development and redevelopment projects will be required to implement post-construction BMPs to control the volume, rate, and potential pollutant load of stormwater runoff, including, but not limited to, requirements to minimize the generation, transport, and discharge of pollutants.

    A.  Prior to and/or during construction, the city may establish controls on the volume and rate of stormwater runoff from new developments and redevelopment as may be appropriate to minimize peak flows or total runoff volume, and to mimic the pre-development site hydrology. These controls may include limits on impervious area or provisions for detention and retention of runoff on-site.

    B.   Permanent Structural Controls. The city may require, as a condition of project approval, permanent structural controls designed for the removal of sediment and other pollutants. The selection and design of such controls shall be in accordance with criteria established or recommended by federal, state, and local agencies. Where physical and safety conditions allow, the preferred control measure is to retain drainageways above ground and in as natural a state as possible or other biological methods such as bioretention areas.

    C.   The city manager may issue design guidelines for post-construction BMPs consistent with the Phase II permit and may amend the guidelines from time to time in accordance with state and federal laws.

    D.  The city shall incorporate such post-construction design guideline requirements in any land use entitlement and construction or building-related permit to be issued relative to such development or redevelopment. The owner and developer shall comply with the terms, provisions and conditions of such land use entitlements and building permits as required in this chapter.

    E.   Runoff Control Plan Requirements.

    1.   For each new development and redevelopment project subject to the development runoff requirements, or where required by the nature and extent of a proposed project and where deemed appropriate by the city, every applicant will submit a runoff control plan and shall implement conditions of approval that reduce stormwater pollutant discharges through the construction, operation and maintenance of source control measures, low impact development design, site design measures, stormwater treatment measures and hydromodification management measures. Increases in runoff shall be managed in accordance with the development runoff requirements.

 

    2.   Implementation of an approved runoff control plan and submittal of an approved stormwater facilities operation and maintenance plan by the applicant shall be a condition precedent to the issuance of a building permit or a construction permit for a project subject to this section. Financial security may be required to ensure that stormwater management facilities operate and are maintained following construction for a period which may be determined by the agency. Financial security shall consist of an irrevocable letter of credit, cash deposit, or performance bond as determined by the agency.

    3.   All stormwater management facilities shall be designed in a manner to minimize the need for maintenance and reduce the chances of failure. All stormwater management facilities shall be maintained according to the approved stormwater facilities operation and maintenance plan. The person(s) or organization(s) responsible for maintenance shall be designated in the plan. Unless a different time period is provided for in the plan, those responsible for maintenance shall inspect the stormwater management facility at least annually. The plan shall also describe how the maintenance costs will be funded. Upon the failure of a responsible person to maintain a stormwater management facility in accordance with this chapter or the plan, the city may perform the maintenance and recover its costs from the responsible person as provided in Section 13.10.310 of this code.

    4.   For each new development and redevelopment project subject to the development runoff requirements, or where deemed appropriate by the agency, access by the city to stormwater management facilities for inspections, as provided in Section 13.10.230 of this code, and through such means as may be appropriate, including, but not limited to, legal agreements, recorded covenants or easements, shall be provided by the property owner. (Ord. 15-2 § 4; Ord. 95-1 § 1; Ord. 88‑20 § 19)

 

15.08.290 Hazards.
    Whenever the city manager or designee determines that any existing excavation or fill on private property has become a hazard to life and limb, or endangers property, or adversely affects the safety, use or stability of a public way or drainage channel, the owner of the property upon which the excavation or fill is located, or other person or agent in control of the property, upon receipt of notice in writing from the city manager or designee shall within the period specified therein repair or eliminate such excavation or fill so as to eliminate the hazard and be in conformance with the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 95-1 § 1; Ord. 88‑20 § 5)

 

15.08.300 Environmental standards.
    A.  Prior to the issuance of a grading permit, the property owner or applicant and the city shall have complied with the requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act, CEQA Guidelines and local implementing regulations.

    B.   Grading. Any grading to be performed within the project site shall take into account the environmental characteristics of that property, including but not limited to prominent geological features, existing streambeds and significant tree cover, and shall be designed in accordance with the best engineering practices to avoid erosion, slides or flooding, to have as minimal an effect on the environment as possible. The applicant shall also comply with the California Environmental Quality Act, any ordinance of the city regulating the cutting of trees, if any, and all other environmental laws.

    C.   All grading and other cuts, fills, drainage and terracing shall conform to the standard specifications of the city. (Ord. 88‑20 §§ 3, 14)

 

15.08.310 Enforcement and penalty.
    A.  It shall be the duty of the city manager or designee and other authorized employees of the city to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The lack of enforcement by the city manager or designee, or any authorized assistants of any official or employee of the city vested with the duty or authority to issues permits, shall not legalize, authorize, waive or excuse the violation of any provision of this chapter.

    B.   In the administration and enforcement of this chapter, any duly authorized official or employee of the city shall have authority to enter upon the premises for the purpose of investigation and inspection. No person shall refuse to permit such inspection.

    C.   In the event any person, firm or corporation shall perform any work in violation of this chapter or any permit issued pursuant to this chapter, or fail or refuse to perform any work required by this chapter or any permit issued pursuant thereto, the same is declared to be a public nuisance and at the direction of the city council, the city attorney is authorized to bring and prosecute an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin the performance of such work or, if such work has been accomplished, from maintaining the same. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, or who violates any grading permit issued under this chapter, shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be punishable by:

    1.   A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for a first violation;

    2.   A fine not exceeding two hundred dollars for a second violation within one year;

    3.   A fine not exceeding five hundred dollars for each additional violation in excess of two within one year. (Ord. 95-1 § 1; Ord. 88‑20 § 12)

Chapter 15.09 EXPEDITED PERMITTING PROCESS FOR ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATIONS
15.09.010 Expedited permitting process for electric vehicle charging stations.
    This chapter shall be known as the “expedited permitting process for electric vehicle charging systems,” and may be cited as such, and will be referred to herein as “this chapter.” (Ord. 17-16 § 2)

 

15.09.020 Definitions.
    “Electric vehicle charging system” or “charging system” means any level of electric vehicle supply equipment station that is designed and built in compliance with Article 625 of the California Electrical Code, as it reads on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, and delivers electricity from a source outside an electric vehicle into a plug-in electric vehicle.

    “Electronic submittal” means the utilization of one or more of the following:

    1.   Electronic mail or email.

    2.   The Internet.

    3.   Facsimile.

    “Specific, adverse impact” means a significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, and written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete. (Ord. 17-16 § 2)

 

15.09.030 Requirements.
 Single-Family      Multi-Family (Apartment)     Multi-Family (Condominium)

 Commercial (Single Business)                               Commercial (Multi-Businesses)

 Mixed-Use           Public Right-of-Way

 

Location and Number of EVSE to be Installed:

 Garage _____   Parking Level(s) _____   Parking Lot _____    Street Curb _____

Description of Work:

 

 

 

Applicant Name:

 

Applicant Phone & email:

 

Contractor Name:

 

License Number & Type:

 

Contractor Phone & email:

 

Owner Name:

 

Owner Phone & email:

 

 

EVSE Charging Level:  Level 1 (120V)  Level 2 (240V)  Level 3 (480V)

Maximum Rating (Nameplate) of EV Service Equipment  =  ___________  kW

Voltage EVSE = _________ V

Manufacturer of EVSE: ___________________________

Mounting of EVSE:  Wall Mount   Pole Pedestal Mount   Other _________________

 

Specify Either Connected, Calculated or Documented Demand Load of Existing Panel:

 

Connected Load of Existing Panel Supplying EVSE  =  __________ Amps

Calculated Load of Existing Panel Supplying EVSE  =  __________ Amps

Demand Load of Existing Panel or Service Supplying EVSE  =  _________ Amps

(Provide Demand Load Reading from Electric Utility)

 

Total Load (Existing plus EVSE Load)  =  __________ Amps

 

For Single Family Dwellings, if Existing Load is not known by any of the above methods, then the Calculated Load may be estimated using the “Single-Family Residential Permitting Application Example” in the Governor’s Office of Planning and Research “Zero Emission Vehicles in California: Community Readiness Guidebook”  https://www.opr.ca.gov

 

 

EVSE Rating __________ Amps  x  1.25  =  __________ Amps   =   Minimum Ampacity of EVSE Conductor  =  #  __________ AWG

 

For Single-Family:  Size of Existing Service Conductors  =  # __________ AWG or kcmil

or:  Size of Existing Feeder Conductor Supplying EVSE Panel  =  # __________ AWG or kcmil

                               (or Verify with Inspector in field)

 

(Ord. 17-16 § 2)

 

15.09.040 Permit application processing.
    A.  Prior to submitting an application for processing, the applicant shall verify that the installation of an electric vehicle charging system will not have specific, adverse impact to public health and safety and building occupants. Verification by the applicant includes, but is not limited to: electrical system capacity and loads; electrical system wiring, bonding and overcurrent protection; building infrastructure affected by charging station equipment and associated conduits; areas of charging station equipment and vehicle parking.

    B.   A permit application must satisfy the requirements set forth in this chapter to be deemed complete and be promptly processed. Upon confirmation by the building official that the permit application and supporting documents meets the requirements of this chapter, the building official shall approve the application and issue all necessary permits. Such approval does not authorize an applicant to energize or utilize the electric vehicle charging station until approval is granted by the city.

    C.   If the building official determines that the permit application is incomplete, he or she shall issue a written correction notice to the applicant, detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance.

    D.  Applications, including supporting documentation, may be submitted electronically. In accepting such permit applications, the building official shall also accept electronic signatures on all forms, applications, and other documentation in lieu of a wet signature by any applicant. (Ord. 17-16 § 2)

 

15.09.050 Electric vehicle charging system installation permit review.
    It is the intent of this chapter to encourage the installation of electric vehicle charging systems by removing obstacles to permitting for charging stations so long as the action does not supersede the building official’s authority to address higher priority life-safety situations. If the building official makes a finding based on substantial evidence that the electric vehicle charging system could have a specific adverse impact upon the public health or safety, as defined in this chapter, the city may require the applicant to apply for a use permit.

    In the technical review of a charging station, consistent with Government Code Section 65850.7, the building official shall not condition the approval for any electric vehicle charging system permit on the approval of such a system by an association, as that term is defined by Civil Code Section 4080. (Ord. 17-16 § 2)

 

15.09.060 Inspections.
    A.  Electric vehicle charging system equipment shall meet the requirements of the California Electrical Code, the Society of Automotive Engineers, the National Electrical Manufacturers Association, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories, and rules of the Public Utilities Commission or a Municipal Electric Utility Company regarding safety and reliability.

    B.   Installation of electric vehicle charging systems and associated wiring, bonding, disconnecting means and overcurrent protective devices shall meet the requirements of Article 625 and all applicable provisions of the California Electrical Code.

    C.   Installation of electric vehicle charging systems shall be incorporated into the load calculations of all new or existing electrical services and shall meet the requirements of the California Electrical Code. Electric vehicle charging equipment shall be considered a continuous load.

    D.  Anchorage of either floor-mounted or wall-mounted electric vehicle charging systems shall meet the requirements of the California Building or Residential Code as applicable per occupancy, and the provisions of the manufacturer’s installation instructions. Mounting of charging systems shall not adversely affect building elements. (Ord. 17-16 § 2)

 

15.09.070 Appeals.
    An appeal of the building official’s determination may be made to the city’s planning commission in accordance with the provisions set forth in Chapter 1.08 of the city’s municipal code. (Ord. 17-16 § 2)

Chapter 15.10 SMALL RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS
15.10.010 Definitions.
    “Association” means a nonprofit corporation or unincorporated association created for the purpose of managing a common interest development.

    “Common interest development” means any of the following:

    1.   A community apartment project;

    2.   A condominium project;

    3.   A planned development;

    4.   A stock cooperative.

    “Electronic submittal” means the utilization of one or more of the following:

    1.   Email;

    2.   The Internet;

    3.   Facsimile.

    “Reasonable restrictions” on a solar energy system are those restrictions that do not significantly increase the cost of the system or significantly decrease its efficiency or specified performance, or that allow for an alternative system of comparable cost, efficiency, and energy conservation benefits.

    “Restrictions that do not significantly increase the cost of the system or decrease its efficiency or specified performance” means:

    1.   For water heater systems or solar swimming pool heating systems: an amount exceeding ten percent of the cost of the system, but in no case more than one thousand dollars, or decreasing the efficiency of the solar energy system by an amount exceeding ten percent, as originally specified and proposed.

    2.   For photovoltaic systems: an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars over the system cost as originally specified and proposed, or a decrease in system efficiency of an amount exceeding ten percent as originally specified and proposed.

    “Small residential rooftop solar energy system” is a solar energy system that satisfies all of the following requirements:

    1.   A solar energy system that is no larger than ten kilowatts alternating current nameplate rating or thirty kilowatts thermal.

    2.   A solar energy system that conforms to all applicable state fire, structural, electrical, and other building codes as adopted or amended by the city and all state and city health and safety standards.

    3.   A solar energy system that is installed on a single or duplex family dwelling.

    4.   A solar panel or module array that does not exceed the maximum legal building height as defined by the city.

    “Solar energy system” means either of the following:

    1.   Any solar collector or other solar energy device whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for space heating, space cooling, electric generation, or water heating.

    2.   Any structural design feature of a building, whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for electricity generation, space heating or cooling, or for water heating.

    “Specific, adverse impact” means a significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, and written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete. (Ord. 15-8 § 2)

 

15.10.020 Purpose.
    The purpose of this chapter is to adopt an expedited, streamlined solar permitting process that complies with the Solar Rights Act and AB 2188 (Chapter 521, Statutes 2014) to achieve timely and cost-effective installations of small residential rooftop solar energy systems. This chapter encourages the use of solar systems by removing unreasonable barriers, minimizing costs to property owners and the city, and expanding the ability of property owners to install solar energy systems. This chapter allows the city to achieve these goals while protecting the public health and safety. (Ord. 15-8 § 2)

 

15.10.030 Applicability.
    A.  This chapter applies to the permitting of all small residential rooftop solar energy systems in the city.

    B.   Small residential rooftop solar energy systems legally established or permitted prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter are not subject to the requirements of this chapter unless physical modifications or alterations are undertaken that materially change the size, type, or components of a small rooftop energy system in such a way as to require new permitting. Routine operation and maintenance or like-kind replacements shall not require a permit.

    C.   This chapter supersedes any conflicting provisions within Section 17.25.035 of this code. (Ord. 15-8 § 2)

 

15.10.040 Solar energy system requirements.
    A.  All solar energy systems shall meet applicable health and safety standards and requirements imposed by the state and the city.

    B.   Solar energy systems for heating water in single-family residences and for heating water in commercial or swimming pool applications shall be certified by an accredited listing agency as defined by the California Plumbing and Mechanical Code.

    C.   Solar energy systems for producing electricity shall meet all applicable safety and performance standards established by the California Electrical Code, the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories and, where applicable, rules of the Public Utilities Commission regarding safety and reliability. (Ord. 15-8 § 2)

 

15.10.050 Duties of building official.
    A.  All documents required for the submission of an expedited solar energy system application shall be made available on the publicly accessible city website.

    B.   Electronic submittal of the required permit application and documents by email, the Internet, or facsimile shall be made available to all small residential rooftop solar energy system permit applicants.

    C.   An applicant’s electronic signature shall be accepted on all forms, applications, and other documents in lieu of a wet signature.

    D.  The city’s building division shall adopt a standard plan and checklist of all requirements with which small residential rooftop solar energy systems shall comply to be eligible for expedited review.

    E.   The small residential rooftop solar system permit process, standard plan(s), and checklist(s) shall substantially conform to recommendations for expedited permitting, including the checklist and standard plans contained in the most current version of the California Solar Permitting Guidebook adopted by the Governor’s Office of Planning and Research.

    F.   All fees prescribed for the permitting of small residential rooftop solar energy systems must comply with Government Code Sections 65850.55, 66015, and 66016, and State Health and Safety Code Section 17951. (Ord. 15-8 § 2)

 

15.10.060 Permit review and inspection requirements.
    A.  The building division shall adopt an administrative, nondiscretionary review process to expedite approval of small residential rooftop solar energy systems. The building division shall issue a building permit or other nondiscretionary permit upon receipt of a complete application that meets the requirements of the approved checklist and standard plan. However, a building official may require an applicant to apply for a use permit if the official finds, based on substantial evidence, that the solar energy system could have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health and safety. Such decisions may be appealed to the planning commission.

    B.   Review of the application shall be limited to the building official’s review of whether the application meets local, state, and federal health and safety requirements.

    C.   If a use permit is required, a building official may deny an application for the use permit if the official makes written findings based upon substantive evidence in the record that the proposed installation would have a specific, adverse impact upon public health or safety and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid, as defined, the adverse impact. Such findings shall include the basis for the rejection of the potential feasible alternative for preventing the adverse impact. Such decisions may be appealed to the planning commission.

    D.  Any condition imposed on an application shall be designed to mitigate the specific, adverse impact upon health and safety at the lowest possible cost.

    E.   “A feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact” includes, but is not limited to, any cost-effective method, condition, or mitigation imposed by the city on another similarly situated application in a prior successful application for a permit. The city shall use its best efforts to ensure that the selected method, condition, or mitigation meets the conditions of subparagraphs (A) and (B) of paragraph (1) of subdivision (d) of Section 714 of the Civil Code defining restrictions that do not significantly increase the cost of the system or decrease its efficiency or specified performance.

    F.   The city shall not condition approval of an application on the approval of an association, as defined in Section 4080 of the Civil Code.

    G.  If an application is deemed incomplete, a written correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information or documentation required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance shall be sent to the applicant for resubmission.

    H.  Only one inspection may be required and performed by the building division for small residential rooftop solar energy systems eligible for expedited review.

    I.    The inspection shall be done in a timely manner and should include consolidated inspections. To the extent that the building official determines it to be practicable to do so, inspections of small residential rooftop solar energy systems should be scheduled within two business days of a request.

    J.    If a small residential rooftop solar energy system fails inspection, a subsequent inspection is authorized but need not conform to the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 15-8 § 2)

Chapter 15.11 ELECTRIC AND BARBED WIRE FENCES
15.11.010 Title.
    This chapter shall be known as the West Sacramento Building Standards for Electric and Barbed Wire Fences, and may be cited as such, and will be referred to herein as “this chapter.” (Ord. 14-8 § 2; Ord. 13-10 § 2)

 

15.11.020 Definitions.
    “Barbed wire” means the portion of a barbed wire fence that contains sharp edges or points.

    “Barbed wire fence” means a fence, barrier, or enclosure partially or totally surrounding a building, field, or yard, that includes sharp edges or points, which are designed to discourage unwanted intrusion into the surrounded building, field, or yard.

    “Electric fence” means any fence, barrier or enclosure partially or totally surrounding a building, field or yard, carrying any electrical pulse or charge through any part, section or element thereof.

    “Key box” means a terminal that provides emergency responders with safe building access. The installation of all key boxes shall conform to 2013 California Fire Code, Chapter 5, Section 506 Key Boxes. (Ord. 14-8 § 2; Ord. 13-10 § 2)

 

15.11.030 Application.
    It is unlawful for any person to install, maintain, or operate an electric fence or barbed wire fence in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 14-8 § 2; Ord. 13-10 § 2)

 

15.11.040 Conflicts with other laws, rules, etc.
    In the event of any conflict between this chapter and any state or federal law, rule or regulation, the requirement that establishes the higher standard of safety or accessibility shall govern. Failure to comply with such standard shall be a violation of this chapter.

    To the extent that the construction of an electric fence does not conflict with the requirements of this chapter, such fence shall be constructed and installed in conformance with the specifications set forth in IEC Standard 60335-2-76. (Ord. 14-8 § 2; Ord. 13-10 § 2)

 

15.11.050 Electric fence installation permit.
    A.  The installation of an electric fence requires an approved installation permit. Installation permit applications shall be filed with the building division. Installation permit applications must include the following:

    1.   Site plan indicating the location of the electric fence and perimeter fence.

    2.   Schematics and load calculations indicating and/or displaying the:

    a.   Location of the power source;

    b.   Materials used for the fence construction;

    c.   Location of the regulating and monitoring equipment; and

    d.   Location of emergency access, key box and cut-off switch.

    B.   The installation permit application fee shall be set by the city council. The fee shall be paid by the applicant at the time of filing the application. (Ord. 14-8 § 2; Ord. 13-10 § 2)

 

15.11.060 Electric fence operational permit.
    A.  The operation of an electric fence requires a valid operational permit. Operational permit applications shall be filed with the fire department.

    B.   An operational permit is valid for one year. The date of the expiration of the operational permit shall be provided to the applicant after the approval of the permit.

    C.   A written application shall be submitted to the fire department on forms furnished for that purpose. No applications may be accepted unless and until the permit fee has been paid. Operational permit applications must include the following:

    1.   The name and address of the establishment and business telephone number of the applicant, the name and titles and twenty-four hour emergency telephone numbers of the primary response person and an alternate.

    2.   The name and address of the person who owns the establishment and, if different, the name and address of the person(s) who operate the establishment or any portion thereof.

    3.   Certification from a qualified person with expertise in evaluating the safety of electric fences stating that the electric fence installation is currently operating in conformity with its safety requirements.

    4.   A notarized statement by the applicant stating that the electric fence is in compliance with the requirements of this chapter.

    5.   Proof of liability insurance, as required by this chapter.

    D.  Operational permit application fees shall be set by the city council.

    E.   Renewal applications and applications filed following permit revocation shall include all of the information required by this section. (Ord. 14-8 § 2; Ord. 13-10 § 2)

 

15.11.070 Permit revocation.
    A.  If an electric fence is found to not be in compliance with this chapter, the fire department may revoke the operational permit.

    B.   Upon permit revocation, the electric fence applicant shall receive a statement from the fire department describing the reason for the revocation.

    C.   Unless otherwise provided by this chapter, after revocation an applicant may apply for a new operational permit. (Ord. 14-8 § 2; Ord. 13-10 § 2)

 

15.11.080 Appeals.
    An interested person may appeal to the board of appeals a decision of the fire department or building division made pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 14-8 § 2; Ord. 13-10 § 2)

 

15.11.090 Liability insurance.
    The owner of the electric fence and the property owner(s), if different, are each required to carry general liability insurance in a minimum amount of one million dollars in the aggregate. Further, proof of insurance shall be required as a condition precedent to secure an operational permit as required in this chapter and upon each subsequent annual renewal. A failure to maintain proof of insurance for the permitted year shall be grounds for denial or revocation of the operational permit. Proof of minimum coverage amounts maintained for the preceding year must be provided with each application for operational permit renewal. Failure to maintain coverage for the entire previous year shall result in a denial of any permit renewal for five years from the date of operational permit expiration or revocation. Proof of insurance shall be underwritten by an organization licensed and authorized to do business in the state of California. (Ord. 14-8 § 2; Ord. 13-10 § 2)

 

15.11.100 Electrification.
    A.  No electric fence shall be installed or operated with a power source other than a storage battery not exceeding twelve volts direct current, charged primarily with a solar panel; provided, however, in case of inclement weather or other conditions that inhibit the ability of the solar panel to fully recharge the battery, a charging device may be utilized for such purpose, if connected in a manner that ensures that the charging device cannot provide a source of power directly to the fence. In no case shall an electric fence be connected to any other electric power source.

    B.   AC current shall not be used to energize any electric fence.

    C.   All ground system cables shall be properly insulated.

    D.  The controller ground system shall not be connected to any plumbing systems in or out of use and shall be at least fifty feet from other utility and buried water pipes.

    E.   The fence controller ground wire shall not touch any buildings on-site.

    F.   The fence controller and its ground system shall be at least fifty feet away from radio and buried telephone wires.

    G.  A lightning diverter (commonly referred to as a lightning arrestor) shall be installed between the fence and the fence controller.

    H.  A cut-off switch shall be installed capable of disconnecting the fence from the controller in case of emergencies, electrical storms, etc. A key box shall be installed to provide secure access to the cut-off switch. The key box shall be illuminated to a minimum one foot candle.

    I.    Each energizer shall be connected to its own ground system and must not be connected to any other ground system(s).

    J.    Two or more energizers shall not be connected to the same fence unless the use of multiple energizers does not increase the overall charge transmitted on the fence and adequate access is provided to the cut-off switch for each energizer.

    K.  All cabling (i.e., wire) and connectors shall be of the same material (e.g. steel, copper, etc.).

    L.   For portable livestock fencing, compliance with this section shall be met by providing cut-sheets and listing information for the entire fence assembly. The information provided must conform to the standards and provisions of the California Building Standards Code, Title 24, Parts 1, 2, 3, 4, 9, and 12, California Code of Regulations. (Ord. 17-15 § 2; Ord. 14-8 § 2; Ord. 13-10 § 2)

 

15.11.110 Perimeter fence.
    A.  No electric fence shall be installed or operated unless it is completely surrounded by a non-electric perimeter fence that is not less than six feet in height. The perimeter fence shall be separated from the electric fence as specified in Annex CC of IEC Standard 60335-2-76, with the exception of gate openings. The area between the perimeter wall or fence and the electric fence shall be kept clear of landscaping, shrubbery, other fences or material of any kind. The lowest part of the perimeter fence or wall shall be constructed to follow the natural terrain to prevent penetration of the perimeter fence at ground level. No part of a perimeter fence shall be allowed to be in contact with the electric fence. Perimeter fences shall be one of the following: a wood privacy fence, a chain link fence with wood or plastic slats inserted into each weave of the fence, or an equivalent solid barrier fence.

    B.   For portable livestock fencing, a non-electric perimeter fence, forty inches in height, shall be separated from the electric fence by a distance not less than thirty-six inches from the electric fence. (Ord. 17-15 § 2; Ord. 14-8 § 2; Ord. 13-10 § 2)

 

15.11.120 Location.
    A.  Electric fences shall only be allowed in zoning designations specified in Title 17 of the West Sacramento Municipal Code.

    B.   The electric fence or barrier must be located at least ten feet from any street property line or five feet from a separated sidewalk.

    C.   Electric fences are prohibited within twenty-five feet of any outdoor area utilized for the storage, use, or handling of hazardous materials as defined in the 2013 California Fire Code.

    D.  Portable livestock fencing adjacent to residential areas shall be subject to review and approval of the fire department. Approval shall only be given for temporary operations lasting no more than ninety days. Operational locations shall only be approved when the system is under twenty-four-hour supervision by an attendant. (Ord. 17-15 § 2; Ord. 14-8 § 2; Ord. 13-10 § 2)

 

15.11.130 Height.
    A.  An electric fence located within the ML, M-1, M-2, M-3, or BP zones shall be not less than eight feet in height.

    B.   An electric fence which is utilized for portable livestock fencing shall be a minimum of thirty-six inches in height. (Ord. 17-15 § 2; Ord. 14-8 § 2; Ord. 13-10 § 2)

 

15.11.140 Signage.
    Electric fences shall be clearly identified by warning signs. The warning signs shall conform to the following requirements:

    A.  All warning signs shall include text that reads: “Warning Electric Fence.” The text shall be printed in English, Spanish and Russian. All lettering shall be a minimum of one inch high.

    B.   In areas where portable livestock fencing is utilized, signs shall be posted that read “Warning: Do Not Pet Livestock.” Signs shall be printed in English, Spanish and Russian. All lettering shall be a minimum of one inch high.

    C.   The size of the warning signs shall be a minimum of four inches by eight inches.

    D.  The warning signs shall consist of a yellow background with black inscriptions and must be kept in good condition to ensure visibility.

    E.   There shall be a minimum of one warning sign on each section of the perimeter fence running parallel to the electric fence, and additional warning signs must be posted so that the distance between warning signs is not greater than fifty feet. (Ord. 17-15 § 2; Ord. 14-8 § 2; Ord. 13-10 § 2)

 

15.11.150 Hours of activation.
    A.  An electric fence shall only be energized during the hours when the general public does not have legal access to the protected property and shall be maintained by an automatic timer.

    B.   A portable electric fence which is used for livestock containment shall only be energized when in constant (twenty-four-hour) supervision of an attendant. (Ord. 17-15 § 2; Ord. 14-8 § 2; Ord. 13-10 § 2)

 

15.11.160 Barbed wire fence requirements.
    The barbed wire fence restrictions contained in this chapter do not apply if the barbed wire fence is installed on a farm or ranch.

    Barbed wire fences shall conform to the following requirements:

    A.  Barbed wire shall be securely fastened to durable wooden or metal posts, spaced not to exceed fifteen feet center-to-center and designed to withstand reasonable loads.

    B.   Gates on a barbed wire fence shall have solid frames and be conventionally hinged. Gates shall not swing over public property.

    C.   Barbed wire shall be properly attached and secured to risers or outriggers designed for this purpose.

    D.  Barbed wire must be at least seven feet above the finished grade at all points along the barbed wire fence. Barbed wire shall not at any point extend beyond the property line or over the public way.

    E.   Barbed wire fences shall only be allowed in zoning designations specified in Title 17 of the municipal code. Fencing locations shall comply with Title 17 of the municipal code. (Ord. 14-8 § 2; Ord. 13-10 § 2)

 

15.11.170 Broken glass.
    The use of broken glass and similar materials designed to do bodily harm, as a topping for fences and walls is prohibited. (Ord. 14-8 § 2; Ord. 13-10 § 2)

Chapter 15.12 BUILDING CODE
15.12.010 Title.
    This chapter shall be known as the West Sacramento Building Code, and may be cited as such, and will be referred to herein as “this code.” (Ord. 19-11 § 2; Ord. 02-18 § 3)

 

15.12.020 Application.
    This code shall be the exclusive source of regulations for any owner or authorized agent who intends to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, replace, demolish, or change the equipment, change the use and occupancy, change the location, maintain or remove any building, structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures throughout the city of West Sacramento. (Ord. 19-11 § 2; Ord. 02-18 § 3)

 

15.12.030 Conflicts with other laws, rules, etc.
    In the event of any conflict between this code and any state or federal law, rule or regulation, that requirement which establishes the higher standard of safety or accessibility shall govern. Failure to comply with such standard of safety or accessibility shall be a violation of this code. (Ord. 19-11 § 2; Ord. 02-18 § 3)

 

15.12.040 Adoption of California Building Standards Codes.
    The following is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated in this code, except as expressly amended or superseded by the provisions of this chapter:

    A.  The 2019 California Administrative Code, Title 24, Part 1, Chapters 4 (Article 1 Essential Service Buildings & Article 3 Local Buildings) and 10 only.

    B.   The 2019 California Building Code, Title 24, Part 2, Volumes 1 and 2 of the California Code of Regulations, including the entire following chapter: Volume 1 of 2, Chapter 1, Scope and Administration, Division I and Division II, as further amended herein, Volume 2 of 2, Chapter 31 (Special Construction), including the following appendices: Appendix F (Rodent Proofing), Appendix H (Signs), Appendix I (Patio Covers), Appendix J (Grading), and Appendix O (Emergency Housing). The following sections are hereby revised:

    1.   Volume 1 of 2, Section 101.1 Title. Insert The City of West Sacramento.

    C.   The 2019 California Residential Code, Title 24, Part 2.5 of the California Code of Regulations, including the following appendices: Appendix H (Patio Covers), Appendix I (Private Sewage Disposal), Appendix J (Existing Buildings and Structures), Appendix O (Automatic Vehicular Gates), Appendix Q (Tiny Houses), Appendix R (Light Straw-Clay Construction), Appendix S (Strawbale Construction), Appendix V (Swimming Pool Safety Act), and Appendix X (Emergency Housing).

    D.  The 2019 California Electrical Code, Title 24, Part 3 of the California Code of Regulations, including the following annexes: Annex A (Product Safety Standards) and Annex B (Application Information for Ampacity Calculation).

    E.   The 2019 California Mechanical Code, Title 24, Part 4 of the California Code of Regulations, including the following appendices: Appendix A (Residential Plan Examiner Review form for HVAC System Design) and Appendix F (Sizing of Venting Systems and Outdoor Combustion and Ventilation Opening Design).

    F.   The 2019 California Plumbing Code, Title 24, Part 5 of the California Code of Regulations, including the following tables and appendices: Table A (Chapter 4), Appendix C (Alternate Plumbing Systems), Appendix F (Firefighter Breathing and Replenishment Systems), Appendix G (Sizing of Venting Systems), Appendix K (Potable Rainwater Catchment Systems), and Appendix M (Peak Water Demand Calculator).

    G.  The 2019 California Energy Code, Title 24, Part 6 of the California Code of Regulations.

    H.  The 2019 California Historical Code, Title 24, Part 8 of the California Code of Regulations.

    I.    The 2019 California Fire Code, Title 24, Part 9 of the California Code of Regulations as further amended herein.

    J.    The 2019 California Existing Building Code, Title 24, Part 10 of the California Code of Regulations, including the following sections: Sections 107, 111, 113, 114, 115, 116 and 117.

    K.  The 2019 California Green Building Standards Code, Title 24, Part 11 (CAL Green) of the California Code of Regulations.

    L.   The 2019 California Referenced Standards Code, Title 24, Part 12 of the California Code of Regulations.

    M.  The International Property Maintenance Code, 2018 edition, as published by the International Code Council including Appendix A Boarding Standard and as further amended herein. The following sections are hereby revised:

    1.   Section 101.1. Insert City of West Sacramento.

    2.   Section [A] 102.3 Application of other codes is hereby amended to read as follows:

 

    i.    Repairs, additions or alterations to a structure, or changes of occupancy, shall be done in accordance with the procedures and provisions of NFPA 70 and the 2019 California Building Code, Parts 1, 2, 2.5, 3 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10 11 and 12 as amended herein.

 

    3.   Section 103.5. Insert City of West Sacramento Resolution 18-8.

    4.   Section 112.4. Insert twice the inspection fee.

    5.   Section 302.4. Insert twelve inches (12″).

    6.   Section 602.3. Insert October 1st to May 1st.

    7.   Section 602.4. Insert October 1st to May 1st. (Ord. 19-11 § 2; Ord. 10-13 § 3; Ord. 07-24 § 1; Ord. 02-18 § 3)

 

15.12.050 Interpretation.
    The purpose of this code is to establish the minimum requirements to safeguard the public health, safety, and general welfare through structural strength, means of egress, facility stability, access to persons with disabilities, sanitation, adequate lighting and ventilation and energy conservation; safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment; and to provide safety to firefighters and emergency responders during emergency operations. (Ord. 19-11 § 2; Ord. 02-18 § 3)

 

15.12.060 Liability.
    The provisions of this code shall not be construed as imposing upon the city of West Sacramento any liability or responsibility for damage to persons or property resulting from defective work, nor shall the city of West Sacramento, or any official, employee or agent thereof, be held as assuming any such liability or responsibility by reason of the review or inspection authorized by the provisions of this code of any permits or certificates issued under this code. (Ord. 19-11 § 2; Ord. 02-18 § 3)

Chapter 15.14 CALIFORNIA FIRE CODE
15.14.010 Adoption of California Fire Code.
    The 2019 California Fire Code, Title 24, Part 9 of the California Code of Regulations, and appendices Chapter 4, B, BB, C, CC, and D are hereby adopted by the city of West Sacramento and incorporated by this reference into the city of West Sacramento Municipal Code, as amended by this chapter. (Ord. 19-11 § 3)

 

15.14.020 Enforcement.
    The fire code shall be enforced by the fire prevention division of the city of West Sacramento fire department under the supervision of the fire marshal. (Ord. 19-11 § 3)

 

15.14.030 Definitions.
    The following definitions are exclusively applicable to Chapter 15.14:

    A.  Whenever the words “city,” “jurisdiction” or “city or jurisdiction” are used in the California Fire Code, it shall mean the city of West Sacramento.

    B.   Whenever the term “chief appointing authority of the jurisdiction” is used in the California Fire Code, it shall mean the city manager of the city of West Sacramento.

    C.   Whenever the term “legal representation of the jurisdiction” is used in the California Fire Code, it shall mean the city attorney of the city of West Sacramento.

    D.  Whenever the term “fire department” is used in the California Fire Code, it shall mean the West Sacramento fire department.

    E.   Whenever the term “jurisdiction’s keeper of records” is used in the California Fire Code, it shall mean the city clerk of the city of West Sacramento.

    F.   Whenever the term “fire code official” is used in the California Fire Code, it shall mean the fire chief of the city of West Sacramento.

    G.  Whenever the term “governing body” is used in the California Fire Code, it shall mean the city council of the city of West Sacramento. (Ord. 19-11 § 3)

 

15.14.040 Amendments to the California Fire Code.
    A.  Section 110.4 of Chapter 1 of the California Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows:

 

Section 110.4 Violation penalties. Violations of a provision of this code or the failure to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the fire code official, or of a permit or certificate used under provisions of this code, shall be a misdemeanor. Each day that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense, except as waived by the fire code official. The imposition of any penalty shall not prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions or excuse the violation.

 

    B.   Section 202 of Chapter 2 of the California Fire Code is hereby amended to add and amend the following definitions:

 

AREA, RURAL. Are areas within the City of West Sacramento in which adequate and reliable water supply systems for firefighting purposes do not exist or any area beyond a five-minute emergency response time.

 

BUILDING. Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy, including manufactured homes, mobile homes, and modulars.

 

    C.   Section 503.2.3 of Chapter 5 of the California Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows:

 

Section 503.2.3 Surface. Fire apparatus access roads shall be designed and maintained to support the imposed loads of fire apparatus, shall meet the minimum road specifications as set forth in the latest published edition of the City of West Sacramento Community Development Department Engineering Division Standard Specifications, and shall provide all weather driving capabilities.

 

    D.  Section 503.2.4 of Chapter 5 of the California Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows:

 

Section 503.2.4 Turning radius. For all turns on public and private roads the minimum inside turning radius shall be 26 feet and the minimum outside turning radius shall be 46 feet.

 

    E.   Section 503.2.7 of Chapter 5 of the California Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows:

 

Section 503.2.7 Grade. The grade of a fire apparatus access road shall be a maximum of 12 percent.

 

    F.   Section 503.2.8 of Chapter 5 of the California Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows:

 

Section 503.2.8 Angles of approach and departure. The first ten feet of approach and departure for fire apparatus access roads shall have a maximum grade of 8.5 percent.

 

    G.  Section 505.1.1 is hereby added to Chapter 5 of the California Fire Code to read as follows:

 

Section 505.1.1 Multiple tenant building identification. Required features:

1. Multiple tenant spaces serviced by vehicular access to the rear through any driveway, alleyway, or parking lot shall have approved address numbers, building numbers or approved building identification placed prior to occupancy on all new and existing buildings as to be plainly visible and legible from the rear access way when deemed necessary by the fire code official.

2. Multiple tenant spaces serviced by rear access through a corridor, exit court, or exit yard shall have approved address numbers, building numbers or approved building identification displayed on the rear of the tenant space, when deemed necessary by the fire code official.

3. Multiple tenant spaces that front on interior walkways or pedestrian malls shall have approved address numbers, building numbers or approved building identification placed over the entrance door in all new and existing buildings.

4. An illuminated directory board shall be required at every entrance where deemed necessary by the fire code official.

 

    H.  Section 505.1.2 is hereby added to Chapter 5 of the California Fire Code to read as follows:

 

Section 505.1.2 Illumination. Addressing shall be illuminated at night in all new buildings. Signs shall be internally or externally illuminated. When the luminance or the face of a sign is from an external source, it shall have an intensity of not less than 5.0 foot-candles. Internally illuminated signs shall provide equivalent luminance.

 

    I.    Section 901.6.4 is hereby added to Chapter 9 of the California Fire Code to read as follows:

 

Section 901.6.4 Residential sprinkler system certification for home resale. All residential occupancies up for resale and equipped with a NFPA 13D sprinkler system or sprinkler system meeting the requirements of the California Residential Code are required to be inspected by qualified personnel; and all necessary repairs shall be completed prior to the closing of escrow.

 

    J.    Section 903.2.21 is hereby added to Chapter 9 of the California Fire Code to read as follows:

 

Section 903.2.21 Additional automatic fire-extinguishing system requirements. An approved automatic fire-extinguishing system shall be installed in every new building in which the total combined floor area of all floors, including mezzanine levels, exceeds 4,000 square feet (372 m2). Required features:

1. Notwithstanding other provisions of this Code, this rule shall be applied to alterations, additions, and changes of occupancy to all new buildings and buildings in existence as of the effective date of this ordinance.

2. An alteration involving no change in occupancy, use or character of a building in existence as of the effective date of this ordinance, and which does not require an increase in the floor area, total height or number of stories of such existing building, may be made without bringing the entire building into compliance with this section.

3. No change shall be made in the character or occupancy or use of any building or structure in existence as of the effective date of this ordinance unless the entire building or structure is made to comply with this section.

 

Section 903.2.21.1 Conditions requiring automatic fire-extinguishing systems. The following conditions will require an automatic sprinkler system to be installed in all occupancies:

1. Any structure or building that is more than two stories above grade plane or where access to the average height of the roof is more than 25 feet above grade for the purpose of fire department access.

2. A structure or building that is located on any property in which any portion of the structure or building is more than 400 feet from a fire hydrant or more than 350 feet from a fire hydrant because of a dead-end condition.

3. Any structure or building that is located on any property which any portion of the structure or building is located more than 150 feet from the nearest fire department access road.

 

Exceptions:

1. In rural single-family dwellings without fire sprinklers in existence as of the effective date of this ordinance, wherein additions that increase total floor area up to 2,500 square feet, no sprinkler system will be required.

1.1 Patio covers connected to single-family dwellings shall not be counted when determining total floor area for purposes of Section 903.2.21.1.

2. In rural Group U occupancies that do not exceed 1,000 square feet in total floor area, no sprinkler system will be required.

3. In rural Group U occupancies in existence as of the effective date of this ordinance wherein additions that increase the total floor area up to 1,000 square feet and is provided with exterior wall and opening protection as per Tables 601, 602 and 704.8 of the California Building code, no sprinkler system shall be required.

4. Spaces or areas in telecommunications buildings used exclusively for telecommunications equipment, associated electrical power distribution equipment, batteries and standby engines, provided those spaces or areas are equipped throughout with an automatic fire alarm system and are separated from the remainder of the building by fire barriers consisting of not less than 1-hour fire-resistance-rated walls and 2-hour fire-resistance-rated floor/ceiling assemblies, no sprinkler shall be required.

5. The use of the building in existence as of the effective date of this ordinance may be changed subject to the approval of the building official and the fire code official, and the building may be occupied for use in other groups of occupancies without conforming to all the requirements of this subsection for those groups, provided the new or proposed use is not more hazardous, based on life and fire risk, than the existing use.

 

    K.  Section 903.4.1 of Chapter 9 of the California Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows:

 

Section 903.4.1 Monitoring. Alarm, supervisory and trouble signals shall be distinctly different and shall be automatically transmitted to an approved supervising station or, where approved by the fire code official, shall sound an audible signal at a constantly attended location. Required features:

1. Initiation and/or termination of required system supervision shall result in immediate notification to the Yolo Emergency Communications Agency and the West Sacramento Fire Department.

2. If shorts, failures, false signals, or other interruptions of service occur within a private building alarm system connected to a central station or an alarm headquarters, the fire chief may order the system disconnected until repaired. A false alarm may also be assessed against the responsible party.

 

Exceptions:

1. Underground key or hub valves in roadway boxes provided by the municipality or public utility are not required to be monitored.

2. Backflow prevention device test valves located in limited area sprinkler system supply piping shall be locked in the open position. In occupancies required to be equipped with a fire alarm system, the backflow valves shall be electrically supervised by a tamper switch installed in accordance with NFPA 72 and separately annunciated.

 

    L.   Section 5001.5.3 is hereby added to Chapter 50 of the California Fire Code to read as follows:

 

Section 5001.5.3 Hazardous materials inventory fee. Permitted facilities in which hazardous materials are stored, used or handled are subject to the annual Hazardous Materials Inventory Fee, as prescribed by resolution of the City Council.

 

    M.  Section 5003.1.5 is hereby added to Chapter 50 of the California Fire Code to read as follows:

 

Section 5003.1.5 Parking and garaging. Vehicles containing hazardous materials in amounts that require placards under state or federal law and possessing the physical hazards listed in Section 5001.2.2 et seq. shall not be left unattended at any time on any residential street or within 500 feet of any residential area, apartment or hotel complex, educational, hospital or care facility; or at any place that would, in the opinion of the fire chief, present a life or safety hazard.

 

    N.  Section 5614 is hereby added to Chapter 56 of the California Fire Code to read as follows:

 

Section 5614 Prohibited and limited acts. The storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited within the City of West Sacramento. This prohibition shall not apply to the temporary storage of explosives and blasting agents for use in connection with approved blasting operations, wholesale and retail stocks of small arms ammunition, explosive bolts, explosive rivets or cartridges for explosive actuated power tools in quantities involving less than 500 pounds of explosive material. For purposes of Health & Safety Code Section 12007, the fire code official shall be the “issuing authority” and shall be responsible for enforcement.

 

    O.  Section 5615 is hereby added to Chapter 56 of the California Fire Code to read as follows:

 

Section 5615 Explosives and blasting agents at terminals. Shipments of explosives or blasting agents through or within the City of West Sacramento shall be transported as expeditiously as possible. Explosives and blasting agents may not be maintained in terminals for more than twenty-four (24) hours, including Sundays and holidays. Explosive and blasting agents may not be stored in terminals adjacent to areas zoned RRA, R-1-A, R-1-B, R-2, R-3, and R-4 for not more than two (2) hours.

 

    P.   Section 5704.2.9.6.1 of Chapter 57 of the California Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows:

 

Section 5704.2.9.6.1 Locations where aboveground tanks are prohibited. Storage of Class I, Class II, and Class III liquids in aboveground tanks is prohibited in the following zoned areas: RRA, R-1-A, R-1-B, R-2, R-3, R-4, C-1, C-2, C-H, C-W, C-3, P-O, CBD, and WF.

 

    Q.  Section 5806.2 of Chapter 61 of the California Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows:

 

Section 5806.2 Limitations. Storage of flammable cryogenic fluids in stationary containers outside of buildings is prohibited in the following zoned areas: RRA, R-1-A, R-1-B, R-2, R-3, R-4, C-1, C-2, C-H, C-W, C-3, P-O, CBD, and WF.

 

    R.   Section 6104.2 of Chapter 61 of the California Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows:

 

Section 6104.2 Maximum capacity within established limits. Within the limits established by law restricting the storage of liquefied petroleum gas for the protection of heavily populated or congested areas, the aggregate capacity of any one installation shall not exceed a water capacity of 500 gallons (1,893 L) in the following zoned areas in the City of West Sacramento: RE, RRA, R-l-A, R-1-B, R-2, R-3, R-4, C-1, C-2, C-H, C-W, C-3, P-O, CBD, and WF, and those areas that are heavily populated or congested and as required by provisions of the City’s zoning ordinances.

 

Exception: In particular installations, this capacity limit shall be determined by the fire code official, after consideration of special features such as topographical conditions, nature of occupancy, and proximity to buildings, capacity of proposed containers, degree of fire protection to be provided and capabilities of the local fire department.

 

    S.   Section C102.2 is hereby added to Appendix C of the California Fire Code to read as follows:

 

Section C102.2 Hydrants on both sides of street. Hydrants shall be required on both sides of the street as set forth in the latest published edition of the City of West Sacramento Community Development Department Engineering Division Standard Specifications whenever one or more of the following conditions exist:

1. Streets that have median center dividers that make access to hydrants difficult, cause a time delay in fire response, or creates an undue hazard.

2. There are four (4) or more lanes of traffic.

3. Street width greater than 88 feet from the back of sidewalk.

 

    T.   Section C104.2 of Appendix C of the California Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows:

Section C104.2 Existing fire hydrants. Required features:

1. Existing single outlet 2.5 inch hydrants shall be changed to an approved City standard hydrant, as set forth in the latest published edition of the City of West Sacramento Community Development Department Engineering Division Standard Specifications when a tentative subdivision or parcel map, merge of lots, change of use of an existing building, expansion of an existing structure or new construction increases the required fire flow.

2. Existing single outlet 2.5 inch hydrants located adjacent to project frontage on any city right-of-way shall be changed to an approved city standard hydrant, as set forth in the latest published edition of the City of West Sacramento Community Development Department Engineering Division Standard Specifications.

3. Existing single outlet 2.5 inch hydrants serving new development or construction shall be changed to an approved city standard hydrant, as set forth in the latest published edition of the City of West Sacramento Community Development Department Engineering Division Standard Specifications.

4. Where water main improvements are required to meet fire flow and the existing water main has a single 2.5 inch outlet fire hydrant, an upgrade of hydrants will be required.

5. Existing hydrants in conflict with new right-of-way improvements shall be moved to an approved location at no cost to the City of West Sacramento.

(Ord. 19-11 § 3)

Chapter 15.16 ENCROACHMENT PERMITS
15.16.010 Purpose.
    The purpose of this chapter is to define, specify, regulate and control the design and improvement of public works facilities, both on and off site, and other construction requirements imposed as conditions of acceptance, or the approval or conditional approval of land development by use permit or building permit, or other public works permits, and all other procedures and processes wherein public or private improvements, construction, and improvement or construction plans are required as a condition prior to city approval. Such approval shall be denied if the parcel proposed for permit does not fully comply with the improvements required in Chapter 16.44 of this code. The requirements to construct these improvements may be deferred as described in Section 15.16.020(C).

    A.  Permit Required. It is unlawful for any person to perform any type of construction, or to place an encroachment of any kind within the public street right-of-way without first having obtained an encroachment permit to do so from the city engineer.

    B.   Compliance Required. Any act done under the authority of a written permit issued pursuant to Section 15.16.010(A) shall be done in accordance with the applicable provisions of this chapter and the terms and conditions of such permit.

    C.   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings set forth in this section:

    1.   “Encroachment” means any type of construction or work or the placing of any object or thing, whether permanent or temporary, within a public street.

    2.   “Person” means any individual, firm, co-partnership, association, corporation, public district or other political subdivision.

    3.   “Public street” includes any public right-of-way, highway, street, sidewalk, easement, or other area or thoroughfare, whether improved or unimproved, which is owned by or under the control of the city.

    D.  Application. Any person desiring to perform construction of any kind or nature across or along any public street shall make application to the city engineer for a permit therefor. Every applicant shall state, in detail, the following information:

    1.   The location, description, and cost estimate of the work to be performed.

    2.   The anticipated starting and completion dates during which the construction will take place.

    3.   A plat or diagram designating such public street or the exact location thereon of the proposed use or encroachment the dimensions thereof and any other such information which may be required by the city engineer.

    E.   Emergency Work. Any person may excavate within a public street right-of-way for the purpose of making repairs in cases of emergency requiring immediate action. In such cases, the city engineer shall be promptly notified of any such action, and such person at his or her own expense shall immediately replace such public street right-of-way in a condition equal or better to that existing before excavation. Such restoration shall be in accordance with standards established by the city engineer.

    F.   Approval Authority. The city engineer or his or her authorized representative shall inspect and approve for city acceptance any work done under permits issued under provisions of this chapter.

    G.  Fees. A fee, established by the Book of City Imposts shall be charged for each permit issued pursuant to this chapter. The fee shall be paid prior to the issuance of any permit.

    H.  Security Required.

    1.   Each applicant for an encroachment permit shall be required to deposit a security with the city, in the form of a security bond, cash deposit, savings and loan certificate or letter of credit in an amount determined by the city engineer to be one hundred percent of the estimated cost of the work to be performed under the encroachment permit. The security shall guarantee:

    a.   The faithful performance of all terms and conditions of the permit; and

    b.   That for a period of one year after completion the public street shall be free from that defect.

    2.   In the event the amount of security is inadequate the city engineer shall have recourse against the permittee for any additional amount of money necessary to restore or repair the public street.

    I.    Insurance Requirements.

    1.   In addition to the requirements provided in Sections 15.16.010(D) and 15.16.010(G) and before issuance of a permit under the provisions of this chapter, the city engineer shall require each applicant to file with the city, certificates of insurance and endorsement provided by the city engineer, evidencing possession of general liability, automobile and worker’s compensation insurance coverage in the minimum amounts of one million dollars each occurrence on account of bodily injuries, including death, or on account of property damage, to cover the liability of the permittee for property damage and injury to persons in connection with the work sought to be done under the permit, except that an applicant seeking to do work behind the public street curb adjacent to premises containing only one single-family dwelling which is owned and occupied or will be occupied upon completion of construction by the applicant shall be required to be filed with the city, certificates of insurance and endorsements evidencing possession of general liability and property damage coverage in the minimum amount of one hundred thousand dollars per occurrence on account of bodily injuries including death, or on account of property damage and injuries to persons in connection with work sought to be done on the permit.

    2.   The certificates of insurance and endorsements shall be in a form approved and provided by the director and shall provide thirty days advance notice to the city of its cancellation or expiration and shall further evidence that the applicant has, except as to the worker’s compensation insurance coverage, the city of West Sacramento, its officers, agents, and employees are named as additional insureds on the applicant’s policies of insurance.

    J.    Indemnity and Litigation Cost.

    1.   The permittee specifically obligates him or herself and agrees to protect, hold free and harmless, defend and indemnify the city, its officers, employees and agents, from any and all liability, penalties, costs, losses, damages, expense, causes of action, claims or judgments, including attorney’s fees, which arise out of or are in any way connected with the permittee’s, his or her contractor’s or his or her subcontractor’s or supplier’s performance of work under this permit.

    2.   In any and all claims against the city, its officers, employees, and agents by any employee of the permittee, his or her contractor, any subcontractor, anyone directly or indirectly employed by any one of them, or anyone for whose acts any of them may be liable, the indemnification obligation under this chapter shall not be limited in any way by any limitation on the amount or type of damages, compensation or benefits payable by or for the contractor or any subcontractor under worker’s compensation statutes, disability benefit statutes, or other employee benefit statutes.

    K.  Public Districts, Utilities, or Subdivisions. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the requirements of Sections 15.16.010(H) and 15.16.010(I) shall not be required of any public corporation, public utility corporations, or political subdivision which is authorized by law to establish or maintain any works or facilities in, under, or over any public street, nor shall the application of any permittee of the class specified in this section be denied. Each such applicant is entitled to a permit, but is otherwise subject to the provisions of this chapter and to all conditions and provisions made by the city engineer in any such permit.

    L.   Infractions—Penalty.

    1.   It shall be the duty of the city engineer and other authorized employees of the city, to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The lack of enforcement by the city engineer, or any authorized assistants of any official, or employee of the city vested with the duty or authority to issue permits, shall not legalize, authorize, waive or excuse the violation of any provision of this chapter.

    2.   In the administration and enforcement of this chapter, any duly authorized official or employee of the city shall have the authority to enter upon the premises for the purpose of investigation and inspection. No person shall refuse to permit such inspection.

    3.   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be punishable in accordance with Chapter 1.12 of this code.

    M.  Franchise Required. No encroachment permit shall be issued to any person for the purposes of installation in the public right-of-way any communication, electric, heat, gas or transportation service whatsoever or for whatever purpose, unless that person shall have first obtained a franchise to maintain such service from the city.

    N.  Removal or Cure of Illegal Encroachments. The city engineer, and/or chief of police (or their designees) are authorized to remove or cure illegal encroachments in the public street right-of-way in accordance with this section.

    1.   Notice. Where possible notice to remove or cure illegal encroachments shall be given to the owner or other responsible person allowing a reasonable time for such person to remove the encroachment.

    2.   Removal by City. Where notice is not possible because the owner is unknown or unavailable, or where the owner or other responsible person fails to remove or cure the encroachment after notice, the encroachment shall be removed or cured by the city. If reasonably possible, any object or thing removed from the public street right-of-way pursuant to this section because it was encroaching shall be held for three days to allow the owner to claim it. If the owner fails to claim it, or if it is not reasonably possible to store it, the object or thing shall be disposed of.

    3.   Costs. The actual cost of cure of or removal, storage, and disposal of encroachments shall be charged against the owner of the encroachment or the person causing such encroachment. No object or thing removed because it was encroaching shall be released pursuant to this section except upon payment of such costs. (Ord. 97-4 § 2 Exh. 1)

 

15.16.020 Completion of improvements.
    A.  1. The applicant shall complete required improvements before final building inspection or the issuance of an occupancy permit.

    2.   If the applicant fails to complete the required improvements within the specified time, the city engineer may, at his or her option, cause the uncompleted improvements to be completed and the parties executing the performance security shall be firmly bound for the payment of all necessary costs.

    B.   Extensions.

    1.   The city engineer may extend the completion date upon written request by the applicant and the submittal of adequate evidence to justify the extension. The request shall be made at least thirty days before the expiration of the building permit or encroachment permit.

    2.   The developer shall pay the costs incurred by the city in processing the extension request and extension agreement.

    C.   Deferred Improvements. In the event that the property does not fully comply with the requirements of Chapter 16.44 of this code the following options are available:

    1.   The applicant may construct the required improvements.

    2.   If a residential building permit is required that either increases the floor area of a structure by fifty percent, or has a construction value equal to or greater than fifty percent of the value of the existing structure, the owner of the property shall be obligated to install public roadway improvements including but not limited to paving; curb and gutter; and driveways to bring the property into compliance with the city’s minimal street frontage improvement standards. The extent and type of improvements required shall be dependent upon the classification of the street (local roadway, collector, arterial, etc.) fronting on the property being improved. The property owner may apply to defer the installation of required public improvements according to subsection (C)(3) of this section.

    3.   Applicants for building permits may apply to the city engineer to defer the construction of any required public improvement that has a value that is equal to or exceeds ten percent of the value of the building permit or other permit that he or she is applying for. The required parcel improvements up to that amount shall be constructed at the same time that work related to the building permit is completed, and permission to occupy the structure shall not be granted until the public improvements have been accepted by the city. If the amount of the ten percent valuation is not sufficient to complete any of the required public improvements, then an in lieu fee in the full amount of the ten percent valuation will be required. If a balance of the ten percent valuation remains after completing partial public improvements required by the issuance of a building permit, then the amount of the remaining balance shall be paid as an in lieu fee. If the property owner has deposited an in lieu fee for deferred public improvements and later elects to complete those improvements him or herself or joins an assessment district formed to install the required improvements, then the city shall issue a refund in the amount of the original in lieu fee paid.

    4.   Activities that include normal maintenance and repair (including those activities caused by natural disasters such as fire) of a single family residential dwelling unit are exempt from the application of the ten percent valuation fee.

    5.   Building permits issued as the result of a mandate to comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act shall not be subject to the ten percent valuation fee.

    6.   The city council may consider an application to defer construction of any required parcel improvement provided that the applicant’s property is included in an established assessment district which will finance the required public improvements.

    7.   The city council may exempt specific areas from all or any of the requirements of this section after a determination has been made that safe and adequate public access and circulation are preserved by such deviation and upon a finding that the requirements of this section serve no public purpose. (Ord. 97-4 § 2 Exh. 1)

 

15.16.030 Acceptance of improvements.
    When the developer has completed all improvements, corrected all deficiencies, and submitted record drawings of the improvements, the city shall consider the improvements for acceptance. (Ord. 97-4 § 2 Exh. 1)

Chapter 15.18 UNDERGROUNDING OF UTILITIES
15.18.010 Purpose.
    The purpose of this section is to define, specify, regulate, and control the undergrounding of utilities when such undergrounding is required as a condition to development. (Ord. 97-4 § 2)

 

15.18.020 Applicability.
    This section shall apply to all projects for which a permit to develop real property is required from the city including but not limited to use permits and building permits, encroachment permits, or other public works permits and all other procedures and processes wherein public or private improvements, construction, and improvements or construction plans are required as a condition prior to city approval. This section shall not apply to alleys or to established residential neighborhoods except where a subdivision is proposed. (Ord. 97-4 § 2)

 

15.18.030 Requirements.
    A.  When new development necessitates the installation of public improvements including, but not limited to, full width street improvements; curb, gutter and sidewalk; driveways; etc. and where the placement of such improvements necessitates the removal and replacement of existing overhead utilities, such utilities shall be placed underground in conformance with Section 15.16.020 of this code.

    B.   Such undergrounding of existing improvements shall be in conformance with the city’s engineering standards in effect at the time of construction, including and in addition to any requirements that the affected public utility may have.

    C.   For various engineering reasons it may be necessary to extend the undergrounding requirement beyond the project limits. When this occurs, the developer shall be reimbursed for the costs associated with such extensions in the manner specified in the city’s municipal code sections relating to oversizing of utilities.

    D.  Prior to commencing work, the developer shall obtain an encroachment permit from the city. The requirements for the encroachment permit shall be as set forth in Chapter 15.16 of this code.

    E.   Unless otherwise agreed to by the affected public utility and the developer, the cost of undergrounding such utilities shall be borne by the developer.

    F.   An in lieu fee equal to the cost of constructing any utility undergrounding improvements required by an encroachment permit may be paid if the city engineer and the affected public utility find that the deferral of said utility undergrounding does not create a situation hazardous to the health, safety and welfare of the general public.

    G.  As an alternative to the payment of an in lieu fee, the property owner may request a deferral of the requirement to underground existing utilities. The city engineer shall consider such requests in accordance with Section 15.16.020(C). (Ord. 97-4 § 2)

Chapter 15.40 RELATING TO AFFORDABLE HOUSING
15.40.010 Purpose and intent.
    The purpose of this chapter is to:

    Provide a chapter implementing Program 1.2, Inclusionary Housing Requirements for Residential Development, of the city’s housing element.

    Promote the provision of housing for all economic segments of the community.

    Ensure that affordable rental housing is managed, maintained and operated consistently with its status as an important community asset. (Ord. 14-4 § 1; Ord. 05-3 § 1)

 

15.40.020 Findings.
    The city council finds that:

    The city, as a member of the Sacramento Area Council of Governments has received housing development goals, which require the use of a variety of tools and methods to address the housing needs of very low, lower and moderate income households.

    The housing element of the city’s general plan, which guides and directs new growth and development, calls for an implementing chapter to further the affordable housing goals of the city and address state housing requirements, including the city’s regional “fair share” allocation pursuant to Government Code Section 65584. The lack of affordable housing has a direct impact upon the health, safety and welfare of city residents.

    Federal and state housing subsidy programs are insufficient to address the housing needs of very low and lower income households.

    Affordable rental housing developed under this chapter represents a unique and valuable community asset. Unlike for-sale housing, the households benefiting directly from affordable rental housing have only a limited ability to control such issues as maintenance and repair of units, leasing and operating practices, and on-site security. Ensuring that this asset is well managed and maintained for the duration of the affordability controls furthers important public goals by providing a safe and healthy living environment for households most in need, and by ensuring that rental housing developments do not deteriorate and create or exacerbate urban blight within the city.

    Certain for-sale housing developments contain significant areas and buildings that are under common ownership and control, typically through a homeowner’s association, and thus present some of the same issues that arise in the case of rental housing. For that reason it is important to ensure that such common areas and buildings are also well managed and maintained. (Ord. 14-4 § 1; Ord. 05-3 § 1)

 

15.40.030 Definitions.
    “Affordable housing agreement” means the agreement described in Section 15.40.100 of this chapter between the developer of a residential project and the city detailing how a residential project’s inclusionary requirements will be met.

    “Affordable housing cost” means, for residential projects with for-sale units, a monthly payment which shall not exceed the product of thirty percent of seventy percent of the area median income, adjusted for household size appropriate for the unit and inclusive of mortgage principal and interest, property taxes, insurance, and any applicable special taxes or homeowners’ association dues. As used in this section, “appropriate for the unit” means a household of one person in the case of a studio unit, two persons in the case of a one-bedroom unit, three persons in the case of a two-bedroom unit, four persons in the case of a three-bedroom unit, and five persons in the case of a four-bedroom unit.

    “Affordable rent” means an affordable rent determined in accordance with any state or federal funding program actually used to finance development or construction of the units within a particular residential project. If no such state or federal funding program is involved, or if the program does not specify how affordable rent is to be determined, “affordable rent” shall have the meaning as set forth in Health and Safety Code Section 50053, as that section may be amended from time to time.

    “Affordable unit” means a dwelling unit which, pursuant to a recorded instrument, may only be sold or rented to a household of a designated income or for a restricted sale price or rent.

    “Area median income” means area median income for Yolo County as published by the California Department of Housing and Community Development pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 50093.

    “City” means the city of West Sacramento.

    “City manager” means the city manager of the city or the city manager’s designee.

    “Developer” means the owner of any real property upon which a residential project is to be constructed or the owner’s duly authorized designee.

    “Development standards” means the standards governing development of real property within the city as set forth in the city’s municipal code, uncodified ordinances, and any applicable regulations adopted pursuant thereto.

    “Dwelling unit” or “unit” has the meaning set forth in the zoning regulations. For purposes of this chapter, the term “dwelling unit” does not include “secondary units” as defined in Chapter 17.41.

    “Feasible” means that even after complying with the requirements of this policy, the residential project as a whole remains reasonably capable of being financed, built and marketed, given the economic conditions prevailing at the time of approval of the affordable housing agreement and taking into account the incentives and alternatives that may be made available to the residential project and under this chapter. In all cases, feasibility shall be determined by the city council in its sole discretion.

    “For-sale units” means attached or detached dwelling units developed as part of a residential project which the developer intends will be offered for individual sale or which are customarily offered for individual sale, including, but not limited to, single-family detached homes, duplex units, condominiums and cooperatives.

    “General plan” means the general plan of the city of West Sacramento, as it may be amended from time to time.

    “Household” has the same meaning as “family” as set forth in the zoning regulations.

    “Housing trust fund” means a separate fund administered by the city into which in-lieu fees are deposited. Funds deposited into the housing trust fund shall be used to assist in the development of affordable housing within the city.

    “Inclusionary units” means those dwelling units developed in accordance with an affordable housing agreement to satisfy the requirements of this chapter, including for-sale inclusionary units available at an affordable housing cost, and rental inclusionary units available at an affordable rent.

    “Lower income” means lower income as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 50079.5 as amended from time to time.

    “One location” means all adjacent land within the city owned or controlled by the same developer or owner, the property lines of which are contiguous at any point, or the property lines of which are separated only by a public or private street, road or other public or private right-of-way.

    “Ordinance” means this inclusionary housing ordinance of the city of West Sacramento.

    “Over-concentration” shall mean that not more than forty percent of the units within a residential project or building phase thereof are inclusionary units.

    “Owner” includes the person, persons, corporation, or public or private entity having sufficient legal interest in real property to commence and maintain development of a residential project on the real property, or the owner’s agent, assignee or successor in interest.

    “Rental units” means dwelling units developed as part of a residential project which the developer intends will be offered for lease or rent or which are customarily offered for lease or rent.

    “Residential lot” or “lot” means any parcel of land that has been legally created with the intention that it will be used for the development of one or more dwelling unit(s).

    “Residential project” means any project involving the construction of five or more dwelling units at one location and requiring the issuance of a building permit, or the creation of five or more residential lots at one location, including in the aggregate all dwelling units or residential lots for which building permits or discretionary approvals have been applied for from or granted by the city. Where all or a portion of the inclusionary units for a residential project are built off-site, the term “residential project” shall also include all residential units built at the off-site location(s), including all inclusionary units and market-rate units built as part of the same development.

    “Very low income” means very low income as set forth in Health and Safety Code Section 50105, as that section may be amended from time to time.

    “Zoning regulations” means Title 17 of the municipal code of the city, as it may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 14-4 § 1; Ord. 05-3 § 1)

 

15.40.040 Applicability—General.
    All residential projects within the city shall comply with the requirements set forth in this chapter, with the following exceptions:

    A.  Residential projects which have acquired a vested right under California law to proceed with development without complying with this chapter.

    B.   Residential projects with existing affordable housing agreements executed prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall comply with the terms of those agreements.

    1.   The city council may approve amendments to existing affordable housing agreements executed prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter to include alternatives in Section 15.40.070(B) to allow the developer to satisfy all or part of the inclusionary housing requirement. (Ord. 14-4 § 1; Ord. 05-3 § 1)

 

15.40.050 No city approvals until compliance.
    No building permit shall be issued and no use permit, final parcel or subdivision map or other agreement with the city shall be approved in connection with any residential project until the city manager confirms in writing one of the following:

    A.  An affordable housing agreement has been executed by the developer and the city and a memorandum of that agreement recorded with the Yolo County recorder.

    B.   The developer has requested and the city council has determined that it is not feasible to comply with the requirements of this chapter. Full compliance shall be presumed feasible unless the city council expressly determines otherwise. Any request by a developer for such a determination shall be made no later than the time of application for the city approval that triggers the obligation to comply with this chapter. (Ord. 14-4 § 1; Ord. 05-3 § 1)

 

15.40.060 Standards for implementation.
    A.  Calculation of Inclusionary Housing Requirements.

    1.   Rental Units. Ten percent of all rental units in a residential project shall be made available at affordable rents to very low and low income households. Five percent shall be affordable to very low income households and five percent shall be affordable to lower income households.

    2.   For-Sale Units. Ten percent of all for-sale units in a residential project shall be made available at an affordable cost to low income households.

    3.   Application of Fractional Remainders. If the developer elects to build inclusionary units and the calculation of inclusionary housing requirements yield fractional remainders, the remainders shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number.

    4.   Substitution of Rental Units for For-Sale Units. The city shall permit a developer to substitute rental units to meet all or a portion of the inclusionary obligation for the residential project. Such units shall be made available at affordable rents in accordance with subsection (A)(1). The decision to substitute rental units for for-sale units shall be made prior to approval of the affordable housing agreement for the residential project.

    B.   General Standards for Development. Except as may otherwise be provided in the affordable housing agreement for a residential project, a developer shall comply with all of the following requirements in fulfilling the obligations under this chapter:

    1.   Location of Inclusionary Units. Inclusionary units shall be built on-site, within the residential project. Inclusionary units shall generally be dispersed so as to avoid the over-concentration of inclusionary units within one portion of the overall residential project.

    2.   Timing of Development. Inclusionary units shall generally be constructed and offered for sale or rent in accordance with this chapter concurrently with or prior to completion of market rate units within the residential project or phase thereof. As used in this chapter, “concurrently” means that a proportionate share of inclusionary units must be completed by the time each twenty-five percent of the market rate units within a residential project are completed.

    3.   Exterior Appearance. Inclusionary units shall be visually and architecturally consistent with and similar in quality of construction materials to market-rate units within the residential project or phase thereof.

    4.   Size of Inclusionary Units. Inclusionary units may be smaller than the market rate units within the residential project, provided that the inclusionary units contain not less than ninety percent of the interior living space of the smallest market rate unit within the residential project. The number of bedrooms in multifamily rental inclusionary units shall be generally consistent with the bedroom mix of market rate units within the same residential project.

    5.   Development Standards. Inclusionary units shall comply with the same development standards applicable to market rate units within the residential project. (Ord. 14-4 § 1; Ord. 05-3 § 1)

 

15.40.070 Incentives and alternatives.
    A.  Incentives.

    1.   Requests for regulatory and/or financial incentives will be considered on a project-by-project basis. All requests for incentives under this chapter shall be accompanied by such information as the city deems necessary in order to evaluate the request. Incentives may include, but are not limited to:

    a.   Regulatory incentives such as:

    i.    Reduced parking in relationship to parking requirements associated with each residential zoning category.

    ii.   Priority permit processing.

    iii.  Waiver or modification in development standards.

    iv.  Technical assistance in project development.

    b.   Financial incentives, to the extent the city has specific programs. Requests for financial incentives must be made in accordance with the terms of those programs.

    2.   Incentives must be approved by city council except to the extent the authority to review and approve such incentives has been delegated to the city manager.

    B.   Alternatives.

    1.   The city council may allow the developer to satisfy all or part of the inclusionary housing requirement through one of the alternative methods described in this section if the city council determines, at its sole discretion, that the alternative will achieve goals set forth in the city’s housing element. In approving any alternative, the city council may impose such conditions as it deems appropriate in order to further the purposes of this chapter.

    a.   Housing Trust Fund Program. The city council may allow the developer to satisfy all or part of the inclusionary housing requirement by participating in the housing trust fund program described in the Book of City Imposts, Section VIII-N, as that section may be amended from time to time.

    b.   Other Alternatives. The city council, at its sole discretion, may allow the developer to satisfy all or part of the inclusionary housing requirement through another alternative method if the city council determines, at its sole discretion, that the proposed alternative meets the general standards for approval set forth in subsection (B)(2). Possible alternatives may include:

    i.    Acquisition, Rehabilitation, and Conversion. The developer may propose to acquire, rehabilitate, and convert existing market rate units to inclusionary units. Duration of affordability restrictions shall meet standards in Section 15.40.100(C).

    ii.   Off-Site Construction. The developer may propose to construct inclusionary units at an off-site location.

    iii.  Preservation of At-Risk Units. The developer may propose the acquisition and preservation of at-risk affordable rental units. In order for the proposed units to qualify as inclusionary units, the city manager must determine that the units are currently affordable units available at affordable rents but are at-risk of converting to market rate units within the next five years due to expiring affordability covenants. Duration of affordability restrictions shall comply with standards in Section 15.40.100(C).

    2.   General Standards for Approval. Any proposed alternative by a developer must comply with the following general standards.

    a.   City Approval of Third-Party Developer. If the developer is proposing to partner with another developer to carry out the alternative, such as a developer specializing in affordable housing, the city council must approve the third-party developer.

    b.   Financing Plan for Inclusionary Units. The developer must submit a financial analysis for the proposed alternative project (pro forma) and such additional information as the city council deems necessary to demonstrate that sufficient funding will be available to complete, operate, and maintain the affordable units developed through the proposed alternative.

    c.   Suitability of Alternative Site. If the developer is proposing to construct inclusionary units off-site, the proposed site must be appropriately zoned to allow for the proposed development, be physically and environmentally suitable to develop housing, be of sufficient acreage to develop the required number of inclusionary units.

    The proposed off-site development must include full on- and off-site infrastructure including paved street access, frontage improvements (curb, gutter, sidewalk, streetlights, etc.), and utility service connections (installed underground) if otherwise required by the city for the development of the site.

    d.   Timing of Development. Inclusionary units developed through the proposed alternative shall generally be constructed concurrently with or prior to completion of market rate units within the residential project. If the inclusionary units will not be available for occupancy concurrently with market rate units within the residential project, the city council may require that the developer provide performance security in an amount determined to be sufficient to secure completion of the inclusionary units. (Ord. 14-4 § 1; Ord. 05-3 § 1)

 

15.40.080 Administration.
    A.  The city manager may promulgate guidelines for the implementation of this chapter.

    B.   The city council may, by resolution, establish a reasonable fee for the administration of this chapter, including, but not limited to, the annual monitoring of units.

    C.   Except as otherwise required by this chapter, the city manager is authorized to approve affordable housing agreements. A decision by the city manager approving or denying an affordable housing agreement, or denying any incentive requested by the developer that the city manager is authorized to approve, may be appealed to the city council in accordance with Chapter 1.08. On appeal, the city council shall determine whether the city manager’s decision conforms to the requirements of this chapter. No appeal shall be filed under this chapter for the purpose of seeking city council review of the underlying merits of the residential project.

    D.  Affordable housing agreements may be referred to the housing advisory commission or other city boards or commissions for a recommendation prior to action on the agreement. (Ord. 14-4 § 1; Ord. 05-3 § 1)

 

15.40.090 Monitoring.
    Inclusionary units will be monitored annually by the city to verify that the dwelling units are and continue to be affordable. (Ord. 14-4 § 1; Ord. 05-3 § 1)

 

15.40.100 Affordable housing agreement.
    A.  Evidence of compliance with this chapter shall be in the form of an affordable housing agreement between the developer and the city.

    B.   Affordable housing agreements shall require full compliance with this chapter and shall specifically address all of the following:

    1.   Number, location, household incomes targeted and affordability of inclusionary units.

    2.   Calculation of affordable housing price for for-sale units and affordable rent for rental units.

    3.   Duration of affordability of the inclusionary units.

    4.   In the case of residential projects containing rental units or with significant areas or buildings under common ownership or control (for example, condominiums and apartments), provisions designed to ensure that the residential project will be well managed and maintained throughout the term of the affordability controls. Prior to initial occupancy, the developer shall be required to provide, for city review and approval, a management plan that addresses in detail issues such as maintenance of common areas and buildings (including the provision of adequate reserves), operations, and leasing practices. The management plan shall provide for city enforcement of its terms.

    5.   In the case of residential projects that satisfy all or a portion of the requirements of this chapter through an alternative, the affordable housing agreement shall specify how the proposed alternative is consistent with Section 15.40.070.

    6.   Any other provisions required by the city to document the obligations imposed by this chapter.

    C.   Duration of Affordability Restrictions.

    1.   Rental dwelling units shall remain affordable for no less than fifty-five years.

    2.   For-sale units shall be regulated with the goal of preserving affordability for forty-five years. Upon a showing that the owner of the inclusionary unit has been unable to identify a qualified buyer for the unit after a good faith affirmative marketing effort, the city manager may:

    a.   Permit the owner to sell the unit to a buyer who is not income qualified but who will remain obligated to resell the unit at an affordable price to an income qualified household; or

    b.   Permit the early termination of the affordability restrictions on the unit as part of a program that will ensure that the city recaptures an amount that reflects the gap between the affordable and market prices for the unit at the time of the unit’s sale to the current owner.

    D.  Master Affordable Housing Agreement. A developer may propose a master affordable housing agreement for any residential project which the developer anticipates will be developed over an extended period of time. Developers are encouraged to request master affordable housing agreements for residential projects containing a mixture of for-sale and rental units, or when the developer believes that the project can be enhanced and the purposes of this chapter better served by modifying the standard requirements of this chapter. The master affordable housing agreement will contain the general rules that will govern the development of the inclusionary units for the residential project. It is anticipated that details such as, for example, the specific location of the inclusionary units within the overall project will be addressed through map- or project-specific affordable housing agreements that will incorporate the terms set out in the master agreement. (Ord. 14-4 § 1; Ord. 05-3 § 1)

 

15.40.110 Judicial review.
    Nothing in this chapter shall in any way preclude or limit any aggrieved party from seeking judicial review after such person has exhausted the administrative remedies provided in this chapter. However, it shall be conclusively presumed that a litigant has not exhausted administrative remedies of any and all issues not raised in the administrative proceedings authorized herein. (Ord. 14-4 § 1; Ord. 05-3 § 1)

Chapter 15.50 200 YEAR FLOOD PROTECTION
15.50.010 Authority.
    This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority granted to cities under Article XI, Section 7 of the California Constitution and the additional authority granted to cities by the legislature of the state of California through Government Code Sections 65302, 65560,and 65800, which confer upon local government units authority to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry. (Ord. 07-11 § 1)

 

15.50.020 Purpose and intent.
    It is the purpose of this chapter, together with Title 18, to promote the public health, safety and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:

    A.  Protect human life and health;

    B.   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;

    C.   Increase preparedness for flooding in order to minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;

    D.  Minimize prolonged business interruptions;

    E.   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains; electric, telephone and sewer lines; and streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard. (Ord. 07-11 § 1)

 

15.50.030 Findings.
    The city council of the city of West Sacramento finds and determines that:

    A.  The flood hazard areas of the city of West Sacramento are vulnerable to periodic inundation which could result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare.

    B.   These flood losses are caused by uses that are inadequately protected from flood damage. New construction in areas that do not meet the 200 year criteria further increases these flood losses and may result in an increase of flood heights also contributing to additional flood loss.

    C.   New federal standards coupled with heightened commitment to flood protection by state and federal agencies prompted the city of West Sacramento to reassess the adequacy of its flood control system and to establish a flood management program designed to provide a minimum 200 year flood protection.

    D.  New structures depend on and will benefit from flood protection improvements.

    E.   Flood protection improvements should be integrated with the existing levee system and with federal, state and regional flood management efforts.

    F.   Goal C, Policy 5 of the Public Facilities and Services Element of the West Sacramento General Plan provides that: “the city shall cooperate with other responsible agencies in ensuring that levees surrounding the city are maintained and improved to provide a minimum of 200 year flood protection.” (Ord. 07-11 § 1)

 

15.50.040 Definitions.
    Except as otherwise provided below, terms shall have the meaning set forth in Title 18 unless a different intent is evident from the context of the term’s use. (Ord. 07-11 § 1)

 

15.50.050 Applicability.
    A.  General. This chapter shall apply to all projects involving the construction of anew structure requiring a building permit, irrespective of whether the project may have vested rights under California law prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. The city hereby finds and determines that the requirements of this chapter shall apply to projects with vested rights because failure to do so would place the residents of the project or the immediate community, or both, in a condition dangerous to their health or safety, or both.

    B.   Exceptions. This chapter shall not apply to:

    1.   A new structure that replaces a previously existing structure of similar type (e.g., single-family home replacing another single-family home) provided both of the following conditions apply:

    a.   The replacement structure does not increase the square footage of the structure by more than fifteen percent; and

    b.   The building permit application for construction of the new structure is filed within twelve months of the date the previous structure was removed.

    2.   A new structure if the building permit application for the structure was determined by the city to be complete prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

    3.   A new structure that is both an “accessory structure,” as defined in Title 17, and is not intended for use as a dwelling. (Ord. 07-11 § 1)

 

15.50.060 No building permit until compliance demonstrated.
    A.  No building permit shall be issued in connection with the construction of any new structure until the applicant for the building permit demonstrates to the satisfaction of the floodplain administrator that: (1) prior to occupancy, the structure will have 200 year flood protection; and (2) any improvements constructed or measures implemented by the applicant to ensure 200 year flood protection will not significantly increase the risk of flooding or the effect of flooding on any adjacent or nearby properties.

    B.   An applicant shall demonstrate compliance with this chapter either by:

    1.   The construction of flood management improvements or other mitigation measures beyond those set forth in Title 18. The floodplain administrator shall review the design and sufficiency of any such improvements or mitigation measures and may approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove proposed improvements and measures.

    2.   The payment to the city of an in-lieu flood management fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council. In-lieu flood management fees shall be paid at the time of issuance. of building permits and the director of finance shall maintain and separately account for the fees, including the interest that may accrue, and shall permit use of the fees exclusively for the purpose of flood protection management. (Ord. 07-11 § 1)

 

15.50.070 Administration.
    A.  Decisions of the floodplain administrator approving, conditionally approving, or disapproving proposed improvements or mitigation measures shall be subject to appeal to the city council in accordance with the procedures set forth in Chapter 1.08.

    B.   The city manager may promulgate guidelines for the implementation of this chapter.

    C.   In addition to the in-lieu fee described in Section 15.50.060, the city council may, by resolution, establish a reasonable fee for the administration of this chapter, including the review of proposed flood management improvements. (Ord. 07-11 § 1)

 

15.50.080 Integration with Title 18.
    The requirements set forth in this chapter shall be in addition to those contained in Title 18, and compliance with the requirements of this chapter or Title 18 shall not be deemed to be compliance with the other. In the event of any conflict between any provision contained in this chapter and Title 18, the more restrictive provision shall control. (Ord. 07-11 § 1)

 

15.50.090 No mandatory duty of care.
    Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as requiring the city to enforce its provisions against any individual in violation hereof. This chapter is not intended to and shall not be construed or given effect in a manner that imposes upon the city or any officer or employee thereof a mandatory duty of care towards persons and property within or without the city so as to provide a basis of civil liability for damages, except as otherwise imposed by law. (Ord. 07-11 § 1)

 

15.50.100 Judicial review.
    Nothing in this chapter shall in any way preclude or limit any aggrieved party from seeking judicial review after such person has exhausted the administrative remedies provided in this chapter. However, it shall be conclusively presumed that a litigant has not exhausted administrative remedies of any and all issues not raised in the administrative proceedings authorized herein. (Ord. 07-11 § 1)

Title 16 SUBDIVISIONS
Chapter 16.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 16.08 DEFINITIONS
Chapter 16.12 RESPONSIBILITIES
Chapter 16.16 MERGERS OF PARCELS AND LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTS
Chapter 16.20 TENTATIVE MAPS
Chapter 16.24 VESTING TENTATIVE MAPS
Chapter 16.28 FINAL MAPS
Chapter 16.30 DIGITAL SUBMISSION OF FINAL AND PARCEL MAPS
Chapter 16.32 TENTATIVE PARCEL MAPS
Chapter 16.36 PARCEL MAPS
Chapter 16.40 DEDICATIONS AND RESERVATIONS
Chapter 16.44 IMPROVEMENTS
Chapter 16.48 SUPPLEMENTAL IMPROVEMENTS REIMBURSEMENT AGREEMENTS
Chapter 16.52 REVERSIONS TO ACREAGE
Chapter 16.56 CORRECTION AND AMENDMENT OF MAPS
Chapter 16.60 ENFORCEMENT
Chapter 16.64 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSIONS

Chapter 16.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS
16.04.010 Title and purpose.
    This title shall be cited and known as the subdivision ordinance of the city. The purpose of this title is to establish the following principles in the interests of protecting the health, safety, and general welfare of the people of the city:

    A.  Implement and supplement the California Subdivision Map Act (Government Code Section 66410 et seq.);

    B.   Implement the city general plan;

    C.   Set forth the legal procedures and requirements applicable to subdivisions, land divisions and mergers;

    D.  Insure that the resulting lots or parcels are served by all necessary utilities and that such utilities are installed in a manner that will permit access for maintenance of such utilities;

    E.   Insure that the required public improvements are provided to adequately meet present and anticipated future needs;

    F.   Insure that the physical alteration of the environment, which will result from the development proposed by the subdivision, land division or merger, will not adversely impact the character of the city in general or the immediate area in which the development will be located;

    G.  Ensure that reasonable access is provided for the intended users; and

    H.  Consider the housing needs of the region against the public service needs of city citizens and available fiscal and environmental resources. (Ord. 03-21 § 1 (part); Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.04.020 Applicability.
    The provisions and requirements of this title shall apply to all or any portion of any subdivision, land division or merger of property entirely or partially within the incorporated limits of the city. Additionally, such provisions and requirements shall apply to unincorporated properties within the city’s sphere of influence where the subdivision, land division, or merger is proposed as a preannexation procedure as described in Section 16.04.080. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.04.030 Consistency with the general plan and specific plans.
    All subdivision, land division, mergers, and resultant development shall be consistent with the goals and policies of the general plan and any applicable specific plans. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.04.040 Consistency with the zoning ordinance.
    All subdivisions, land divisions, mergers and resultant development shall be consistent with the land use classifications and standards of the zoning ordinance. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.04.050 Consistency with the subdivision ordinance and the Subdivision Map Act.
    All subdivisions, land divisions, mergers, and resultant development shall be consistent with this title and the California Subdivision Map Act (Government Code 66410 et seq.). If any discrepancy between a requirement set forth in this title and the Subdivision Map Act occurs, the requirements set forth in the Subdivision Map Act shall prevail. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.04.060 Exclusions.
    This title shall be inapplicable to:

    A.  The financing or leasing of apartments, offices, stores or similar space within apartment buildings, industrial buildings, commercial buildings, mobile home parks, or trailer parks;

    B.   Mineral, oil or gas leases;

    C.   Land dedicated for cemetery purposes under the Health and Safety Code of the state;

    D.  A lot line adjustment between two or more existing adjacent parcels, where the land taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel, and where a greater number of parcels than originally existed is not thereby created, provided the lot line adjustment is approved by the city;

    E.   Boundary line or exchange agreements to which the state Lands Commission or local agency holding a trust grant of tide and submerged lands is a party;

    F.   Any separate assessment under Section 2188.7 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state;

    G.  Unless a parcel or final map was approved by the city council, the conversion of a community apartment project, as defined in Section 11004 of the Business and Professions Code, to a condominium, as defined in Section 783 of the Civil Code, but only if all of the following requirements are met:

    1.   At least seventy-five percent of the units in the project were occupied by record owners of the project on March 31, 1982,

    2.   A final or parcel map of the project was properly recorded, if the property was subdivided, as defined in Section 66424, after January 1,1964, with all of the conditions of that map remaining in effect after the conversion;

    H.  Unless a parcel or final map was approved by the city council, the conversion of a stock cooperative, as defined in Section 11003.2 of the Business and Professions Code, to a condominium, as defined in Section 783 of the Civil Code, but only if all of the following requirements are met:

    1.   At least fifty-one percent of the units in the cooperative were occupied by stockholders of the cooperative on January 1, 1981, or individually owned by stockholders of the cooperative on January 1, 1981. As used in this paragraph, a cooperative unit is “individually owned” if and only if the stockholder of that unit owns or partially owns an interest in no more than one unit in the cooperative;

    2.   No more than twenty-five percent of the shares of the cooperative were owned by any one person, including an incorporator or director of the cooperative, on January 1, 1981;

    3.   A person renting a unit in a cooperative shall be entitled at the time of conversion to all tenant rights in state or local law, including, but not limited to, rights respecting first refusal, notice, and displacement and relocation benefits;

    I.    The leasing of, or the granting of an easement to, a parcel of land, or any portion or portions thereof, in conjunction with the financing, erection, and sale or lease of a wind powered electrical generation device on the land;

    J.    The financing or leasing of any parcel of land, or any portion thereof, in conjunction with the construction of commercial or industrial buildings on a single parcel, unless the project is not subject to review under other local agency ordinances regulating design and improvement;

    K.  The financing or leasing of existing separate commercial or industrial buildings on a single parcel;

    L.   The construction, financing, or leasing of dwelling units pursuant to Section 65852.1 or second units pursuant to Section 65852.2 but this division shall be applicable to the sale or transfer, but not leasing, of those units;

    M.  The construction of removable commercial buildings having a floor area of less than one hundred square feet;

    N.  The leasing of agricultural land for agricultural purposes. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.04.070 Exceptions.
    A.  Authority. The commission may authorize conditional exceptions to any of the requirements and regulations set forth in this title.

    B.   Petitions. Applications for exceptions to the provisions of this title shall be made by verified petition of the subdivider or developer, stating fully the grounds of the application and the facts relied upon by the petitioner.

    C.   Petitions—Filing—Criteria for Approval. Such petition shall be filed with the tentative map of the subdivision or the street dedication map, whichever the case may be. In order for the property referred to in the petition to come within the provisions of this chapter, the commission shall find that all of the following facts apply with respect to the subject property:

    1.   That there are special circumstances or conditions of topography, size, shape or location affecting such property;

    2.   That the exception recommended is necessary for preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right of the petitioner;

    3.   That the granting of the exception will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property in the territory in which the subject property is situated; and

    4.   That the granting of the exception will not adversely affect the general plan.

    D.  Petitions—Approval by the Commission. The commission may approve the tentative map with the requested exceptions and any conditions of approval which the commission may deem appropriate, provided that the findings set forth in Section 16.04.070(C) are met. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.04.080 Sale or conveyance of title of subdivisions—Compliance required.
    It is unlawful for any individual, firm, association syndicate, copartnership, corporation, trust, or any other legal entity, as a principal, agent or otherwise to sell, or to convey title in any way to, any subdivision of land or any part thereof in the city, unless and until all the requirements hereinafter provided have been complied with. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.04.090 Annexations.
    A.  When any area in a subdivision as to which a final map has been finally approved by the Yolo County board of supervisors and filed for record pursuant to this division is thereafter annexed to the city, the final map and any agreements relating to the subdivision shall continue to govern the subdivision.

    B.   When any area in a subdivision or proposed subdivision as to which a tentative map, tentative parcel map or vesting tentative map has been filed but a final map has not been finally approved, or as to which a parcel map is required by this division but the final act required to make the parcel map effective has not been taken, is annexed to the city, all procedures and regulations required by this title shall be deemed to commence as of the effective date of the annexation and the map shall comply with the requirements of any applicable ordinance of the city. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

Chapter 16.08 DEFINITIONS
16.08.010 Board of supervisors.
    “Board of supervisors” means the board of supervisors, county of Yolo, California. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.08.015 Cadastral.
    “Cadastral” means relating to land boundaries and subdivisions, parcels of land suitable for transfer of title. (Ord. 93-5 § 2(A))

 

16.08.016 CADD.
    “CADD” means computer-aided drafting and design. (Ord. 93-5 § 2(A))

 

16.08.020 Certificate of compliance.
    “Certificate of compliance” means a certificate recorded by the county which determines that the subdivision of real property complies with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and applicable city ordinances enacted pursuant thereto. A recorded final map or parcel map shall constitute a certificate of compliance with respect to the parcels of real property described therein. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.08.030 City.
    “City” means the city of West Sacramento, county of Yolo, California. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.08.040 City engineer.
    “City engineer” means the person authorized to perform the functions of the city engineer. (Ord. 91- 9 § 3)

 

16.08.045 City street.
    “City street” means any duly dedicated street, avenue, or the like which the city has accepted and regularly maintained or upon which public funds have been expended for improvements or rights-of-way used by the public generally. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.08.050 City surveyor.
    “City surveyor” means the person authorized to perform the land surveying functions of the city engineer. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.08.060 Commission.
    “Commission” means the planning commission of the city. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.08.070 Community development department.
    “Community development department” means the community development department of the city. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.08.080 Condominium.
    “Condominium” means an estate in real property consisting of an undivided interest in common in a portion of a parcel of real property together with a separate interest in space in a residential, industrial or commercial building on the real property, such as an apartment, office or store. A condominium may include, in addition, a separate proportional interest in other portions of the real property. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.08.090 Conversion.
    “Conversion” means the creation of separate ownership of existing real property together with a separate proportional interest in space of residential, industrial or commercial buildings and property. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.08.100 County.
    “County” means the county of Yolo, California. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.08.110 Day(s).
    “Day(s)” means a calendar day or days, unless otherwise indicated. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.08.120 Design.
    “Design” means:

    A.  Street alignments, grades and widths;

    B.   Drainage, water and sanitary sewer facilities and other utilities, including alignments and grades thereof;

    C.   Location and sizes of all required easements and rights-of-way;

    D.  Fire roads and fire breaks;

    E.   Lot size and configuration;

    F.   Traffic access;

    G.  Grading;

    H.  Land to be dedicated for park and recreational or recreational purposes; and

    I.    Such other specific physical requirements in the plan and configuration of the entire subdivision as may be necessary to ensure consistency with or implementation of the general plan or with any applicable specific plan. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.08.130 Development.
    “Development” means the uses to which the land which is the subject of a map shall be put, the buildings to be constructed on it, and all alterations of the land and construction incident thereto. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.08.140 Easement.
    “Easement” means an easement dedicated to the city, which shall be continuing and irrevocable unless formally abandoned by the city, and/or other easement whether owned by a public entity, public utility, or private party. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.08.150 Environmental impact report.
    “Environmental impact report” means a detailed statement setting forth the environmental effects and considerations pertaining to a project as specified in the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), state Public Resources Code, Section 21000 et seq. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.08.160 Final map.
    “Final map” means a map that delineates the final division of land into five or more land, condominium or community apartment parcels with required dedications and/or improvements, as required by this ordinance, and prepared in accordance with this chapter and the Map Act. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.08.170 General plan.
    “General plan” means the general plan of the city, as approved and amended from time to time. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.08.175 Geodetic control.
    “Geodetic control” means coordinate points on the California Coordinate System. (Ord. 93-5 § 2(A) (part).

 

16.08.177 Geographic information system (GIS).
    “Geographic information system” means a computerized information system for analyzing spatially indexed information. (Ord. 93-5 § 2(A))

 

16.08.180 Government Code.
    “Government code” means the Government Code of the state of California. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.08.190 Improvement.
    “Improvement” means:

    A.  Any street work and utilities to be installed, or agreed to be installed, by the subdivider on the land to be used for public or private streets, highways, ways, and easements, as are necessary for the general use of the lot owners in the subdivision and local neighborhood traffic and drainage needs as a condition precedent to the approval and acceptance of the final map thereof.

    B.   Any other specific improvements or types of improvements, the installation of which, either by the subdivider, by public agencies, by private utilities, by any other entity approved by the city, or by a combination thereof, is necessary to ensure consistency with, or implementation of the general plan or any applicable specific plan. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.08.195 Land Surveyor’s Act.
    “Land Surveyor’s Act” means Sections 8700 to 8806 of the Business and Professions Code of the state. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.08.200 Lot.
    “Lot” means a parcel or portion of land separated from other parcels or portions by description, as on a subdivision or record of survey map, or by metes and bounds, for purpose of sale, lease or separate use. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.08.210 Lot line adjustment.
    “Lot line adjustment” means a minor shift or rotation of an existing lot line or other adjustments where a greater number of parcels than originally existed is not created, as approved by the zoning administrator or other authorized representative. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.08.220 Map Act.
    “Map Act” means the Subdivision Map Act of the state (Government Code Section 66410 et seq.). (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.08.230 Merger.
    “Merger” means the joining of two or more contiguous parcels of land under one ownership into one parcel. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.08.235 NAD 83.
    “NAD 83” means North American Datum 83, defined by the National Geodetic Service as the basis for geodetic control measurements. (Ord. 93-5 § 2(A))

 

16.08.240 Owner.
    “Owner” means the individual, firm, association, syndicate, copartnership, or corporation having sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought to be subdivided to commence and maintain proceedings to subdivide the same under this title. (Ord. 91- 9 § 3)

 

16.08.250 Parcel map.
    “Parcel map” means a map showing a division of land of four or less parcels as required by this ordinance, and prepared in accordance with this chapter and the Map Act. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.08.260 Private street.
    “Private street” means any street, accessory, or the like, lying in whole or in part within a subdivision for which dedication and ownership is privately held and is utilized as access to a development. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.08.270 Remainder.
    “Remainder” means that portion of an existing parcel which is not designated on the required map as part of the subdivision. The remainder shall not be considered as part of the subdivision but shall be shown on the required map as part of the area surrounding the subdivision and designated as a remainder parcel. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.08.280 Subdivision improvement standards.
    “Subdivision improvement standards” means the standard details, standard specifications, and other standards approved by the city engineer that shall govern the improvements to be constructed pursuant to this chapter and the Map Act. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.08.290 Subdivider.
    “Subdivider” means a person, firm, corporation, partnership, or association who proposes to divide, divides, or causes to be divided real property into a subdivision for itself or for others. Employees and consultants of such persons or entities acting in such capacity are not “subdividers.” (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.08.300 Subdivision.
    “Subdivision means the division, by any subdivider, of any unit or units of improved or unimproved land, or any portion thereof, shown on the latest equalized county assessment roll as a unit or as contiguous units, for the purpose of sale, lease or financing, whether immediate or future. Property shall be considered as continuous units, even if it is separated by roads, streets, utility easements or railroad rights-of-way. “Subdivision” includes a condominium project, as defined in Subdivision (f) of Section 1351 of the Civil Code, a community apartment project, as defined in Subdivision (d) of Section 1351 of the Civil Code, or the conversion of five or more existing dwelling units to a stock cooperative, as defined in subdivision (m) of Section 1351 of the Civil Code. (Ord. 03-21 § 1; Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.08.310 Tentative map.
    “Tentative map” means a map made for the purpose of showing the design and improvement of a proposed subdivision and the existing conditions in and around it and need not be based upon an accurate or detailed final survey of the property. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.08.320 Tentative parcel map.
    “Tentative parcel map” means a map made for the purpose of showing the design and improvement of a proposed parcel map and the existing conditions in and around it and need not be based upon an accurate or detailed final survey of the property. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.08.330 Vesting tentative map.
    “Vesting tentative map” refers to a map which meets the requirements of Chapter 16.20 and 16.24 of this title. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.08.340 Zoning administrator.
    “Zoning administrator” means the person authorized to perform the functions of the zoning administrator as authorized by the city’s zoning ordinance. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.08.350 Zoning ordinance.
    “Zoning ordinance” means the zoning ordinance of the city, as from time to time amended. (Ord. 91- 9 § 3)

Chapter 16.12 RESPONSIBILITIES
16.12.010 City attorney.
    The city attorney’s responsibilities shall include approving as to form all subdivision improvement agreements and security and all governing documents for a common interest development. (Ord. 91- 9 § 3)

 

16.12.020 City council.
    The city council shall have final jurisdiction in the approval, conditional approval or denial of final maps and in the approval of improvement agreements for subdivisions of five or more parcels. The city council shall also have final jurisdiction in the approval, conditional approval or denial of reversions to acreage.

    The city council shall act as the appeal board for hearing appeals of the approval, conditional approval or denial of tentative maps and vesting tentative maps. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.12.030 City engineer.
    The city engineer’s responsibilities shall include:

    A.  Establishing design and construction details, standards and specifications;

    B.   Determining if proposed subdivision improvements comply with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this chapter;

    C.   The processing and certification of final maps, parcel maps, reversion to acreage maps, amended maps and the processing and approval of subdivision improvement plans;

    D.  Examining and certifying that final maps and parcel maps are in substantial compliance with the approved tentative map;

    E.   The approval of proposed street names;

    F.   The approval as to form of subdivision improvement agreements;

    G.  The inspection, approval and acceptance of subdivision improvements;

    H.  Approve, conditionally approve or deny parcel maps; and

    I.    Accept or reject dedications and offers of dedications made by statement on parcel maps. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.12.040 City surveyor.
    In the event that the city engineer is not authorized by Section 8731 of the Business and Professions code of the state to practice land surveying, the city surveyor shall review each final map and parcel map for technical correctness and attest by statement on the map that he or she has completed said review. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.12.050 Community development department.
    The community development department shall be responsible for the processing of all maps and for the collection of all required deposits and fees. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.12.060 Community development director.
    A.  May approve minor amendments to approved tentative maps;

    B.   Shall be responsible for carrying out the responsibilities imposed by this chapter. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.12.070 Planning commission.
    The planning commission shall be responsible for approving, conditionally approving, or denying the application for tentative maps and tentative vesting maps and reporting its action to the city council. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

Chapter 16.16 MERGERS OF PARCELS AND LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTS
Note
*     Prior ordinance history: Ords. 87-18, 89-15; prior code §§ 8-1.450, 8-1.450.1, 8-1.451—8-1.4511.

 

16.16.010 Purpose.
    The purpose of this chapter is to provide a simplified procedure to enable the removal of previously approved parcel lines and minor lot line adjustments to be approved by the director of community development, exercising his or her authority as zoning administrator pursuant to Chapter 17.14 of this code, subject to appeal to the planning commission and council as set forth in Chapter 17.06. (Ord. 03-21 § 1; Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.16.020 Definitions.
    For the purpose of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:

    “Lot line adjustment” means an adjustment between at least two existing adjacent parcels where the land from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel, and where a greater number of parcels than existed originally is not thereby created, provided such adjustment is exempt from the Subdivision Map Act of the state by virtue of subsection (d) of Section 66412 of the Government Code of the state.

    “Merger of contiguous parcels under common ownership” (referred to in this chapter as “merger”) means the elimination of parcel lines between contiguous parcels under common ownership, without reverting the land in such parcels to acreage, pursuant to the authority set forth in Section 66499.20-3/4 of the Government Code of the state (Subdivision Map Act).

    For the purposes of this chapter, “common ownership” exists if the title for all properties proposed for merger is vested in the same individual, individuals, firm or partnership, and all persons required by the Subdivision Map Act of the state to consent to the recordation of a reversion to acreage of such parcels have consented to the merger. The definition of “contiguous parcels” is as set forth in Section 66424 of the Subdivision Map Act.

    “Zoning administrator” means the director of community development, or his or her designated representative, operating as zoning administrator pursuant to Chapter 17.14. (Ord. 97-4 § 2 Exh. 1 (part); Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.16.030 Mergers of parcels authorized.
    Pursuant to Section 66499.20 3/4 of the Government Code of the state, the zoning administrator is authorized to approve the merger of parcels under common ownership, as defined in Section 16.16.020, without a reversion to acreage, upon the findings and utilizing the procedures set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 97-4 § 2 Exh. 1 (part); Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.16.040 Minor lot line adjustments authorized.
    Pursuant to subsection (d) of Section 66412 of the Government Code of the state, the zoning administrator is authorized to approve minor lot line adjustments, as defined in Section 16.16.020, upon the findings and utilizing the procedures set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.16.050 Mergers of parcels—State statutes adopted—General requirements.
    Article 1.5 of Chapter 3 of Division 2 of Title 7 of the Government Code, commencing with Section 66451.10, including all amendments, deletions and additions thereto, is incorporated into this code as though fully set forth in this chapter. Mergers of subdivided lots in the city shall be governed by the following provisions, except as otherwise provided by the above-incorporated provisions of the Government Code:

    A.  Two or more parcels or units of land which are held by the same owner shall be and are declared to be merged if any one of the contiguous parcels or units does not conform to standards for minimum parcel size under the zoning ordinance of the city and if all of the following requirements are satisfied:

    1.   At least one of the affected parcels is undeveloped by any structure for which a building permit was issued or for which a building permit was not required at the time of construction, or is developed only with an accessory structure or accessory structures, or is developed with a single structure, other than an accessory structure, that is partially sited on a contiguous parcel or unit.

    2.   With respect to any affected parcel, one or more of the following conditions exists:

    a.   Comprises less than five thousand square feet in area at the time of the determination of merger;

    b.   Was not created in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances in effect at the time of its creation;

    c.   Does not meet current standards for sewage disposal and domestic water supply;

    d.   Does not meet slope stability standards;

    e.   Has no legal access which is adequate for vehicular and safety equipment access and maneuverability;

    f.    Its development would create health or safety hazards;

    g.   It is inconsistent with the city’s general plan and/or the city’s zoning requirements, other than minimum lot size or density standards.

    B.   The city planning commission may establish the standards specified in subdivisions (c) to (g) inclusive, of subsection (A)(2) of this section, which shall be applicable to parcels to be merged. For purposes of determining whether contiguous parcels are held by the same owner, ownership shall be determined as of the date that notice of intention to determine status is recorded.

    C.   This section shall not apply if one of the following conditions exist:

    1.   On or before July 1, 1981, one or more parcels or units of land was/were enforceably restricted open space land pursuant to a contract, agreement, scenic restriction or open space easement, as defined and set forth in Section 421 of the Revenue and Taxation Code.

    2.   On July 1, 1981, one or more of the contiguous parcels or units of land was timberland as defined in Government Code Section 51104, or was devoted to an agricultural use as defined in Government Code Section 51201(b).

    3.   On July 1, 1981, one or more of the contiguous parcels or units of land was located within two thousand feet of the site on which an existing commercial mineral resource extraction use was being made, whether or not the extraction was being made pursuant to a use permit.

    4.   On July 1, 1981, one or more of the contiguous parcels or units of land was located within two thousand feet of a future commercial mineral extraction site as shown on a plan for which a use permit or other permit authorizing commercial mineral resource extraction was issued.

    For purposes of subdivisions (3) and (4) of this subsection, “mineral resource extraction” means gas, hydrocarbon, gravel or sand extraction, geothermal wells or other similar commercial mining activity.

    D.  Any division, by any subdivider, of any unit of parcels declared merged by this section for purposes of sale, lease or financing shall constitute a “subdivision” for purposes of this chapter and the Subdivision Map Act and shall require compliance with this chapter and the Subdivision Map Act. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.16.060 Applications for mergers or minor lot line adjustments—Contents.
    An application for a merger of parcels or a minor lot line adjustment pursuant to this chapter shall be accompanied by the following materials:

    A.  The application shall be made on a form provided by the community development department.

    B.   No application shall be deemed complete nor accepted for filing until the applicant therefore has paid the application fee. The council is authorized to promulgate such fee by resolution, such fee not to exceed the reasonable cost to process the application.

    C.   The application shall include a discussion of the purpose for the proposal, the existing and proposed configurations of the parcels, the existing and proposed improvements, and sketches to illustrate such items in sufficient detail to enable the zoning administrator to determine whether the findings required by this chapter are satisfied by the proposal.

    D.  The application shall include a preliminary title report covering all affected parcels.

    E.   Evidence that the real property taxes have been prepaid prior to the approval of the lot line adjustment, in compliance with Government Code Section 66412(d).

    F.   All applications for lot line adjustments shall be accompanied by legal descriptions which accurately describe the parcels to be created.

    G.  Applications for lot line adjustments shall also be accompanied by a deed or deeds as necessary to convey the land subject to the lot line adjustment as necessary to complete the transaction.

    H.  All final parcel maps and deeds required by the application shall be in form suitable for recordation in the office of the county recorder.

    I.    All applications pursuant to this chapter shall be accompanied by a certificate executed by all record title holders indicating their comments to the proposed transaction, when such comments are required by the Subdivision Map Act of the state for reversions to acreage, and shall include information regarding adjustments of the interests held by such holders required as a result of the proposal.

    J.    All applications pursuant to this chapter shall include an application for a certificate of compliance pursuant to Section 66499.35 of the Government Code of the state, with a waiver of any notice or previous opportunity to be heard, such certificate to be issued and recorded upon the approval of the application.

    Incomplete applications shall not be filed. The zoning administrator shall inform the applicant of what is needed to make the application complete. (Ord. 97-4 § 2 Exh. 1 (part); Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.16.070 Mergers of parcels—Findings required.
    The zoning administrator shall not approve any application for a merger of parcels pursuant to this chapter unless all of the following findings are made in the affirmative:

    A.  That the application is complete and contains all of the information required by this chapter;

    B.   That all existing streets and/or utility easements of record are reserved;

    C.   That all record title holders whose consent is required by the Subdivision Map Act of the state with regard to a reversion of acreage have consented to the proposed merger, and the public works department has approved the proposal for compliance with the Act;

    D.  That the real property taxes have been prepaid in compliance with Government Code Section 66412(d); and

    E.   That the zoning administrator is satisfied that the design of the resulting parcel will comply with the existing requirements of this code regarding area, improvements and design, flood and water drainage control, appropriate improved public roads, sanitary disposal facilities, water supply availability, environmental protection and all other requirements of state laws and this code and is in conformity with the purpose and intent of the general plan and zoning provisions. (Ord. 97-4 § 2 Exh. 1 (part); Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.16.080 Mergers of parcels—Notice and hearing procedure.
    A.  A merger of parcels becomes effective at the time the city records with the county recorder a notice of merger specifying the names of the record owners and particularly describing the real property.

    B.   Prior to recording a notice of merger, the city shall cause to be mailed by certified mail to the then current record owner of the property a notice of intention to determine status, notifying the owner that the affected parcels may be merged pursuant to standards specified in the city’s merger ordinance and advising the owner of the opportunity to request a hearing on determination of status and to present evidence at the hearing that the property does not meet the criteria for merger. The notice of intention to determine status shall be filed for record with the county recorder on the date that notice is mailed to the property owner.

    C.   At any time within thirty days after recording of the notice of intention to determine status, the owner of the affected property may file with the city planning commission a request for a hearing on determination of status.

    D.  Upon receiving a request for a hearing on determination of status from the owner of the affected property pursuant to subsection C, the planning commission shall fix a time, date and place for a hearing, and shall notify the property owner by certified mail of the time, date and place for the hearing. The hearing shall be conducted not more than sixty days following the planning commission’s receipt of the property owner’s request for a hearing, but may be postponed or continued upon the mutual consent of the commission or its representative and the property owner.

    E.   At the hearing, the property owner shall be given the opportunity to present any evidence that the affected property does not meet the standards for merger specified in this chapter. At the conclusion of the hearing, the planning commission shall make a determination that the affected parcels are to be merged or are not to be merged and shall notify the owner of its determination. In its discretion, the planning commission may make a determination of nonmerger, whether or not the affected property meets the standards for merger specified in Section 16.16.050. A determination of merger shall be recorded within thirty days after the conclusion of the hearing as provided for in subsection C.

    F.   If, within the thirty-day period specified in subsection C, the owner does not file a request for a hearing in accordance with subsection E the planning commission may, at any time thereafter, make a determination that the affected parcels are to be merged or are not to be merged. A determination of merger shall be recorded as provided for in subsection A no later than ninety days following the mailing of the notice required by subsection D.

    G.  If, in accordance with subsections E or F, the planning commission determines that the subject property shall not be merged, it shall cause to be recorded in the manner specified in subsection A, a release of the notice of intention to determine status, recorded pursuant to subsection B, and shall mail a clearance letter to the then current owner of record. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.16.090 Lot line adjustments—Findings required.
    The zoning administrator shall not approve any lot line adjustment pursuant to this chapter unless all of the following findings are made in the affirmative:

    A.  That the application is complete;

    B.   That all record title holders who are required by the Subdivision Map Act of the state to consent to a reversion to acreage have consented to the proposed lot line adjustment, and the city engineer has approved the proposal as complying with the Act;

    C.   That the deeds to be utilized in the transaction accurately describe the resulting parcels;

    D.  That the lot line adjustment will not result in the abandonment of any street or utility easement of record, and that, if the lot line adjustment will result in the transfer of property from one owner to another owner, the deed to the subsequent owner expressly reserves any street or utility easement of record;

    E.   That the lot line adjustment will not result in the elimination or reduction in size of the access way to any resulting parcel, or that the application is accompanied by new easements to provide access which meet all the requirements of this code regarding access to parcels in the location and of the size as those proposed to be created;

    F.   That the zoning administrator is satisfied that the design of the resulting parcels will comply with the existing requirements as to area, improvements and design, flood and water drainage control, appropriate improved public roads, sanitary disposal facilities, water supply availability, environmental protection and all other requirements of state laws and this code and is in conformity with the purpose and intent of the general plan and zoning provisions; and

    G.  That the real property taxes have been prepaid in compliance with Government Code Section 66412(d). (Ord. 97-4 § 2 Exh. 1 (part); Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.16.100 Hearings—Notices.
    In implementing this chapter, the zoning administrator is authorized to, and shall, do all things required to provide notice and an opportunity to be heard to any person whose property would be substantially affected by the proposed application, or who has a material interest in the proposed application, or who has requested special notice of such application.

    The zoning administrator shall provide such notice as is required by federal or state laws or this code and shall conduct such hearings as are required by federal or state laws or this code prior to approving any application pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.16.110 Certificates of compliance.
    A.  Approval Without Conditions. If the zoning administrator approves the merger or lot line adjustment pursuant to this chapter without conditions, he or she shall cause a certificate of compliance to be recorded in the office of the county recorder.

    B.   Conditional Approval. If the zoning administrator conditionally approves the merger or lot line adjustment pursuant to this chapter, he or she shall set forth the conditions in writing and deliver such writing to the applicant.

    If within no more than six months the applicant submits evidence that all of the conditions of the approval have been satisfied, the zoning administrator shall cause a certificate of compliance to be recorded in the office of the county recorder, along with any deeds necessary to complete the transaction. (Ord. 97-4 § 2 Exh. 1 (part); Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.16.120 Mergers of parcels and lot line adjustments—Effect of approval.
    Upon the recordation of the certificate of compliance regarding the approval of a merger pursuant to this chapter, all separate parcels shown on the merger application shall be merged into one parcel for all purposes and shall thereafter be shown as such on the assessment roll.

    Upon the recordation of the certificate of compliance regarding the approval of a lot line adjustment pursuant to this chapter, the previous parcels shall be merged and the approved resulting parcels shall be created and shall thereafter be shown as such on the assessment roll.

    Upon the final approval of a merger or lot line adjustment pursuant to this chapter, the zoning administrator shall forward to the county assessor such information as is required by the county assessor to correct the equalized assessment roll to reflect the actions approved by the zoning administrator. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.16.130 Appeals and reviews.
    The zoning administrator or the planning commission, on motion of either, may refer any merger or lot line adjustment initiated pursuant to this chapter to the planning commission for decision pursuant to the zoning ordinance of the city. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.16.140 Unmerged parcels.
    Any parcel which has merged under the provisions of any law prior to January 1, 1984 for which a notice of merger has not been recorded on or before January 1, 1984, shall be unmerged if on that date the parcel meets each of the following criteria:

    A.  Comprises at least five thousand square feet in area;

    B.   Was created in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances in effect at the time of its creation,

    C.   Meets current standards for sewage disposal and domestic water supply;

    D.  Meets slope density standards;

    E.   Has legal access which is adequate for vehicular and safety equipment access and maneuverability;

    F.   Its unmerger and development would create no health and safety hazards;

    G.  The unmerged parcel would be consistent with the applicable general plan, other than minimum lot size or density standards, and with respect to which one of the conditions mentioned in Section 66451.30(b)(1), (2), (3), (4) or (5) exist. (Ord. 03-21 § 1 (part); Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.16.150 Request for determination by owner.
    A.  Upon written application made by the owner, the planning commission shall make a determination that the affected parcels have merged or are to be merged. If the planning commission determines that the parcels are not merged, the owner shall so be notified.

    B.   If the planning commission determines that the parcels have merged and that they meet the requirements for unmerger in Section 16.16.140, a notice of status shall be issued to the owner and recorded with the county recorder which shall identify each parcel and declare that they are unmerged.

    C.   If the planning commission determines the parcels have merged and do not meet the unmerger requirements in Section 16.16.140, a notice of merger specifying the record owner and a description of the parcel shall be issued to the owner and recorded with the county recorder. The owner may appeal the decision of the planning commission as provided in Section 16.16.130. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.16.160 Fee for mergers and unmergers.
    The fee for processing mergers and unmergers at the request of an owner shall be set by the city. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

Chapter 16.20 TENTATIVE MAPS
16.20.010 Title and purpose.
    The purpose of this chapter is to create and establish the city’s regulations, standards and procedures applicable to tentative maps consisting of five or more parcels. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.20.020 Submission of tentative map application.
    The tentative map shall be prepared in a manner acceptable to the Community Development Department and shall be prepared by a registered Civil Engineer or licensed land surveyor. The tentative map application shall contain the following components:

    A.  Tentative Map.

    1.   Subdivision name and number.

    2.   Legal description of the property to be subdivided.

    3.   Date, north arrow, scale, contour interval and source and date of existing contours and datum.

    4.   A vicinity map showing roads, adjoining subdivisions, towns, creeks, railroads and other data sufficient to locate the subdivision.

    5.   Name, telephone number, and address of record owner or owners of the subdivision.

    6.   Name, address and telephone number of the subdivider.

    7.   Name, business address and telephone number of the registered engineer or licensed surveyor who prepared the tentative map.

    8.   A statement of existing zoning and any proposed zoning changes and of existing and proposed uses of the property.

    9.   A statement of the gross and net acreages of the overall subdivision and the resultant parcels.

    10. Topographic data of the proposed site and at least one hundred feet beyond its boundary, including but not limited to:

    a.   Existing contours at one-foot intervals if the existing ground slope is less than ten percent and at not less than five-foot intervals for existing ground slopes equal to greater than ten percent. Existing contours shall be represented by dashed lines or by screened lines.

    b.   Type, circumference and drip line of existing trees with a trunk diameter of four inches or more. Any trees proposed to be removed shall be so indicated.

    c.   The location and outline of existing structures identified by type. Structures to be removed shall be so marked.

    d.   The approximate location of all areas of potential stormwater overflow; the location, width, and direction of flow of each water course; and the flood zone designation as indicated on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (“FIRM”).

    e.   The location, pavement and right-of-way width, grade and name of existing streets or highways.

    f.    The widths, location and purpose of all existing easements.

    g.   The location and size of existing sanitary sewers, fire hydrants, water mains and stormdrains shall be indicated. The location of existing overhead utility lines on peripheral streets shall be indicated.

    11. Proposed improvements to be shown shall include but not be limited to:

    a.   The location, center line radius and arc length of curves, right-of-way width, and name of all streets. Typical sections of all streets shall be shown. Proposed private streets shall be clearly indicated.

    b.   The location of all curb returns and cul-de-sacs.

    c.   The locations, width and type of all easements.

    d.   The angle of intersecting streets if such angle deviates from a right angle by more than four degrees.

    e.   The approximate lot layout and the approximate dimensions of each lot and each building site, the finish floor elevation of proposed building pads, the top and toe of cut and fill slopes to scale, the number of each lot, and the elevation of adjacent parcels.

    f.    Proposed contours at one-foot intervals shall be shown if the existing ground slope is less than ten percent and not at less than five-foot intervals for existing ground slopes of ten percent or more. A separate grading plan may be submitted.

    g.   Proposed park and recreational sites, common areas, open space areas including method of ownership and management.

    h.   The location and size of sanitary sewers, fire hydrants, water mains and storm drains. The proposed routing of stormwater runoff generated by a one-hundred-year flood shall also be indicated.

    i.    A runoff control plan per Section 15.08.280. Submittal requirements include:

    (1)  Project’s applicability status to the post-construction standards plan;

    (2)  Site design plans and specification;

    (3)  A complete post-construction project worksheet;

    (4)  An O&M plan;

    (5)  A signed certificate of responsibility.

    j.    A list of proposed street names pursuant to the city’s street naming policy for review by the community development department.

    B.   Accompanying Environmental Information and Reports. All tentative map applications shall be accompanied by the following information unless otherwise exempted by the community development director and the city engineer:

    1.   Environmental studies including, but not limited to, biological assessments, noise studies, cultural resources reports, arborist reports, and Phase 1/2 evaluations.

    2.   Soils Report. A soils report prepared in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 70 of the Uniform Building Code.

    3.   School Sites. The subdivider shall obtain from the Washington Unified School District, its intention, in writing, concerning the necessity for a school site and/or temporary and/or permanent school facilities.

    4.   Traffic study.

    5.   Phasing Plan. If the subdivider plans to file multiple final maps on the tentative map, it shall submit a written notice to this effect to the community development department.

    6.   Title Report. A preliminary title report, acceptable to the community development department, showing the legal owners at the time of the filing of the tentative map.

    7.   Preliminary grading plan.

    C.   Application Format and Additional Information. The community development director shall determine the number of tentative maps to be delivered. The map shall be legibly drawn, printed or reproduced. The scale of the map shall be not less than one inch equals one hundred feet or as may be necessary to show all details clearly. All tentative map applications shall be accompanied by the following additional information:

    1.   Assessor’s parcel map showing the location of the subject property and all surrounding property within a five hundred foot radius of the property.

    2.   List of all property owners within the five hundred foot radius.

    3.   Copy of every restrictive covenant proposed, or in the case of condominium projects, a copy of the declaration of restrictions and proposed management arrangement relating to the project, as required by the provisions of Section 1353 of the California Civil Code.

    D.  Fees. A fee, as established by city council resolution, shall be required with all tentative map applications. (Ord. 15-4 § 3; Ord. 03-21 § 1; Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.20.030 Tentative map process.
    A.  Within thirty days of receiving a tentative map application, the community development department shall inform the applicant whether the application is complete and accepted for filing. If incomplete, the community development department shall state in what respect the application is deficient.

    B.   Within five days after the filing of a complete tentative map application, the community development department shall send a notice of the filing of a tentative map to appropriate city departments and other agencies, including the Washington Unified School District.

    C.   The community development department shall set a public hearing on the application before the planning commission and cause notice thereof to be published once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, not less than ten days prior to the public hearing. A copy of the community development department report shall be forwarded to the subdivider at least three working days prior to the public hearing. At least ten days prior to the date scheduled for the public hearing, the community development department shall mail notice of the public hearing to the owner of the subject property or his or her authorized agent, the project applicant, each local agency expected to provide essential facilities or service whose ability to provide these facilities may be affected, and all property owners within a three hundred foot radius of the subject property.

    D.  The planning commission shall approve, conditionally approve or deny the tentative map, and the community development department shall report the decision of the planning commission to the subdivider within fifty days after certification of an environmental impact report (EIR) for the project, adoption of a negative declaration for the project, or determination by the city that the project is exempt from CEQA. In reaching a decision upon the tentative map, the planning commission shall consider the effect of that decision on the housing needs of the region, and balance these needs against the public service needs of its residents and available fiscal and environmental resources. (Ord. 97-4 § 2 Exh. 1 (part); Ord. 92-2 § 2(A); Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.20.040 Required findings for tentative map approval.
    The tentative map may be approved or conditionally approved by the planning commission if it finds that:

    A.  The tentative map is consistent with the goals and policies of the general plan and any applicable specific plans;

    B.   The tentative map is in conformance with this title and the zoning ordinance; and

    C.   The tentative map is in conformance with the Subdivision Map Act. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.20.050 Denial of a tentative map.
    The tentative map may be denied by the planning commission if it makes any of the following findings:

    A.  The tentative map is not consistent with the goals and policies of the West Sacramento general plan and any applicable specific plans;

    B.   The tentative map is not in conformance with this title and the zoning ordinance;

    C.   The tentative map is not in conformance with the Subdivision Map Act;

    D.  The site is not physically suitable for the type of development;

    E.   The site is not physically suitable for the proposed density of the development;

    F.   The subdivision or improvements are likely to cause substantial environmental damage or substantially and avoidably injure fish and wildlife or their habitat;

    G.  The subdivision or improvements are likely to cause serious public health problems;

    H.  The subdivision or improvements conflict with easements acquired by the public at large, for access through or use of property within the proposed subdivision;

    I.    The land is subject to a contract entered into pursuant to the California Land Conservation Act (Government Code 51200 et seq.) and that the resulting parcels following a subdivision of land would be too small to sustain their agricultural use. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.20.060 Appeal of planning commission action.
    A.  The subdivider or any party adversely affected by any planning commission action, including the city council or any individual city council member, may within ten days after the decision, appeal in writing to the city clerk.

    B.   The city council shall hold a public hearing on the appeal within thirty days after the date of filing of the appeal. If there is no regular meeting of the city council within the next thirty days for which the required notice can be given pursuant to Government Code Section 66451.3, the appeal may be heard at the next regular meeting for which notice can be given, or within sixty days from the date of the receipt of the request, whichever period is shorter. Within ten calendar days following the conclusion of the public hearing, the city council shall render its decision on the appeal.

    C.   The city council may sustain, modify, or reject any ruling of the planning commission and may make any findings which are consistent with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act or this chapter. (Ord. 09-17 § 2; Ord. 95-7 § 2 (part); Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.20.070 Expiration of tentative map approvals.
    A.  An approved or conditionally approved tentative map shall expire thirty-six months after its approval. However, if the subdivider is subject to a requirement of one hundred twenty five thousand dollars or more to construct or improve or finance the construction or improvement of public improvements outside the boundaries of the tentative map, each filing of a final map authorized by Section 66456.1 shall extend the expiration of the approved tentative map by thirty-six months from the date of its expiration as provided in this section, or the date of the previously filed final map, whichever is later. The extensions shall not extend the tentative map more than ten years from its approval or conditional approval. However, a tentative map on property subject to a development agreement may be extended for the period of time provided for in the agreement, but not beyond the duration of the agreement. The number of phased final maps which may be filed shall be determined by the planning commission at the time of the approval of the tentative map. “Public improvements,” as used in this title, include traffic controls, streets, roads, highways, freeways, bridges, over-crossings, street interchanges, flood control or stormdrain facilities, sewer facilities, water facilities, and lighting facilities.

    B.   The period of time specified in Section 16.20.070(A) herein above shall not include any period of time during which a development moratorium, as defined in Government Code Section 66452.6(f) imposed after approval of the tentative map, is in existence; provided however, that the length of the moratorium shall not exceed five years. Once a moratorium is terminated, the map shall be valid for the same period of time as was left to run on the map at the time that the moratorium was imposed. However, if the remaining time is less than one hundred twenty days, the map shall be valid for one hundred twenty days following the termination of the moratorium.

    C.   The period of time specified in Section 16.20.070(A) and (D) shall not include the period of time during which a lawsuit involving the approval or conditional approval of the tentative map is or was pending in a court of competent jurisdiction if the stay of the time period is approved by the planning commission pursuant to this section. After service of the initial petition or complaint in the lawsuit upon the city, the subdivider may apply to the planning commission for a stay. Within forty days after receiving the application, the planning commission shall either stay the time period for up to five years or deny the requested stay.

    D.  The expiration of the approved or conditionally approved tentative map shall terminate all proceedings and no final map or parcel map of all or any portion of the real property included within the tentative map shall be filed with the legislative body without first processing a new tentative map. Once a timely filing is made, subsequent actions of the local agency, including, but not limited to, processing, approving, and recording, may lawfully occur after the date of expiration of the tentative map. Delivery to the city engineer shall be deemed a timely filing for purposes of this section. (Ord. 91-9 3)

 

16.20.080 Amendment of tentative map.
    A.  Prior to the public hearing thereon, the subdivider may amend the application. This amendment must occur prior to the hearing being advertised unless the community development director determines the amendment is minor and will not significantly change the nature or character of the application. If the community development director determines the amendment is major, a new notice of hearing shall be given in the manner and for the time required in Section 16.20.030 as appropriate, and the subdivider shall pay the cost to readvertise.

    B.   Amendment of a tentative map after approval by the planning commission may be initiated by the subdivider. The community development director will determine whether the amendment is minor and can be approved by the community development department, or is significant enough to change the nature or character of the approved project and will require a decision by the planning commission. If the community development director determines the amendment is major, a new notice of hearing shall be given in the manner and for the time required in Section 16.20.030 as is appropriate, and the subdivider shall pay the fee fixed therefor. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.20.090 Pre-annexation filing of tentative maps.
    Any subdivider may file with the city, the tentative map of a proposed subdivision of unincorporated territory adjacent to the city. The map, in the discretion of the city, may be acted upon in the manner provided in Article 1 of the Map Act and this title, except that if it is approved, such approval shall not be effective until annexation of such property to the city has been completed. If annexation is not completed within one year, the approval of such map shall be null and void. No subdivision of unincorporated territory may be affected by approval of a map by the city unless annexation thereof to the city is completed prior to the approval of the final map thereof. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.20.100 Resubmittal of application.
    No application for a tentative map approval shall be accepted nor any hearings held thereon when an application for the same or substantially same tentative map has been previously denied until a period of one year has elapsed from the date of the final denial of the application by the body having final jurisdiction in the matter. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

Chapter 16.24 VESTING TENTATIVE MAPS
16.24.010 Authority and purpose.
    A.  This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by Chapter 4.5 (commencing with Section 66498.1) of the Subdivision Map Act (hereinafter referred to as the vesting tentative map statute) and may be cited as the West Sacramento vesting tentative map ordinance. The purpose of this chapter is to establish appropriate local procedures for the implementation of the vesting tentative map statute.

    B.   To accomplish this purpose, the regulations contained in this chapter are determined to be necessary for the preservation of the public health, safety and general welfare, and for the promotion of orderly growth and development. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.24.020 Consistency.
    No land shall be subdivided and developed pursuant to a vesting tentative map for any purpose which is inconsistent with the general plan and any applicable specific plan or not permitted by the zoning ordinance or other applicable provisions of the city code, unless the appropriate zone amendments are also granted. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.24.030 Definitions.
    A “vesting tentative map” means a “tentative map” for a subdivision, as defined in Section 16.08.320, that shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words “vesting tentative map” at the time it is filed in accordance with Section 16.24.050 and is thereafter processed in accordance with the provisions hereof.

    All other definitions set forth in this title are applicable. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.24.040 Application.
    A.  This title shall apply to all developments. Whenever a provision of the Subdivision Map Act, as implemented and supplemented by this chapter, requires the filing of a tentative map or tentative parcel map for a residential development, a vesting tentative map may instead by filed, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

    B.   If a subdivider does not seek the rights conferred by the vesting tentative map statute, the filing of a vesting tentative map shall not be a prerequisite to any approval for any proposed subdivision, permit for construction, or work preparatory to construction. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.24.050 Filing and processing.
    A vesting tentative map shall be filed in the same form and have the same contents, accompanying data and reports and shall be processed in the same manner as set forth in this chapter for a tentative map except as hereinafter provided:

    A.  At the time a vesting tentative map is filed, it shall have printed conspicuously on its face the “vesting tentative map”;

    B.   At the time a vesting tentative map is filed a subdivider shall also supply the following information:

    1.   A statement that the vesting tentative map is consistent with the current zoning of the land, or that an application has been filed for rezoning or prezoning that land which will be processed concurrently with the vesting tentative map. If a planned development permit or use permit is required by the zoning ordinance, said permit shall be processed prior to or concurrently with the vesting tentative map,

    2.   A tentative utility plan indicating the location of all public utilities and facilities including, but not limited to, facilities for water, sewer, electric, gas, cable television and street lighting to be installed to serve the subdivision and any facilities which currently exist within the boundary of the subdivision,

    3.   Preliminary grading plans required by the city’s grading ordinance,

    4.   Location of proposed sewer, water, storm drain and road details with appropriate calculations and master plan studies,

    5.   Geotechnical analysis of the subdivision land,

    6.   Soils analysis of the subdivision land,

    7.   Floodplain information including the amount of flooding that may occur during a storm with a frequency of once in one hundred years, and mitigation measures necessary to protect the subdivision from flooding during a storm with a frequency of once in one hundred years,

    8.   Noise analysis with suggested mitigation measures,

    9.   Required approval letters from other agencies where applicable,

    10. Traffic studies including, but not limited to, existing and future traffic, geometrics, number of lanes, level of service, and recommended pavement sections,

    11. When required by the community development director or city engineer, feasibility studies, life cycle studies, or other future impact studies,

    12. Any other studies required because of the peculiarities of the subdivision to assist the department of community development in making the determination required by Section 21080.1 of the Public Resources Code;

    C.   The subdivider as part of the vesting tentative map application may provide substantial documentation as to why a particular submittal requirement in subsection (B) is inapplicable and shall be waived. The director of community development and city engineer shall make a decision as to the request;

    All vesting tentative map submittals must be accurate and complete, and must satisfy all requirements of the department of community development and the department of public works. Failure to comply with the above shall be cause for rejection. (Ord. 97-4 § 2 Exh. 1 (part); Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.24.060 Fees.
    A fee, as established by the city council, shall be required with all vesting tentative map applications. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.24.070 Expiration.
    The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall expire at the end of the same time period, and shall be subject to the same extensions, established by Section 16.20.070 for the expiration of the approval or conditional approval of a tentative map. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.24.080 Rights of a vesting tentative map.
    A.  The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies, and standards described in Section 66474.2 of the Subdivision Map Act. However, if Section 66474.2 is repealed, the approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies, and standards in effect at the time the vesting tentative map is approved or conditionally approved.

    B.   Notwithstanding subsection (A), a permit, approval, extension, or entitlement may be conditioned or denied if any of the following are determined:

    1.   A failure to do so would place the residents of the subdivision or the immediate community, or both in a condition dangerous to their health or safety, or both.

    2.   The condition or denial is required, in order to comply with state or federal law.

    3.   The condition or denial is required if there is a boundary shift which neither the developer nor the city has control over, and such shift would result in damages to the developer or surrounding lands.

    C.   The rights referred to herein shall expire if a final map is not approved prior to the expiration of the vesting tentative map as provided in Section 16.20.070. If the final map is approved, these rights shall last for the following periods of time:

    1.   An initial time period of one year beyond the recording of the final map or parcel map. Where several final maps are recorded on various phases of a project covered by a single vesting tentative map, this one year initial time period shall begin for each phase when the final map for that phase is recorded.

    2.   The one year initial time period set forth in subdivision (1) of this subsection shall be automatically extended by any time used for processing a complete application for a grading permit, if one is required, or for any required design or architectural review, if such processing exceeds thirty days from the date a complete application is filed.

    3.   A subdivider may apply to the planning commission for a one year extension at any time before the initial time period set forth in subdivision (1) of this subsection expires. If the extension is denied, the subdivider may appeal that denial to the city council within fifteen days in accordance with Section 16.20.060. The city council shall deny a request for extension unless it finds that changes to any city ordinances, policies, or standards that were adopted subsequent to the time of filing the vesting tentative map are not necessary to protect the public health, safety or welfare.

    4.   If the subdivider submits a complete application for a building permit during the periods of time specified in subsections (C)(1) through (3), the rights referred to herein shall continue until the expiration of that permit, or any extension of that permit. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.24.090 Amendment to approved vesting tentative map.
    Amendments to the approved or conditionally approved vesting tentative map shall be made in accordance with Section 16.20.080 or Section 16.32.080, as the case may be. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.24.100 Development inconsistent with zoning—Conditional approval.
    A.  Whenever a subdivider files a vesting tentative map for a subdivision whose intended development is inconsistent with the zoning ordinance in existence at that time, that inconsistency shall be noted on the map. The city shall deny such a vesting tentative map if the city finds the vesting tentative map to be inconsistent with the zoning of the property, or proposed zoning ordinance which is being processed concurrently with the vesting tentative map. If a change in the zoning ordinance or issuance of a PUD permit or use permit is obtained, the approved or conditionally approved vesting tentative map shall, notwithstanding Section 66498.1(b), confer the vested right to proceed with the development in substantial compliance with the change in the zoning ordinance, planned development permit or use permit and the map as approved.

    B.   The rights conferred by this section shall be for the time periods set forth in Section 66452.6 (g)(h). (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.24.110 Taxes, fees and charges.
    The subdivider shall pay all applicable taxes, fees and charges in the amount required at the time such taxes, fees and charges become due and payable. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.24.120 Applications inconsistent with current policies.
    Notwithstanding any provision of this title to the contrary, a property owner or designee may seek approvals or permits for development which depart from the ordinances, policies, and standards described in Section 66498.1(b), and the city may grant these approvals or issue these permits to the extent that the departures are authorized under this chapter, this code, the general plan and other applicable law. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

Chapter 16.28 FINAL MAPS
16.28.010 Purpose and applicability.
    The purpose of this section is to establish the form, content, regulations, standards and procedures for final subdivision maps. This chapter is applicable to all approved or conditionally approved vesting tentative maps that have not expired. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.28.020 Form and standards for preparation.
    A.  An accurate and complete survey of the land to be subdivided shall be prepared by or under the direction of a registered civil engineer authorized by Section 8731 of the Business and Professions Code of the state to practice land surveying or a licensed land surveyor and shall be based upon an actual field survey.

    B.   The final map shall be legibly drawn, printed or reproduced by a process guaranteeing a permanent record in black on polyester film. Certificates, affidavits, and acknowledgments may be legibly stamped or printed upon the map with opaque ink. If ink is used on polyester base film, the ink surface shall be coated with a suitable substance to assure permanent legibility.

    C.   The size of each sheet shall be eighteen inches by twenty-six inches. A marginal line shall be drawn completely around each sheet, leaving an entirely blank margin of one inch. The scale of the map should be not less than one inch equals one hundred feet or as may be necessary to show all details clearly, and enough sheets shall be used to accomplish this end. The particular number of the sheet and the total number of sheets comprising the map shall be stated on each of the sheets, and its relation to each adjoining sheet shall be clearly shown.

    D.  All survey and mathematical information and data necessary to locate all monuments and to locate and retrace any and all interior and exterior boundary lines appearing thereon shall be shown, including bearings and distances of straight lines, radius, central angle and arc length for all curves, and any information which may be necessary to determine the location of the centers of curves and ties to existing monuments used to establish the subdivision boundaries.

    E.   If the map includes a “designated remainder” parcel, and the gross area of the “designated remainder” parcel or similar parcel is five acres or more, that remainder parcel need not be shown on the map and its location need not be indicated as a matter of survey, but only by deed reference to the existing boundaries of the remainder parcel. A parcel designated “not a part” shall be deemed to be a “designated remainder” for purposes of this section. (Ord. 97-4 § 2 Exh. 1 (part); Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.28.030 Contents.
    The contents of the final map shall conform to the Subdivision Map Act as follows:

    A.  Boundary. The boundary of the subdivision shall be designated by a heavy black line in such a manner as not to obliterate figures or other data.

    B.   Title. Each sheet shall have a title showing the subdivision number and name and the location of the property being subdivided with reference to maps which have been previously recorded, or by reference to the plat of a United States Survey. The following words shall appear in the title, “City of West Sacramento, County of Yolo, State of California.”

    C.   Certificates and Acknowledgements. All certificates and acknowledgments shall be made as required by Article 2, Chapter 2 (Sections 66433 et seq.) of the Subdivision Map Act and shall appear only once on the cover sheet.

    D.  Scale, North Point and Basis of Bearings. There must appear on each map sheet the scale, the north arrow, the basis of bearings, and a legend.

    E.   Linear, Angular and Radial Data. Sufficient linear, angular and radial data shall be shown to determine the bearings and lengths of monument lines, street center lines, the boundary lines of the subdivision, the boundary lines on every lot and parcel which is a part of the subdivision, and ties to existing monuments used to establish the boundary. Arc length, radius and total central angle for all curves, and radial bearings as additional information for nontangent curves of all curves shall be shown on the map.

    F.   Monuments. The location and description of all existing and proposed monuments shall be shown. Standard city monuments shall be set at, or on city engineer approved offsets to the following locations:

    1.   The intersection of street center lines;

    2.   Beginning and end of curves or intersection of tangents on center lines;

    3.   At other locations as may be required by the city engineer.

    G.  Lot Numbers. Lot numbers shall begin with the number one in each subdivision and shall continue consecutively with no omissions or duplications except where contiguous lands, under the same ownership, are being subdivided in successive units, in which event lot numbers may begin with the next consecutive number following the last number in the preceding unit. Each lot shall be shown entirely on one sheet of the final map, unless otherwise approved by the city engineer.

    H.  Adjoining Properties. The adjoining corners of all adjoining subdivisions shall be identified by subdivision number, or name when not identified by official number, and referenced to the book and page of the filed map showing such subdivision; and if no subdivision is adjacent, then by the name of the owner and reference to the recorded deed by book and page number for the last record owner.

    I.    City Boundaries. City boundaries which cross or join the subdivision shall be clearly designated.

    J.    Street Names. The names of all streets, alleys, or highways within or adjoining the subdivision shall be shown.

    K.  Easements and Dedications.

    1.   Easements and dedications for roads or streets, paths, alleys, utilities, local transit facilities, stormwater drainage, sanitary sewers or other public use as may be required, shall be dedicated to the public for acceptance by the city or other public agency, and the use shall be specified on the map.

    2.   All easements of record shall be shown on the map, together with the name of the grantee and sufficient recording data to identify the conveyance, (e.g., recorder’s serial number and date, or book and page of official records).

    3.   Easements not disclosed by the records in the office of the county recorder and found by the surveyor or engineer to be existing, shall be specifically designated on the map, identifying the apparent dominant tenements for which the easement was created.

    4.   The sidelines of all easements of record shall be shown by dashed lines on the final map with the widths, lengths and bearings of record. The width and location of all easements shall be approved by the city engineer. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.28.040 Additional data.
    The city engineer may require additional data to be filed or recorded simultaneously with a final map. The additional information shall be in the form of a separate document or an additional map sheet which shall indicate its relationship to the final or parcel map, and shall contain a statement that the additional information is for informational purposes, describing conditions as of the date of filing, and is not intended to affect record title interest. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.28.050 Submittal for city approval.
    The subdivider shall submit prints of the final map to the city engineer for checking. The preliminary prints shall be accompanied by the following data, plans, reports, and documents in a form as approved by the city engineer:

    A.  Improvement Plans. Improvement plans as required by Section 16.44.070;

    B.   Soils Report. A soils report prepared in accordance with Chapter 70 (Excavation and Grading) of the Uniform Building Code;

    C.   Title Report. A title report showing the legal owners at the time of submittal of the final map;

    D.  Tax Certificate. A certificate from the county tax collector stating that all taxes due have been paid or that a tax bond or other adequate form of security assuring payment of all taxes which are a lien but not yet payable has been filed with the county prior to recordation of the final map;

    E.   Deeds for Easements or Rights-of-Way. Deeds for off-site easements or rights-of-way required for road or drainage purposes which have not been dedicated on the final map. Written evidence acceptable to the city in the form of rights-of-entry or permanent easements across private property outside of the subdivision permitting or granting access to perform necessary construction work and permitting the maintenance of the facility;

    F.   Traverse Closures. Traverse closures for the boundary blocks, lots, easements, street center lines and monument lines;

    G.  Hydrologic and Hydraulic Calculations. Complete hydrologic and hydraulic calculations of all stormdrains and flood flow;

    H.  Governing Documents. The submittal of the final map or parcel map for a common interest development within the meaning of Section 1350 et seq., of the state Civil Code shall include the proposed declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions containing the provisions described in Section 1353 of the Civil Code, and all other governing documents for the subdivision as are appropriate pursuant to Section 1363 of the Civil Code. The submittal of the final map or parcel map for all subdivisions other than a common interest development shall include any declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions proposed in connection therewith. All documents shall be subject to review and approval by the city engineer and city attorney;

    I.    Guarantee of Title. A guarantee of title, in form acceptable to the city engineer and city attorney, shall be issued by a competent title company to and for the benefit and protection of the city and shall be continued complete up to the instant of recording of the final map, guaranteeing that the names of all persons whose consent is necessary to pass a clear title to the land being subdivided, and all public easements being offered for dedication, and all acknowledgments hereto, appear on the proper certificates and are correctly shown on the map, both as to consents as to the making thereof and affidavits of dedication where necessary prior to recordation of the final map;

    J.    Improvement Agreement. In the event sewer, water, drainage, grading, paving, or other improvements required pursuant to Chapter 16.44 have not been completed prior to the filing of the final map, an agreement in accordance with the requirements of Section 16.44.080 shall be filed for the improvement thereof. The subdivider shall secure the performance of the agreement in accordance with the requirements of Section 16.44.080;

    K.  Liability and Insurance. The improvement agreement shall obligate the subdivider to hold the city and its officer, agents and employees harmless from any liability for damages or claims for damages for personal injury or death which arise from the operations of the subdivider and/or the subdivider’s subcontractors in connection with the subdivision. Evidence of insurance as required by the city indicating the amount of insurance the subdivider carries for the subdivider’s own liability for damages or claims for damages for personal injury or death which arise from the operations of the subdivider or his or her subcontractors in connection with the subdivision. A certificate of insurance shall be provided which names the city as an additional insured. The evidence and certificate of insurance required by this subsection shall be subject to prior review and approval by the city engineer and city attorney;

    L.   Copy of the approved or conditionally approved tentative map and the final conditions of approval;

    M.  Traverse data consisting of an ASCII file containing traverse data, i.e., bearings, distances, northings and eastings of boundaries, street centerlines, lot lines, easements, etc., as defined in the standards and specifications set forth in the document titled “Specifications for the Digital Submission of Cadastral Surveys” prepared by the city of West Sacramento community development department;

    N.  Graphics Representation. A graphics representation of required elements of the cadastral map as defined in Specifications for the Digital Submission of Cadastral Surveys prepared by the city of West Sacramento community development department. (Ord. 93-5 § 2(B); Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.28.060 Review by city engineer.
    The city engineer shall review the final map and any other required information and the subdivider shall make corrections and/or additions until acceptable to the city engineer. The land surveying functions of the city engineer may be performed by the city surveyor. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.28.070 Approval by city engineer.
    The subdivider shall submit to the city engineer the original tracing of the map and any duplicates as per city requirements, corrected to its final form and signed by all parties required to execute the certificates, statements and acknowledgements on the map. Original signatures shall appear on the original drawing. Upon receipt of all required certificates and submittals, the city engineer shall sign the appropriate statements and transmit the original map to the city clerk. The city surveyor shall also sign the appropriate statement if the land surveying functions of the city engineer are performed by the city surveyor. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.28.080 Approval by city council.
    A.  The final map approved by the city engineer as complying with the approved or conditionally approved tentative map shall be filed with the city council for approval after all required statements have been signed. The date the map shall be deemed filed with the city council is the date on which the city clerk receives the map. Before approving the final map, the city council shall consider approval of the subdivision improvement agreement in accordance with the requirements of Section 16.44.070.

    B.   If the subdivision improvement agreement and final map are approved by the city council, it shall instruct the city clerk to execute the agreement on behalf of the city. At the time the city council approves the final map, it shall also accept or reject any offer of dedication. The city clerk shall certify on the final map the action by the city council.

    C.   The city may accept any dedications lying outside the subdivision boundary which require a separate grant deed. The acceptance shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder.

    D.  If the subdivision improvement agreement and/or final map is unacceptable, the city council shall make its recommended corrections, instruct the city engineer to draft a new agreement and/or revise the final map and defer approval until an acceptable agreement and/or final map has been resubmitted.

    E.   The city council shall not postpone or refuse approval of a final map because the subdivider has failed to meet a tentative map condition requiring construction or installation of off-site improvements on land which neither the subdivider nor the city has sufficient title or interest to permit the improvements to be made. In such a case, the city shall follow the procedure according to Section 16.44.040(J). (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.28.090 Denial by city council.
    The city council shall not deny approval of the final map if the city has previously approved a tentative map for the proposed subdivision and if the city council finds that the final map is in compliance with the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act, this chapter, and the tentative map and all conditions thereof. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.28.100 Filing with the county recorder.
    Upon approval of the final map by the city council, the city clerk shall execute the appropriate statement on the statement sheet and shall, subject to the provisions of Section 66464 of the Subdivision Map Act, transmit the map, or have an authorized agent forward the map, to the county recorder. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.28.110 Multiple final maps on one tentative map.
    Multiple final maps relating to an approved or conditionally approved tentative map may be filed prior to expiration of the tentative map if the subdivider, at the time the tentative map application is filed, notifies the community development director in writing of the subdivider’s intention to file multiple final maps on the tentative map. In providing the notice, the subdivider shall not be required to define the number or configuration of the proposed multiple maps. The planning commission shall approve the sequence of map approvals. After filing of the tentative map application, the community development director, the city engineer and the subdivider shall concur in the filing of multiple final maps.

    The filing of a final map on a portion of an approved or conditionally approved tentative map shall not invalidate any part of the tentative map. Each final map which constitutes a part, or unit of the approved or conditionally approved tentative map shall have a separate subdivision unit number. The subdivision improvement agreement executed by the subdivider shall provide for construction of improvements as required to constitute a logical and orderly development of the whole subdivision. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

Chapter 16.30 DIGITAL SUBMISSION OF FINAL AND PARCEL MAPS
16.30.010 Coordinated positions of new tracts.
    The city shall provide coordinated positions in the vicinity of each new tract or parcel map by tying the section, quarter section, rancho, or other appropriate land net corners or road centerlines, on an approximate one-half-mile grid convenient for proper coordinate tie-in of such map boundaries to the existing monuments of, and where possible, intervisible with, the local control network, and by calculating and adjusting coordinates for these corners using the California Coordinate System based on the North American Datum of 1983. (Ord. 93-5 § 2(C))

 

16.30.020 Control monument data—Filing procedure—Availability to public.
    All data pertaining to these control monuments shall be filed in accordance with the requirements of the Land Surveyor’s Act, and these records shall be indexed and made readily available to the general public. (Ord. 93-5 § 2(C))

 

16.30.030 Showing ties to control monuments required.
    The city shall require the surveyor or engineer to show on the final map or parcel map those ties made by the surveyor or engineer to such control monuments in accordance with Division 8, Chapter 1, Section 8813 of the Public Resources Code, and that coordinates published by the city for those control monuments be shown on the map. (Ord. 93-5 § 2(C))

 

16.30.040 Showing prescribed information on record of survey permitted.
    The surveyor or engineer may be permitted to show on any record of survey submitted for filing with the county of Yolo the information prescribed above, when the normal course of survey activities include ties made to points for which coordinates have been provided or accepted into the control network by the city, and when such information may be shown pursuant to the requirements of the California Public Resources Code. (Ord. 93-5 § 2(C))

 

16.30.050 Tie-in of map boundaries to NAD 83 required.
    The city shall require the surveyor or engineer preparing the final or parcel map to tie the boundary of said map into the California Coordinate System (NAD 83) in at last two locations, preferably on opposite sides of the boundary or as mutually agreed to by the surveyor or engineer and the city engineer. (Ord. 93-5 § 2(C))

 

16.30.060 Map basis of bearings.
    The basis of bearings of the final or parcel map shall be the California Coordinate System (NAD 83) as established by the use of existing monuments, Global Positioning System surveys (GPS), or by astronomic observation. (Ord. 93-5 § 2(C))

 

16.30.070 Requirements waived when.
    In the event that the city is unable to provide the surveyor or engineer with coordinated monuments, as described in Section 16.30.010, within thirty days of a written and city-approved request filed by the surveyor or engineer relating to any map which is or will be processed by the city engineer, the forgoing requirements would be waived. However, none of the above will preclude a person, authorized to practice land surveying within the state of California, from performing the necessary work to meet the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 93-5 § 2(C))

 

16.30.080 Digital graphics file—Submittal required when.
    The city shall require the surveyor or engineer preparing a final or parcel map to submit to the city, in addition to the material concurrently being submitted for map checking and recordation purposes, a digital graphics file containing the boundary, street centerline, right-of-way and lot/parcel line data necessary to facilitate transferring of the file into the city mapping system if the surveyor or engineer has the capability to provide such files. If the surveyor or engineer does not have this capability, the city will create such a graphics file for entry into its system and recover the cost through the map-check process. (Ord. 93-5 § 2(C))

 

16.30.090 Appeal.
    In the event the surveyor or engineer submitting a parcel map to the city feels that compliance with the requirements of this chapter will create a hardship on him or her or on the client, he or she may appeal to the city engineer and the community development director to waive them. If this appeal request is denied, the surveyor or engineer may further appeal the decision to the city council. (Ord. 93-5 § 2(C))

 

16.30.100 Supplemental provisions.
    The provisions of this chapter shall be supplemented by the standards and specifications as set forth in the document titled Specifications for the Digital Submission of Cadastral Surveys prepared by the city of West Sacramento community development department, and amended from time to time. (Ord. 93-5 § 2(C))

Chapter 16.32 TENTATIVE PARCEL MAPS
16.32.010 Purpose.
    This chapter sets forth the form, contents, submittal and approval of tentative parcel maps. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.32.020 Form and contents.
    The tentative parcel map shall be prepared in a manner acceptable to the community development department and shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. The form and contents shall comply and be consistent with the requirements of Section 16.20.020 unless otherwise approved by the director of community development and the city engineer. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.32.030 Submittal to the community development department.
    Any person making a division of land for which a parcel map is required shall, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, file the tentative parcel map, together with any deposits toward plan checking and review fees, to the community development department. The community development director shall determine the number of copies to be delivered. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.32.040 Vesting tentative parcel map.
    When a parcel map is required, the subdivider may submit to the community development department, an application for a vesting tentative parcel map to obtain the rights conferred under Chapter 16.24. Such application shall meet and follow all applicable regulations. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.32.050 Planning commission review.
    A.  Upon receipt of a tentative parcel map application that is determined by the community development department to be complete, the community development department shall prepare a report and set the matter for a public hearing before the planning commission in accordance with Section 16.20.030(C).

    B.   The planning commission shall approve, conditionally approve or deny the tentative parcel map application and make the required reporting and findings in accordance with Sections 16.20.030(D), 16.20.040 and 16.20.050. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.32.060 Appeal of planning commission action.
    Appeals of the planning commission action with respect to the tentative parcel map shall be made to the city council in accordance with Section 16.20.060. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.32.070 Expiration of tentative parcel map approvals.
    An approved or conditionally approved tentative map shall expire thirty-six months after its approval in accordance with the provisions of Section 16.20.070. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.32.080 Amendments to approved or conditionally approved map.
    Any amendment to an approved or conditionally approved tentative parcel map shall be made in accordance with Section 16.20.080(B). (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.32.090 Parcel map waiver.
    The subdivider may request, at the time of filing a tentative parcel map, that the planning commission waive the requirements for the recordation of a final parcel map when the land being divided consists of a lot or parcels shown on a recorded parcel map or final map and the full street improvements have been constructed and monumentation is evident, or where each of the lots have a gross acreage of forty acres or more or each of which is a quarter-quarter section or larger. The planning commission may grant the waiver and will issue a certificate of compliance if:

    A. The subdivider files an application with the city engineer, including any fees required, verifying the existence of monumentation and the existence of full street improvements;

    B.   The application contains a legal description for each of the lots to be created; and

    C.   The planning commission finds that the proposed division of land complies with requirements of this title and the Subdivision Map Act. (Ord. 91- 9 § 3)

 

16.32.100 Fees.
    A fee, as established by city council resolution, shall be required on all tentative parcel map applications. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

Chapter 16.36 PARCEL MAPS
16.36.010 Purpose.
    This chapter sets forth the form, contents, submittal, approval, and filing of parcel maps. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.36.020 Survey required.
    Where a parcel map is required, such map shall be based upon a field survey made in conformity with the Land Surveyors Act or be compiled from recorded or filed data when sufficient survey information exists on filed maps to locate and retrace the exterior boundary lines of the parcel map if the location of at least one of these boundary lines can be established from an existing monumented line. All monuments, property lines, center lines of streets, alleys and easements adjoining or within the subdivision shall be tied into the survey. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.36.030 Form and contents.
    The form and contents of the parcel map shall conform to the requirements in Sections 16.28.020 through 16.28.040. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.36.040 Preliminary submittal.
    The subdivider shall submit prints of the parcel map to the city engineer for checking. The preliminary prints shall be accompanied by copies of the data, plans, reports and documents as required by Section 16.28.050. The city engineer and community development director may waive any of the requirements if the location and nature of the proposed map does not justify compliance with Sections 16.28.020 through 16.28.040. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.36.050 Review and approval by city engineer.
    The subdivider shall submit to the city engineer the original tracing of the map and any duplicates as per city requirements, corrected to its final form and signed by all parties required to execute the certificates, statements and acknowledgements on the map. Original signatures shall appear on the original drawing. Upon receipt of all required certificates and submittals, the city engineer shall sign the appropriate statements and transmit the original map to the city clerk. The city surveyor shall also sign the appropriate statement if the land surveying functions of the city engineer are performed by the city surveyor. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

Chapter 16.40 DEDICATIONS AND RESERVATIONS
16.40.010 Title and purpose.
    The purpose of this section is to set the standards and procedures for dedications, reservations and development fees. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.40.020 Dedication of streets, alleys and other public rights-of-way or easements.
    As a condition of approval of a tentative map, the subdivider shall dedicate or make an irrevocable offer of dedication of all portions of land within the subdivision that are needed for streets and alleys, including access rights and abutters’ rights, drainage, public greenways, bicycle paths, trails, scenic easements, public utility easements, and other public easements. In addition, the subdivider shall improve or agree to improve all streets and alleys, including access rights and abutters’ rights, drainage, public greenways, bicycle paths, trails, public utility easements, and other public easements. Improvements shall be made in accordance with Chapter 16.44. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.40.030 Park land dedication.
    A.  General. This section is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by the Map Act and Ordinance 90-7 and Ordinance 93-23 and is for the purpose of providing such additional park and recreational facilities and open space as appropriate pursuant to the general plan of the city. The park and recreational facilities for which dedication of land and/or payment of a fee is required by this article are in accordance with the policies, principles and standards for park and recreational facilities contained in the city general plan.

    B.   Requirements. As a condition of approval of a tentative map, the subdivider shall dedicate land, pay a fee in lieu thereof, or both, at the option of the city, for park or recreational purposes at the time and according to the standards and formula contained in Chapter 16.70. The land dedicated or the fees paid, or both, shall be used for community and neighborhood parks and facilities in such a manner that the locations of such parks and facilities bear a reasonable relationship to the use of the park and recreational facilities by the future inhabitants of the subdivision generating such dedication or fees or both.

    C.   General Standard. It is found and determined that the public interest, convenience, health, safety and welfare require that five acres of property for each one thousand persons residing within the city be devoted to local park and recreational purposes.

    D.  Standards and Formula for Dedication of Land. Where a park or recreational facility has been designated in the general plan and is to be located in whole or in part within the proposed subdivision, the subdivider shall dedicate land for park and recreation facilities sufficient in size and topography to meet that purpose. The amount of land to be provided shall be determined pursuant to Chapter 16.70.

    Lands to be dedicated or reserved for park and/or recreational purposes shall be suitable in the opinion of the community development department and the director of parks and community services in location, topography, environmental characteristics and development potential as related to the intended use.

    E.   Procedure.

    1.   At the time of the approval or conditional approval of the tentative map, the planning commission shall determine, after a report and recommendation from the director of parks and community services, whether land in-lieu fees, or a combination of land and fees, shall be dedicated and/or paid by the subdivider.

    2.   The planning commission may approve, modify, or disapprove the recommendation of the director of parks and community services; provided, however, any modification of the proposed recommended condition not previously considered by the director of parks and community services shall first be referred back to the director of parks and community services for a report and further recommendation. The director of parks and community services shall report back to the planning commission within thirty days. After the receipt and consideration of the report, or after thirty days have passed in the event no report is received, the planning commission may adopt the condition.

    3.   At the time of the recording of the final map or parcel map, the subdivider shall dedicate the land and/or pay the fees as determined by the city.

    4.   Open space covenants, conditions and restrictions for private park or recreational facilities shall be submitted to the city prior to approval of the final map or parcel map and, if approved, shall be recorded concurrently with the final map or parcel map.

    F.   Not Applicable to Certain Subdivisions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the following:

    1.   Subdivisions containing four or fewer parcels and not used for residential purposes. However, a condition may be placed on the approval of such parcel map that if a building permit is requested for construction of a residential structure or structures on one or more of the parcels, the fee pursuant to this section may be required to be paid by the owner of such parcel as a condition to the issuance of such permit.

    2.   Commercial or industrial subdivisions.

    3.   Condominium projects or stock cooperatives which consist of the subdivision of airspace in an existing apartment building which is more than five years old when no new dwelling units are added. (Ord. 97-4 § 2 Exh. 1 (part); Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.40.040 School site dedication.
    A.  General. As a condition of approval of a tentative map, a subdivider who develops or completes the development of one or more subdivision within the Washington Unified School District shall dedicate to the school district such lands as the city shall deem to be necessary for the purpose of constructing thereon elementary schools necessary to assure the residents of the subdivision adequate public school service.

    B.   Procedure. The requirement of dedication shall be imposed at the time of approval of the tentative map. If within thirty days after the requirement of dedication is imposed by the school district does not offer to enter into a binding commitment with the subdivider to accept the dedication, the requirement shall be automatically terminated. The required dedication may be made any time before, concurrently, with, or up to sixty days after the filing of the final map or parcel map on any portion of the subdivision.

    C.   Payments to Subdivider for School Site Dedication. The school district shall, if it accepts the dedication, repay to the subdivider or his or her successors the original cost to the subdivider of the dedicated land, plus a sum equal to the total of the following amounts:

    1.   The cost of any improvements to the dedicated land since acquisition by the subdivider;

    2.   The taxes assessed against the dedicated land from the date of the school district’s offer to enter into the binding commitment to accept the dedication;

    3.   Any other costs incurred by the subdivider in maintenance of such dedicated land, including interest costs incurred on any loan covering such land.

    D.  Exemptions. The provisions of this section shall not be applicable to a subdivider who has owned the land being subdivided for more than ten years prior to the filing of the tentative map. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.40.050 Interim classroom facilities.
    A.  Authority, Purpose and Intent.

    1.   This section is enacted pursuant to the authority of Section 659070 et seq., of the Government Code for the purpose of providing interim school facilities to alleviate conditions of overcrowding caused by new residential development.

    B.   Definitions. In addition to the definitions set forth in Sections 65973 and 65980 of the Government Code, the following definitions shall apply to this section:

    1.   “Board” means the board of trustees of the district.

    2.   “Declaration of impact” means a statement adopted by the board, and forwarded to the city council, declaring the existence of an impacted school or schools, in accordance with the findings and other requirements of Section 65971 of the Government Code. The declaration of impact may include the schedule required by Section 75976 of the Government Code.

    C.   Action by Board. The board may, from time to time, adopt a declaration of impact and file the same with the city clerk for consideration by the city council.

    D.  Action by City Council. Upon receipt of a declaration of impact from the board and the schedule required by Section 65976 of the Government Code, the city council shall, if it concurs in the findings set forth in the declaration of impact, withhold approval of, or order the appropriate office, employee or commission within the city to withhold approval of, new residential development within the attendance area of the impacted school or schools pending compliance with subsection (3).

    E.   Mitigation Measures.

    1.   The city council shall require, as a condition of approval of new development within the attendance area of an impacted school, either the dedication of land, the payment of fees in lieu thereof, or a combination of both, in accordance with the provision of Section 65974 of the Government Code.

    2.   The decision concerning whether to require the dedication of land, payment of fees or an appropriate combination shall be determined after consultation with the board concerning the needs of the district as they relate to the impacted school or schools.

    3.   The amount of any fee shall be in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 4.9 (commencing with Section 65995) of the Government Code, shall be prescribed by resolution of the city council, and shall be collected at the time of issuance of a building permit.

    F.   Use of Fees and Land-Accounting.

    1.   The district shall use the land and/or fees solely to alleviate the conditions of overcrowding within the affected attendance area.

    2.   The district shall provide to the city council the report required by Section 65978 of the Government Code.

    G.  City’s Right to Disapprove Development or Require Other Fees. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the right of the city to disapprove new residential development for any lawful reason, including, but not limited to, the impact that such development may have on a school or schools within the district which cannot be alleviated by the provision of this section. (Ord. 03-21 § 1 (part); Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.40.060 Permanent classroom facilities.
    The city may not require, as a condition of approval of a tentative map for a residential subdivision, dedication of land or payment of in-lieu fees or a combination of both in order to provide permanent facilities for school purposes. Nothing in this chapter is intended as a limitation on the district’s authority to directly levy a fee, charge, dedication or other form of requirement against any development project, pursuant to Section 53080 of the Government Code, in order to provide temporary and permanent facilities for school purposes. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.40.070 Reservations.
    A.  General. As a condition of approval of a tentative map, the subdivider shall reserve sites, appropriate in area and location, for parks, recreational facilities, fire stations, libraries or other public uses according to the standards and formula contained in this section.

    B.   Standards for Reservation of Land. Where a park, recreational facility, fire station, library, or other public use is shown on the general plan or an adopted specific plan, the subdivider may be required by the city to reserve sites as so determined by the city in accordance with the policies and standards contained in the general plan or the adopted specific plan. The reserved area must be of such size and shape as to permit the balance of the property within which the reservation is located to develop in an orderly and efficient manner. The amount of land to be reserved shall not make development of the remaining land held by the subdivider economically infeasible. The reserved area shall be consistent with the general plan or the adopted specific plan and shall be in such multiples of streets and parcels as to permit an efficient division of the reserved area in the event that it is not acquired within the prescribed period.

    C.   Procedure. The public agency for whose benefit an area has been reserved shall at the time of approval of the final map or parcel map, enter into a binding agreement to acquire such reserved area within two years after the completion and acceptance of all improvements, unless the period of time is extended by mutual agreement.

    D.  Payment to Subdivider. The purchase price for the reserved area shall be the market value thereof at the time of the filing of the tentative map plus the taxes against the reserved area from the date of the reservation and any other costs incurred by the subdivider in the maintenance of the reserved area, including interest costs incurred by the subdivider in the maintenance of the reserved area, including interest costs incurred on any loan covering the reserved area.

    E.   Termination. If the public agency for whose benefit an area has been reserved does not enter into a binding agreement in accordance with this section, the reservation of the area shall automatically terminate. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.40.080 Local transit facilities.
    As a condition of approval of a tentative map, the subdivider shall dedicate, or make an irrevocable offer of dedication, of land within the subdivision for local transit facilities such as shelters, benches, bus turnouts, landing pads, and similar items which directly benefit the residents of the subdivision, if (a) the subdivision as shown on the tentative map has the potential for two hundred dwelling units or more if developed to the maximum density shown on the general plan or contains one hundred acres or more, and (b) if the city finds that transit services are or will, within a reasonable time period, be made available to the subdivision.

    The provisions of this section do not apply to condominium projects or stock cooperatives which consist of the subdivision of airspace in an existing apartment building which is more than five years old when no new dwelling units are added. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.40.090 Solar access easements.
    As a condition of approval of a tentative map, there may be imposed, in accordance with the provision of Section 66475.3 of the Map Act, a requirement that the subdivider dedicate easements for the purpose of assuring that each parcel or unit in the subdivision shall have the right to receive sunlight across adjacent parcels or units in the subdivision for any solar energy system, as defined in Section 801.5 of the state Civil Code. In establishing such easements, consideration shall be given to feasibility, contour, configuration of the parcel to be divided, and cost. Required easements shall not result in reducing allowable densities or the percentage of a lot which may be occupied by a building or a structure under applicable planning and zoning in force at the time such tentative map is filed.

    At the time of tentative map approval, the planning commission shall specify the following:

    A.  The standards for determining the exact dimensions and location of such easements;

    B.   Any restrictions on vegetation, buildings and other objects which would obstruct the passage of sunlight through the easement;

    C.   The terms or conditions, if any, under which an easement may be revised or terminated.

    The foregoing provisions of this section do not apply to condominium projects which consist of the subdivision of airspace in an existing building where no new structures are added. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.40.100 Drainage fees.
    Prior to the filing of any final map or parcel map, the subdivider shall pay or cause to be paid any fees for defraying the actual or estimated cost of constructing planned drainage and sanitary sewer facilities for drainage and sanitary sewer areas, after the proceedings and other provisions of Section 66483 have been complied with. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.40.110 Bridges and major thoroughfares.
    The purpose of this section is to make provision for assessing and collecting fees as a condition of approval of a final map or parcel map or as a condition of issuing a building permit for the purpose of defraying the actual or estimated costs of constructing bridges or major thoroughfares pursuant to Section 66484.

    Prior to the filing of a final map or parcel map, or prior to the issuance of a building permit, the subdivider shall pay or cause to be paid any fees for defraying the actual or estimated cost of constructing planned bridges or major thoroughfares, after the proceedings and other provisions of Section 66484 have been complied with. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

Chapter 16.44 IMPROVEMENTS
16.44.010 Purpose.
    The purpose of this chapter is to define, specify, regulate and control the design and improvement of public works facilities, both on-site and off-site, and other construction requirements imposed as conditions of acceptance, or the approval or conditional approval of subdivision maps, parcel maps, boundary adjustments and reversions to acreage wherein public or private improvements, construction, and improvement or construction plans are required as a condition prior to city approval. (Ord. 97-4 § 2 Exh. 1; Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.44.020 City standards and specifications.
    A.  The subdivider shall design and construct all required improvements on-site and off-site in accordance with the city standard specifications and other approved standards as provided by this chapter and as adopted by the city. Subject to Subdivision Map Act, the city engineer may authorize an exception to the construction standards in this chapter.

    B.   A decision or interpretation of the city engineer regarding the specifications, details or design of improvements is final.

    C.   No final map may be presented to the council or parcel map to the city engineer for approval until the subdivider either completes the required improvements or enters into an improvement agreement with the city agreeing to the work. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.44.030 Energy conservation.
    A.  The design of a subdivision for which a tentative map is required, excluding a conversion, shall provide to the extent feasible, for future passive or natural heating or cooling opportunities in the subdivision. Examples of such energy conservation opportunities in subdivision design include design of lot size and configuration to permit orientation of a structure in an east-west alignment for southern exposure or to take advantage of shade or prevailing breezes (66473.1).

    B.   “Feasible” means capable of being accomplished in a successful manner within a reasonable period of time, taking into account economic, environmental, social and technological factors.

    C.   Compliance with this provision shall not result in reducing allowable densities or the percentage of a lot which may be occupied by a building or structure. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.44.040 Improvements required.
    A.  General. All improvements required as tentative map conditions of approval or by city ordinance or resolution, together with the required improvements set forth below, are required of all subdivisions.

    B.   Frontage Improvements. The frontage of each lot shall be improved to its ultimate adopted geometric section for one-half width of the street, including but not limited to street structural section, curbs, sidewalks, driveway approaches and transitions as determined by the city engineer.

    C.   Storm Drainage. Stormwater runoff from the subdivision shall be collected and conveyed by an approved storm drain system. The storm drain system shall be designed for ultimate development of the watershed. The storm drain system shall provide for the protection of abutting and off-site properties that would be adversely affected by any increase in runoff attributed to the development. Off-site storm drain improvements may be required to satisfy this requirement.

    D.  Sanitary Sewers. Each unit or lot within the subdivision shall be served by an approved sanitary sewer system.

    E.   Water Supply. Each unit or lot within the subdivision shall be served by a separate and approved domestic water system.

    F.   Utilities. Each unit or lot within the subdivision shall be served by gas (if required), electric, telephone and cable vision facilities (66473.2, 66473.3).

    G.  Underground Utilities.

    1.   All existing and proposed utilities within the subdivision and along frontage streets shall be placed underground except those facilities exempted by the Public Utilities Commission regulations.

    2.   The subdivider is responsible for complying with the requirements of this chapter and shall make the necessary arrangements with each utility company for installation of the facilities.

    3.   The planning commission may grant an exception to the undergrounding requirements as provided in Section 16.44.404 (G)(1) of this title if topography, soils or other conditions make underground installation of the facilities unreasonable.

    H.  Access. Every lot shall be served by a public or private street. Public streets shall be constructed to city standards. Private streets will only be permitted if the city engineer determines that the private streets proposed will provide adequate and safe access to all parcels. At a minimum, the private streets shall be constructed to city standards for public street except that the city engineer may allow for the omission of sidewalks and additional street width for on-street parking if he or she determines that equivalent and adequate pedestrian and parking facilities will be provided within the project site. The private street and all other necessary appurtenances shall be constructed as a condition of approval of the parcel or final map and a feasible method shall be provided to ensure the maintenance of the street improvements and all water, sewer and storm drainage utilities located within the street.

    I.    Fire Protection. A fire protection system shall be provided consisting of appurtenances capable of providing fire protection to each unit, lot and structure within the subdivision.

    J.    Other Improvements. Other improvements including but not limited to, grading, street lights, fire hydrants, signs, traffic control signals, street trees and shrubs, monuments, bikeways and fences or fees in lieu of any of the foregoing, shall be required as determined by the city engineer in accordance with this chapter, the general plan or any specific plan, and the city standard specifications.

    K.  Off-site Improvements. If the subdivider is required to construct off-site improvements on land in which neither the subdivider nor the city has sufficient title or interest to allow construction:

    1.   The city may, before approving the parcel map or final map, require the subdivider to enter into an agreement to complete the off-site improvements at the time the city acquires title or an interest in the land. The subdivider shall pay the cost of acquiring off-site land or an interest in the land required to construct the off-site improvements; or

    2.   The city shall, within one hundred twenty days of recording the final map, acquire by negotiation or commence condemnation of the land. If the city fails to meet the one hundred twenty day time limit, the condition for the construction is waived.

    L.   The planning commission may, after making the appropriate findings, defer the installation of any public improvement required under this title. (Ord. 97-4 § 2 Exh. 1; Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.44.050 Deferred improvement agreements.
    A.  Minor Subdivisions. At the discretion of the city engineer, improvements required for a subdivision consisting of four or less parcels shall be completed as specified by agreement between the owner of the real property and the city. The city council may extend the time allowed to complete the required improvements. The agreement shall be in a form acceptable to the city, and shall provide that:

    1.   The owner complete construction of improvements within the time period specified in the agreement, but not exceeding thirty-six months from the date of approval of the parcel or final map;

    2.   In the event of a default by the owner, the city is authorized to cause construction to be done and charge the entire cost and expense to the owner, including interest from the date of notice of the cost and expense until paid;

    3.   The subdivider provide improvement security as specified by Section 16.44.080;

    4.   The agreement shall be recorded with the county recorder at the expense of the owner and shall constitute notice to all successors and assigns of title to the real property of the obligations set forth therein, and shall also constitute a lien in such amount necessary to fully reimburse the city, including interest as provided above, subject to foreclosure in the event of a default in payment. The obligations under the agreement shall run with the property and constitute a lien against it;

    5.   In the event of litigation occasioned by default of the owner, the owner agrees to pay all costs involved, including reasonable attorney’s fees. Those costs shall become a part of the lien against the real property;

    6.   The agreement shall not relieve the subdivider or owner from any other specific requirements of the Map Act, this chapter, or law. The construction of deferred improvements shall conform to this title and all applicable provisions of this code in effect at the time of construction. (Ord. 97-4 § 2 Exh. 1; Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.44.060 Improvement plans.
    Improvement plans shall be prepared under the direction of and signed by a registered civil engineer and shall conform to the standard specifications of the city. Improvement plans shall include those improvements specified in Section 16.08.190.

    A.  Form.

    1.   The plans, profiles and details for all improvements shall be prepared in accordance with the city standard specifications.

    2.   Reference may be made to applicable city or state department of transportation standard details in lieu of duplicating the drawing.

    3.   Details shall be drawn in accordance with standard accepted drafting practices and to appropriate scales clearly to show the intended construction without crowding of features which might cause misinterpretation.

    4.   The form of all plans shall conform to additional requirements as may be established by the city engineer. The final form of all plans shall be approved by the city engineer.

    5.   Submittal of improvement plans in a generally accepted digital format will also be required for all subdivisions. The city’s required format shall be one commonly used in the region. The city engineer may waive this requirement upon request if it can be shown that compliance with this requirement would present an undue hardship.

    B.   Contents.

    1.   The improvement plans shall show complete plans, profiles and details for all required improvements (both private and public) to be constructed, including common areas.

    2.   A grading plan shall show by means of arrows and elevation the method proposed for draining each individual lot.

    3.   The improvement plans shall include details of required off-site improvements.

    4.   The improvement plan shall show the water distribution facilities to be installed both inside and outside the subdivision with connections to existing water mains clearly marked and including the types, sizes, locations and depth of pipes, valves, hydrants, reservoirs, pumps and other appurtenances.

    5.   The improvement plans shall show the sanitary sewer facilities to be installed both inside and outside the subdivision with connections to existing sewers clearly marked and including the size of pipes, the type of materials for pipes and joint sealing, pipe invert elevations, the locations of manholes, manhole rim elevations, details concerning pumps and lift stations, and other pertinent information.

    6.   The improvement plans shall show the size and location of drainage facilities to be installed inside and outside of the subdivision, including means for the disposal of surface and stormwaters beyond the limits of the subdivision, locations and elevations of gutters, drains and ditches, location size, type, and elevations of storm drain pipes, the hydraulic grade line, and elevations of storm drain pipes, location and styles of catch basins, and details of other drainage structures, pumps and appurtenances. All requirements shall be pursuant to Chapters 13.10 and 15.08 of this code. (Ord. 15-4 § 4; Ord. 97-4 § 2 Exh. 1; Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.44.080 Improvement security.
    A.  General. An improvement agreement, contract, or act required or authorized by the Subdivision Map Act or this title for which security is required shall be secured in accordance with Section 66499, et seq., of the Subdivision Map Act and as provided in this section.

    B.   Amount of Security.

    1.   The subdivider shall provide a performance bond or other security in the amount of one hundred percent of the total estimated construction costs to guarantee the construction or installation of all improvements. An additional amount of one-hundred percent of the estimated construction costs shall be required to guarantee payment to the subdivider’s contractor, subcontractors, and to persons furnishing labor, materials, or equipment for the construction or installation of improvements. As a part of the obligation guaranteed by the security, and in addition to the full amount of the security, there shall be included costs and reasonable expenses and fees, including attorney’s fees, incurred by the city in enforcing the obligations secured.

    2.   The estimate of improvement costs shall be as approved by the city engineer and shall provide for:

    a.   Ten percent of the total construction cost for contingencies;

    b.   Increase for projected inflation computed to the estimated midpoint of construction; and

    c.   All utility installation costs.

    C.   Form of Security.

    1.   The form of security shall be one or a combination of the following at the option and subject to the approval of the city:

    a.   A bond by one or more duly authorized corporate sureties. The form of the bond or bonds shall be in accordance with Sections 66499.1, 66499.2, 66499.3 and 66499.4 of the Subdivision Map Act;

    b.   A deposit, either with the city or responsible escrow agent or trust company, at the option of the city, of money or negotiable bonds of the kind approved for securing deposits of public monies;

    c.   An irrevocable letter of credit from one or more financial institutions regulated by the state or federal government pledging that the funds necessary to carry out the act or agreement are on deposit and guaranteed for payment and will only be released upon receipt of written instruction from the city. The form of the letter must be approved by the city attorney;

    d.   An instrument of credit from an agency of the state, federal, or local government provides at least twenty percent of the financing of the portion of the project requiring security (66499[a]);

    e.   Any other comparable form of security, acceptable to the city, as provided in Section 66499 of the Subdivision Map Act.

    D.  Warranty Security. Upon acceptance of the subdivision improvements by the city, the subdivider shall provide security in the amount as required by the city engineer to guarantee the improvements against any defective work or labor done or defective materials used in the performance of the improvements throughout the warranty period. The warranty period is one year following completion and acceptance of the improvements, unless a longer warranty period is required by the city engineer. At the discretion of the city, the city may retain the improvement security for warranty security.

    E.   Release of Improvement Security.

    1.   Performance Security. The city may release performance security only upon acceptance of the improvements by the city and after an approved warranty security has been filed with the city engineer. If a warranty security is not submitted, the city may release the performance twelve months after acceptance of improvements and correction of all warranty deficiencies.

    2.   Material and Labor Security. The city may reduce security given to secure payment to the contractor, subcontractors, and to persons furnishing labor, materials, or equipment, six months after completion and acceptance of improvements by the city, to an amount equal to the amount of all claims filed and of which notice has been given to the city. The city may release the balance of the security upon the settlement of all claims and obligations for which the security was given.

    3.   Warranty Security. The city may release warranty security upon satisfactory completion of the warranty period, provided:

 

    a.   All deficiencies appearing on the warranty deficiency list for the subdivision have been corrected; and

    b.   Not less than twelve months have elapsed since the acceptance of the improvements by the city.

    F.   Change in Ownership. A subdivider who acquires ownership of an approved subdivision whose improvements are not completed shall provide improvement security for all improvements in accordance with subsection (B) of this section, and for not just those improvements that may remain incomplete at the time of the change of ownership. The amount of the improvement security shall be determined by the city. The new owner may also be required to enter into a new improvement agreement at the discretion of the city. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.44.090 Construction and inspection.
    A.  The construction methods and materials for all improvements shall conform to the city standard specifications and standard details and all other standard plans and specifications of the city and are subject to inspection and approval by the city engineer;

    B.   Construction shall not begin until all required improvement plans are approved by the city engineer;

    C.   The subdivider shall provide written notice to the city engineer a minimum of ten working days before beginning any work. All work done in constructing the improvements and all materials furnished shall be subject to the inspection of the city engineer. The city engineer shall have access to the work at all times during its construction and shall be furnished with every reasonable facility for ascertaining that the materials used and the workmanship are in accordance with the requirements of this title. Any improvements constructed without inspection by the city engineer or constructed contrary to the approved plans, city standard specifications, or the direction of the city engineer will be deemed as noncomplying and will not be accepted by the city for maintenance and/or operation;

    D.  The subdivider shall prosecute the work to completion without undue delay except for inclement weather or other reasonable cause. If there is a delay in completion of the work beyond the period stated in the subdivision agreement, unless an extension is approved by the city council and the surety company, the city council may take appropriate steps to use the security to complete the work. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.44.110 Completion of improvements.
    A.  Major Subdivisions.

    1.   The subdivider shall complete the improvements for a subdivision of five or more lots within seven hundred twenty calendar days of city council approval, unless an extension is granted by the city council.

    2.   The subdivider shall complete improvements before final building inspection or the issuance of an occupancy permit for any unit in the subdivision.

    3.   If the subdivider fails to complete the improvements within the specified time, the city engineer may, at his or her option, cause the uncompleted improvements to be completed and the parties executing the performance security shall be firmly bound for the payment of all necessary costs.

    B.   Extensions.

    1.   The city engineer may extend the completion date upon written request by the subdivider and the submittal of adequate evidence to justify the extension. The request shall be made at least thirty days before the expiration of the subdivision agreement.

    2.   At the discretion of the city engineer, the subdivider may be required to enter into a subdivision improvement agreement extension with the city. The agreement shall be prepared by the city engineer, approved as to form by the city attorney, and executed by the subdivider prior to being transmitted to the city council for its consideration. If approved by the city council, the mayor shall execute the agreement on behalf of the city.

    3.   In passing upon a request for a subdivision improvement agreement extension, the city may require the following:

    a.   Revision of improvement plans to provide for current design and construction standards when required by the city engineer;

    b.   Revise improvement construction estimates to reflect current improvement costs as approved by the city engineer;

    c.   Increase of improvement securities in accordance with revised construction estimates;

    d.   Increase of inspection fees to reflect current construction costs; however, inspection fees are not subject to decrease or refund;

    e.   The city council or city engineer as the case may be, may impose additional requirements considered necessary as a condition to approving a time extension for the completion of improvements.

    C.   The subdivider shall pay the costs incurred by the city in processing the extension request and extension agreement. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.44.120 Acceptance of improvements.
    When the subdivider has completed all improvements, corrected all deficiencies, and submitted record drawings of the improvements, the city shall consider the subdivision improvements for acceptance. The city council shall act by resolution either accepting the offer for dedication for recordation purposes only or accepting the offer of dedication for maintenance. The city clerk shall subsequently cause a copy of the resolution to be filed with the county recorder. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

Chapter 16.48 SUPPLEMENTAL IMPROVEMENTS REIMBURSEMENT AGREEMENTS
16.48.010 Title and purpose.
    The purpose of this section is to establish the city’s regulations and procedures for supplemental public improvement reimbursements. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.48.020 Supplemental sizing of improvements.
    Improvements to be installed by the subdivider or land developer for any parcel or parcels of property for the benefit of the subdivision or single parcel to be developed shall contain supplemental size, capacity, number and length for the benefit of property not within the subdivision or single parcel to be developed as determined to be necessary by the city engineer. Such improvements shall be dedicated to the public. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.48.030 Reimbursement agreement upon approval.
    When a subdivider or land developer is required to provide supplemental size, capacity, number or length in excess of the construction required for the subdivision or single parcel to be developed, under the provisions of this chapter, the city shall, upon recommendation of the city engineer and approval of the city council, enter into an agreement with the subdivider or land developer to reimburse the subdivider or land developer for the portion of the cost of such improvements, equal to the difference between the amount it would have cost the subdivider or land developer to install such improvements to serve the subdivision, or parcel(s) of land to be developed only, and the actual cost of such improvements to include the payment of interest, as determined by the city. The reimbursement agreement shall contain at least the provisions specified in this chapter. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.48.040 Reimbursement agreement.
    A.  The reimbursement agreement shall be prepared by the city attorney, and shall include:

    1.   City shall be obligated to make reimbursements to subdivider or land developer only when and as city obtains funds from benefiting property owners as such benefiting property owners eventually improve their property;

    2.   Any funds paid by benefiting property owners to the city need not be paid over to the subdivider or land developer until the limitations period for instituting court action to seek a refund of such funds paid under protests has passed, and no court action has been instituted; in the event court action is instituted, city shall not pay over such funds to the subdivider or land developer until the court action has been finalized and the authority of the city to collect such charges has been sustained.

    3.   The city shall have the right to turn over the defense of any action seeking refund of amounts paid under protest to the subdivider or land developer; if the subdivider or land developer fails to undertake the defense of the action at subdivider’s own expense, the city may stipulate to return of the funds so paid under protest by or on behalf of the owner or owners of such benefiting property, and the city shall not be further obligated to subdivider or land developer as to any such funds so refunded. In the event a court action is maintained to prevent the city from collecting such funds from benefiting property owners, the city shall have the right to turn over defense of that action to the subdivider or land developer, who shall agree to hold the city harmless from any and all liability thereunder; in the event the subdivider or land developer fails to undertake defense of the action at subdivider’s or land developer’s sole expense, the city may stipulate to cease collecting such funds, or enter into any other settlement of the litigation acceptable to the city, and subdivider or land developer shall lose any right to reimbursement under the reimbursement agreement;

    4.   The reimbursement agreement shall provide for reimbursement of all funds when and so collected unless the council otherwise determines. Under no circumstances shall the city be deemed liable for any funds not so collected from benefiting property owners.

    B.   In order to pay the costs provided for in the reimbursement agreement, the city may:

    1.   Collect from other persons or parties using such improvements for the benefit of real property not within the subdivision or parcel(s) of land to be developed, a reasonable charge for such use; collection of these charges may be deferred until such time as the other persons using such improvements improve their property through construction or through subdivision;

    2.   Contribute to the subdivider or land developer that part of the cost of the improvement that is attributable to the benefit of real property outside the subdivision or parcel(s) of land to be developed, upon a determination by the city that it is in the public interest so to do; the city shall thereafter levy a charge upon the real property benefited to reimburse itself for such cost as paid to the subdivider or land developer, together with interest thereon;

    3.   Establish and maintain local benefit districts for the levy and collection of such charge or costs from the property benefited. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.48.050 Report from the city engineer.
    Prior to entering into a reimbursement agreement pursuant with this chapter, the city council shall receive a report from the city engineer describing in detail the area outside the subdivision or parcel(s) of land to be developed which is benefited by the supplemental sizing, capacity, number or length of improvements required, and recommending the apportionment of the costs of such improvements based upon the benefit to such property outside the subdivision or parcel(s) of land to be developed. The apportionment of benefit shall be on the basis of frontage improvements, acreage served by such improvements, or any other formula rationally related to actual benefit. The city council, by resolution, may approve the report as submitted, or modify the report, and the action of the city council thereon shall determine the benefit to each piece or parcel of property outside the subdivision or single parcel to be developed benefited by such improvements, establish the amount or amounts to be charged such properties, and direct the method of collection of the costs of such improvements. The action of the city council shall be final. The city clerk shall cause a copy of the resolution to be filed with the county recorder. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

Chapter 16.52 REVERSIONS TO ACREAGE
16.52.010 Title and purpose.
    The purpose of this chapter is to create and establish the city’s regulations, standards and procedures for reversions to acreage. This article shall apply to final maps and parcel maps. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.52.020 Initiation by city council.
    The city council, at the request of any person or on its own motion, may, by resolution initiate proceedings to revert property to acreage. The city council shall direct the community development department to obtain the necessary information to initiate and conduct the hearings. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.52.030 Initiation by owners.
    Proceedings to revert subdivided property to acreage may be initiated by petition of all the owners of record of the property. The petition shall be in a form prescribed by the city engineer. The petition shall contain the information required by Section 16.52.040 and any other information as required by the city engineer. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.52.040 Contents of petition.
    The petition shall contain, but not be limited to the following:

    A.  Evidence of title to the real property;

    B.   Evidence of the consent of all of the owners of an interest in the property;

    C.   Evidence that none of the improvements required to be made have been made within two years from the date the final or parcel map was filed for record, or within the time allowed by agreement for completion of the improvements, whichever is later;

    D.  Evidence that no lots shown on the final or parcel map have been sold within five years from the date such final or parcel map was filed for record;

    E.   A final or parcel map in the form, and with the contents prescribed by Sections 16.28.020 and 16.28.030, which delineates dedications which will not be vacated and deductions required as a condition to reversion final or parcel maps, shall be conspicuously designated with the title, “The purpose of this map is a reversion to acreage”;

    F.   Fees as determined by the city. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.52.050 Submittal of petition to the city engineer.
    A.  The final or parcel map for the reversion, together with all other data as required by this chapter, shall be submitted to the city engineer for review.

    B.   Upon finding that the petition meets with all the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act or this chapter, the city engineer shall submit the final or parcel map, together with a report and recommendations of approval or conditional approval to the city council for its consideration. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.52.060 City council approval.
    A.  A public hearing shall be held by the city council on all proposed reversions to acreage. Notice of the public hearing shall be given as provided in Section 66451.3.

    B.   The city council may approve a reversion to acreage only if it finds and records by resolution that:

    1.   Dedications or offers of dedication to be vacated or abandoned by the reversion to acreage are unnecessary for present or prospective public purposes; and

    2.   Either:

    a.   All owners of an interest in the real property within the subdivision have consented to reversion, or

    b.   None of the improvements required to be made have been made within two years from the date the final or parcel map was filed for record, or within the time allowed by agreement for completion of the improvements, whichever is later, or

    c.   No lots shown on the final or parcel map have been sold within five years from the date such map was filed for record. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.52.070 Alternative procedure merger and resubdivision.
    Pursuant to Section 66499.20-1/2 of the Map Act, subdivided property may be merged and resubdivided without reverting to acreage by complying with all applicable requirements as provided in this chapter and the Map Act. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

Chapter 16.56 CORRECTION AND AMENDMENT OF MAPS
16.56.010 Requirements.
    After a final or parcel map is filed in the office of the county recorder, it may be amended by a certificate of correction or an amending map:

    A.  To correct an error in any course of distance shown thereon;

    B.   To show any course or distance that was omitted therefrom;

    C.   To correct an error in the description of the real property shown on the map;

    D.  To indicate monuments set after the death, disability or retirement from practice of the engineer or surveyor charged with responsibilities for setting monuments;

    E.   To show the property location of any monument which has been changed in location, or character, or originally was shown at the wrong location or incorrectly as to its character;

    F.   To correct any other type of map error or omission as approved by the city engineer, which does not affect any property right. Errors and omissions may include but are not limited to, lot number, acreage, street names and identification of adjacent record maps. Error does not include changes in courses or distances from which an error is not ascertainable from the data shown on the final or parcel map. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.56.020 Form and contents.
    The amending map or certificate of correction shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. The form and contents of the amending map shall conform to the requirements set forth by the city for final maps and parcel maps. The certificate of correction shall set forth in detail the corrections made and show the names of the present fee owners of the property affected by the correction. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.56.030 Submittal and approval by city engineer.
    A.  The amending map or certificate of correction, complete as to final form, shall be submitted to the city engineer for review and approval.

    B.   The city engineer shall examine the amending map or certificate of correction and if the only changes made are those set forth in Section 16.56.010, this fact shall be certified by the city engineer on the amending map or certificate of correction. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.56.040 Filing with the county recorder.
    The amending map or certificate of correction certified by the city engineer shall be filed in the office of the county recorder. Upon such filing, the county recorder shall index the names of the fee owners and the appropriate subdivision designation shown on the amending map or certificate of correction in the general index and map index, respectively. Thereupon, the original map shall be deemed to have been conclusively so corrected, and thereafter shall impart constructive notice of all such corrections in the same manner as though set forth upon the original map. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

Chapter 16.60 ENFORCEMENT
16.60.010 Prohibition and penalty.
    A.  No person shall sell, lease, or finance any parcel or parcels of real property or commence construction of any building for sale, lease or financing thereon, except for model homes, or allow occupancy thereof, for which a final map is required by the Map Act or this chapter, until such a map, in full compliance with the provisions of the Map Act and this chapter, has been filed for record by the county recorder.

    B.   No person shall sell, lease or finance any parcel or parcels of real property or commence construction of any building for sale, lease or financing thereon, except for model homes, or allow occupancy thereof, for which a parcel map is required by the Map Act or this chapter, until such a map, in full compliance with the provisions of the Map Act and this chapter has been filed for record by the county recorder.

    C.   Conveyances of any part of a division of real property for which a final or parcel map is required by the Map Act or this chapter shall not be made by parcel or block number, letter or other designation, unless and until such map has been filed for record by the county recorder.

    D.  This section does not apply to any parcel or parcels of a subdivision offered for sale or lease, contracted for sale or lease, or sold or leased in compliance with or exempt from any law, including this chapter, regulating the design and improvement of subdivisions effective at the time the subdivision was established.

    E.   Nothing in subsections A or B shall be deemed to prohibit an offer or contract to sell, lease or finance real property or to construct improvements thereon where such sale, lease or financing or commencement of such construction, is expressly conditioned upon the approval and filing of a final map or parcel map, as required under the Map Act or this chapter.

    F.   Nothing in subsections A to E, inclusive shall in any way modify or affect Section 11018.2 of the Business and Professions Code.

    G.  The limitation period for commencing an action against the subdivider or an owner of record at the time of a violation of this chapter, shall be tolled for any time period during which there is no constructive notice of the transition constituting the violation, because the owner of record at the time of the violation or any time thereafter failed to record a deed, lease, or financing document with the county recorder. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.60.020 Remedies.
    A.  Any deed of conveyance, sale or contract to sell real property which has been divided, or which has resulted from a division, in violation of the provisions of the Map Act or this chapter or, is voidable at the sole option of the grantee, buyer or person contracting to purchase, any heirs, personal representative, or trustee in insolvency or bankruptcy thereof within one year after the date of discovery of such violation. The deed of conveyance, sale or contract to sell is binding upon any successor in interest of the grantee, buyer or person contracting to purchase, other than those above enumerated, and upon the grantor, vendor or person contracting to sell, or his or her assignee, heir of devisee.

    B.   Any grantee, or successor in interest thereof, of real property which has been divided, or which has resulted from a division, in violation of the provisions of this chapter or the Map Act may, within one year of the date of discovery of such violation, bring an action in the superior court to recover any damages suffered by reason of such division of property. The action may be brought against the person who so divided the property and against any successors in interest who have actual or constructive knowledge of such division of property.

    C.   The provisions of this section shall not apply to the conveyance of any parcel of real property identified in a certificate of compliance filed pursuant to Section 16.60.030 or identified in a recorded final map or parcel map from and after the date of recording.

    The provisions of this section shall not limit or affect in any way the rights of a grantee or successor in interest under any other provision of law.

    D.  This section does not bar any legal, equitable or summary remedy to which the city or other public agency, or any person, firm or corporation may otherwise be entitled, and the city or other public agency, or such person, firm or corporation may file a suit in the superior court to restrain or enjoin any attempted or proposed subdivision or sale, lease, or financing in violation of the Map Act or this chapter.

    E.   The city shall not issue a permit or grant any approval necessary to develop any real property which has been divided, or which has resulted from a division, in violation of the provisions of the Map Act or this chapter if it finds that development of such real property is contrary to the public health or the public safety. The authority to deny such a permit or approval shall apply whether the applicant therefore was the owner of record at the time of such violation or whether the applicant therefore is either the current owner of record or a vendee thereof with, or without, actual or constructive knowledge of the violation of the time of the acquisition of an interest in such real property.

    If the city issues a permit or grants approval for the development of any real property illegally subdivided, the city may impose those additional conditions which would have been applicable to the division of the property at the time the current owner of record acquired the property. If the property has the same owner of record as at the time of the initial violation, the city may impose conditions applicable to a current division of the property. If a conditional certificate of compliance has been filed for record in accordance with the provision of Section 16.60.030, only those conditions stipulated in that certificate shall be applicable. (Ord. 03-21 § 1 (part); Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.60.030 Certificate of compliance.
    A.  Any person owning real property or a vendee of such person pursuant to a contract of sale of such real property may request the city engineer to determine whether the real property complies with the provision of the Map Act and this chapter.

    B.   If the city engineer determines that the real property does not comply with the provisions of the Map Act or this chapter, the city engineer may, as condition to granting a certificate of compliance, impose conditions in accordance with Section 16.60.020. Upon making such a determination and establishing such conditions, the city engineer shall file a conditional certificate of compliance for record with the county recorder. Such certificate shall serve as notice to the property owner or vendee who has applied for the certificate, a grantee of the property owner, or any subsequent transferee or assignee of the property, that the fulfillment and implementation of such conditions shall be required prior to subsequent issuance of a permit or other grant of approval for development of the property.

    C.   Compliance with such conditions shall not be required until such time as a permit or other grant of approval for development of such property is issued.

    D.  A recorded final map or parcel map shall constitute a certificate of compliance with respect to the parcels of real property described therein.

    E.   Subject to the provisions of Section 66499.35(e) of the Map Act, an official map prepared pursuant to Section 66499.52(b) of the Map Act shall constitute a certificate of compliance with respect to the parcels of real property described therein.

    F.   A fee and/or deposit shall be charged to the applicant for making the determination and processing the certificate of compliance. (Ord. 91-9 § 3)

 

16.60.040 Notice of violation.
    If the department has knowledge that real property has been divided in violation of the provisions of the Map Act or this chapter, a notice of intention to record a notice of violation shall be mailed by the department by certified mail to the current owner of record. The notice shall describe the property in detail, name the owners, describe the violation and state that the owner will be given the opportunity to present evidence. The notice shall also contain an explanation as to why the subject parcel is not lawful under Section 66412.6(a) or (b) of the Map Act. The notice shall specify the date, time and place for a meeting at which the owner may present evidence to the department why a notice of violation should not be recorded.

    The meeting shall be held no sooner than thirty days and no later than sixty days from the date of mailing of the notice of intention to record a notice of violation. If, within fifteen days of receipt of the notice, the owner fails to file with the department a written objection to recording the notice of violation, the department shall file the notice of violation for record with the county recorder. If, after the owner has presented evidence, the department determines that there has been no violation, the department shall mail a clearance letter to the then current owner of record. If, however, after the owner has presented evidence, the planning commission determines that the property has in fact been illegally divided, the department shall record the notice of violation for record with the county recorder.

    The notice of violation, when recorded, shall be deemed to be constructive notice of the violation to all successors in interest in such property. (Ord. 91- 9 § 3)

Chapter 16.64 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSIONS
Article I. General Provisions
16.64.010 Title.
    This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Condominium Conversion Law of the city of West Sacramento.” (County code § 8-6.101)

 

16.64.020 Purpose.
    The major objectives of this chapter are to secure the public health, safety and welfare by regulating condominium conversions so as to minimize the reduction of housing units in the low-to-moderate income rental housing market while increasing the availability of affordable owner occupied housing in a reasonable balance, which may be accomplished by appropriate conversions; to provide assistance to rental tenants dislocated thereby and to secure for such tenants all rights provided by the laws of the state; and to protect the rights and assist in securing the reasonable expectations of the purchasers of converted condominium units.

    To meet such objectives, this chapter incorporates the following goals:

    A.  To provide a reasonable balance of adequate rental and ownership housing within the principal urban communities within the corporate limits of the city;

    B.   To provide mitigation measures to alleviate problems of rental tenants impacted by condominium conversions;

    C.   To provide adequate administrative measures for the protection of the property rights of prospective condominium purchasers;

    D.  To ensure that rental units being converted meet the reasonable development standards required by this chapter and all other applicable provisions of federal and state laws and regulations and this code;

    E.   To promote the residential stability and diversity of the community by encouraging neighborhood maintenance, preventing major displacements of people and facilitating inhabitant ownership of residential dwelling units;

    F.   To provide standards for the conversion of rental units into condominium units;

    G.  To provide information to both existing tenants and prospective buyers on the physical adequacy of the building to be converted;

    H.  To assure that the “protected tenant” receives additional incentives as specified in this chapter, and

    I.    To provide notice of all rights required by the Subdivision Map Act of the state and this chapter. (County code § 8‑6. 102)

 

16.64.030 Authority.
    This chapter is enacted pursuant to the following authority:

    A.  The State Planning Law which authorizes and requires counties to enact general plans and the housing element thereof and requires a program to implement the housing element, especially subsection C of Section 65302 and Section 65583 of the Government Code of the state;

    B.   The Subdivision Map Act of the state which authorizes counties to regulate the design and improvement of condominiums and to provide for notice and rights to the tenants of proposed conversions, particularly Sections 66426, 66427, 66427.1, 66452.8 and 66452.9 of the Government Code of the state. The city council declares that the housing element of the general plan includes definite objectives and policies specifically directed to condominium conversions within the meaning of Section 66427.2 of the Government Code and that Sections 66473.5 and 66424 of the Government Code apply thereto; and

    C.   The police powers vested in the city by Section 7 of Article XI of the Constitution of the state. (County code § 8‑6.103)

 

16.64.040 Applicability—Construction.
    This chapter applies only to condominium conversions as defined in Section 16.64.050. This chapter is intended to be, and shall be construed as being, supplementary to, and not in conflict or duplication with, the requirements of federal and state laws and regulations regarding condominium conversions. (County code § 8‑6.301)

 

16.64.050 Definitions.
    A.  Generally. For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as set forth in this section.

    B.   Definitions.

    “Affected community area” means a geographical area which lies within a four-mile radius of the proposed condominium conversion project.

    “Comparable housing” means housing found by the planning commission to be:

    1.   Decent, safe, sanitary and in compliance with all local and state housing codes;

    2.   Open to persons regardless of race, creed, national origin, ancestry, age, marital status or sex;

    3.   Provided with facilities equivalent to that provided by the landlord in the dwelling unit in which the tenant then resides in regard to each of the following:

    a.   The apartment size, including the number of rooms,

    b.   The rent or lease range,

    c.   The major kitchen and bathroom facilities,

    d.   The special facilities necessary for handicapped or infirmed persons, including access, and

    e.   Provisions for minor children and pets;

    4.   Located in an area materially not less desirable than the area in which the tenant then resides in regard to each or the following:

    a.   Accessibility to the tenant’s place of employment, and

    b.   Accessibility to community and commercial facilities; and

    5.   Adequate in terms of numbers of units to provide for displaced tenants.

    “Condominium conversion” means the development of real property previously devoted to residential use by creating a “condominium,” as defined by Section 783 of the Civil Code of the state, a “stock cooperative,” as defined by Section 11003.2 of the Business and Professions Code of the state, and/or a “community apartment project,” as defined by Section 11004 of the Business and Professions Code of the state.

    “Director” means the director of the community development department or his or her designate.

    “Disabled household” shall mean a household in which the head of the household is “disabled,” as defined by Section 223 of the United States Social Security Act, or “handicapped,” as defined by Section 50072 of the Health and Safety Code of the state.

    “Elderly household” means a household in which the head of the household is sixty-two years of age or older at the time of an application for a conversion as specified in this chapter.

    “Low income household” means a household which has a total income from all sources not greater than eighty percent of the median income level for the Sacramento Standard Metropolitan Statistical Area (SMASH). “Moderate income household” means a household which has a total income from all sources not less than eighty percent nor greater than one hundred twenty percent of the median income level for the Sacramento SMASH. Low and moderate household income shall be adjusted based on family size and based on a median income as defined in the most recent income limits established for the Section 8 Housing Assistance Payments program by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development.

    “Protected tenant” means any household which is a low income, elderly, single or disabled household as defined in this section.

    “Single head of household” means a household in which the head of the household is unmarried or separated and has one or more children under the age of eighteen living within the unit.

    “Tenant” means the person or persons most recently approved by the owner/manager to occupy the unit.

    C.   Additional terms and phrases used in this chapter are defined in Chapter 17.04 of this code. (County code § 8‑6.201—8‑6.212)

 

Article II. Development Standards
16.64.060 Generally.
    The development standards set forth in this article apply to all condominium conversions. (County code § 8‑6.40 1)

 

16.64.070 Off-street parking.
    Off-street parking shall be provided according to current city standards. The number of spaces, dimensions, location and use of such parking shall be subject to the provisions of all applicable city parking requirements which would apply if the building were being newly constructed at the time of the conversion, (County code § 8‑6.402)

 

16.64.080 Number of units.
    At least two individual dwelling units shall be included within the proposed conversion. (County code § 8‑6.403)

 

16.64.090 Sewers.
    Each condominium unit shall have a separate sewer service connection; provided, however, the planning commission may permit the use of common sewer lines which are oversized by one size or more, or which are hydraulically designed with a one hundred percent safety factor, where the planning commission, with the written concurrence and approval of the affected sewer service district, finds the common sewer lines can adequately service the condominium. (County code § 8‑6.404(a))

 

16.64.100 Water.
    Each condominium unit shall have a separate water service connection and shutoff; provided, however, the planning commission may permit a single water system to service more than one condominium unit where shutoff’s are provided wherever practicable and where the planning commission, with the written concurrence and approval of the affected water district, finds the single water system can adequately service the condominium. (County code § 8‑6.404(b))

 

16.64.110 Gas.
    Each condominium unit shall have a separate gas service where gas is a necessary utility; provided, however, the planning commission may permit a single gas service where shutoffs have been provided for each unit and where the planning commission, with the written concurrence and approval of the gas service district or other supplier, finds that the single gas service can adequately service the condominium. (County code § 8‑6.404(c))

 

16.64.120 Electricity.
    Each condominium unit shall have a separate electrical service, with separate meters and disconnects, and ground fault interrupters where required by applicable building codes. (County code § 8‑6.404(d))

 

16.64.130 Sound attenuation.
    All separating walls and floor/ceiling assemblies between condominium units shall provide an airborne and impact sound installation equal to that required to meet a sound transmission class of forty-five (forty if field tested) as defined in Uniform Building Code Standard No. 35-1. (County code § 8‑6.405)

 

16.64.140 Fire safety.
    Each condominium unit shall have a two-hour fire separation between floors, including attic space, and on each wall common to itself and an adjacent unit. A smoke detector and fire alarm, with an outside alarm bell, shall be required in each unit.

    In lieu of the two-hour fire separation requirement, the planning commission may authorize, with the written concurrence of the city fire department, the use of another fire protection system when the planning commission finds that the proposed system will protect the occupants of the condominium as effectively as a two-hour fire separation. (County code § 8‑6.406)

 

16.64.150 Ownership organization.
    All condominium conversions shall provide an ownership association responsible for the care and maintenance of all common areas and common improvements and any other interest common to the condominium owners. Complete and true copies of all covenants, conditions and restrictions, articles of incorporation and bylaws shall be subject to review by the city attorney and approval by the director prior to approval by the planning commission for the condominium project. (County code § 8‑6.407)

 

16.64.160 Building code requirements.
    A building proposed for conversion, and each unit within the building, shall comply, after conversion, with the current provisions of the building code and all other applicable building standards of the city. Nothing set forth in this section shall be construed to prevent or prohibit the applicant or the city from providing or requiring building standards greater than those set forth in the building code where the greater standards are found to be necessary to carry out the purposes and objectives set forth in this section for condominium conversions. (County code § 8‑6.408)

 

16.64.170 Modifications of development standards—Findings.
    The planning commission may approve a condominium project which does not comply with all of the development standards set forth in this article if the planning commission finds that:

    A.  Because of circumstances applicable to the subject property or to the structure situated thereon, including, but not limited to, the size, shape, location or surroundings of the subject property or the building thereon, the strict application of the development standards would create an unreasonable economic hardship; and

    B.   As modified, the condominium conversion will be in substantial compliance with the development standards set forth in this article and will incorporate mitigating features into the project which will mitigate the detrimental effect of the modification. (County code § 8‑6.409)

 

Article III. Tenant and Buyer Protection
16.64.180 Required notice.
    The applicant for a condominium conversion shall comply with all the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act of the state regarding notice to tenants of the intent to convert and granting to such tenants the rights specified in the Subdivision Map Act, including, but not limited to, Sections 66427.1, 66452.8 and 66452.9 of the Government Code of the state regarding continuation of tenancy for one hundred eighty days before termination due to the conversion, measured from the notice of intention to convert. (County code § 8‑6.501)

 

16.64.190 Protected tenants—Duration of tenancy.
    Any protected tenant, as defined in Section 16.64.050, shall be given no less than one hundred eighty days’ written notice of intention to convert prior to the termination of tenancy due to the conversion, measured from the date of the approval of the tentative map of the conversion. (County code § 8‑6.502)

 

16.64.200 Exclusive purchase rights.
    As a condition of any condominium conversion approved pursuant to this chapter, the applicant shall comply with all the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act of the state regarding the grant to each tenant of the proposed condominium conversion project of an exclusive right to contract for the purchase of the dwelling unit occupied by the tenant upon the same or more favorable terms and conditions than those on which such unit will be initially offered to the general public, as required by subsection (d) of Section 66427.1 of the Government Code of the state. The right shall run for a period of not less than ninety days after the date of the issuance of the preliminary subdivision public report pursuant to Section 11018.2 of the Business and Professions Code of the state, unless the tenant gives prior written notice to the developer of the tenant’s intention not to exercise the right to purchase or request an extended lease. (County code § 8‑6.503)

 

16.64.210 Unjust evictions—Prohibited.
    No tenant shall be unjustly evicted from the date of the initial notice of intent to convert provided pursuant to subsection (a) of Section 66427.1 of the Government Code of the state through the dates specified in this article for the continuation of tenancy before termination due to the conversion. An unjust eviction shall be an eviction for other than one or more of the following reasons:

    A.  The tenant has failed to pay the rent to which the landlord is entitled.

    B.   The tenant has violated an obligation or covenant of the tenancy other than the obligation to surrender possession upon proper notice and has failed to cure such violation after receiving written notice thereof from the landlord.

    C.   The tenant is committing or permitting to exist a nuisance in, or is causing damage to, the rental unit or to the appurtenances thereof or is creating an unreasonable interference with the comfort, safety or enjoyment of any of the other residents of the same or any other adjacent building.

    D.  The tenant is using or permitting a rental unit to be used for any illegal purpose.

    E.   The tenant, who had a written lease or rental agreement which terminated on or after December 30, 1982, has refused, after written request or demand by the landlord, to execute a written extension or renewal thereof for a further term of like duration with similar provisions and in such terms as are not inconsistent with or violative of any provision of this section.

    F.   The tenant has refused the landlord reasonable access to the unit for the purpose of inspection, as permitted or required by the lease or by law, or for the purpose of showing the rental unit to any prospective purchaser or mortgagee.

    G.  The person in possession of the rental unit at the end of the lease or rental term is a subtenant or assignee not approved by the landlord, where the lease or rental agreement requires approval by the landlord of any assignment or subtenancy.

    H.  A developer shall not evict tenants nor force tenants to vacate their rental units for the purpose of avoiding the application of this chapter.

    In no case shall any tenant be evicted because the tenant may be nonsupportive of the conversion proposal.

    The intention of this section is to provide tenant protection in addition to, and not in lieu of, any and all tenant protections afforded by the laws of the state. This chapter shall not be construed to impair the rights of either landlords or tenants under preexisting leases, if such leases expressly authorize eviction due to conversion. (County code § 8‑6.504)

 

16.64.220 Rent increases.
    From the date of the initial notice of intent to convert provided pursuant to subsection (a) of Section 66427.1 of the Government Code of the state, through the dates specified in this article for the continuation of tenancy before termination due to the conversion, no tenant’s rent shall be increased more frequently than once every twelve months nor at a rate greater than the rate of increase in the current Consumer Price Index for the San Francisco Region, on an annualized basis, for the same period. This limitation shall not apply if rent increases are provided for in written leases or contracts executed prior to the date of the initial notice. (County code § 8‑6.505)

 

16.64.230 Notice to prospective tenants.
    After the service of the notice of intention to convert pursuant to subsection (a) of Section 66427,1 of the Government Code of the state, any prospective tenant shall be notified in writing of the intent to convert prior to leasing any unit, as required by Section 66452.8 of the Government Code. The provisions of this section concerning rent increase limitations shall not apply to any lease or rental agreement entered into after such tenant has received such notice. (County code § 8‑6.506)

 

16.64.240 Relocation assistance—Comparable housing.
    Each applicant shall propose and, after approval by the planning commission, shall implement a relocation assistance plan for each tenant who will be evicted as a result of the conversion. No such plan shall be approved unless it includes the following elements:

    A.  A report to each tenant concerning the availability of housing comparable to the unit occupied by the tenant as defined in Section 16.64.050;

    B.   A description of the standards the applicant will undertake to assure the successful relocation of each tenant;

    C.   An unconditional offer to pay a relocation expense for each dwelling unit (to include the actual invoice amount provided by a moving company, any deposit less damages, and an amount equal to the last month’s rent at the new residence) of not less than five hundred dollars; and

    D.  Within a four-mile radius of the conversion project, that alternate comparable housing, as defined in Section 16.64.050, shall actually be found for all displaced tenants before they are required to move. (County code § 8‑6.507)

 

16.64.250 Additional incentives for protected tenants.
    The applicant shall propose an incentive program to assist protected tenants, as defined in Section 16.64.050, in the proposed project. Such incentives shall include one or more of the following:

    A.  A shared equity program between the tenant and developer or lending institution;

    B.   An inclusionary program which substantially writes down the cost of the unit;

    C.   The use of mortgage bond money enabling the low income household to purchase;

    D.  Additional relocation assistance;

    E.   An extended lease program no less than six months in duration offered to the tenant;

    F.   A below-market interest rate financing program;

    G.  A short-term interest-free mortgage;

    H.  A donation of use for units to the city housing authority for rental purposes, with the first right of tenancy to the existing tenant; and

    I.    Other incentives proposed by the applicant to meet the intent of this section. (County code § 8‑6.508)

 

16.64.260 Buyer protection provisions.
    A.  The applicant shall provide each condominium unit purchaser with a copy of the public report required by the Department of Real Estate of the state.

    B.   The covenants, conditions and restrictions (CC&Rs), or equivalent document, shall contain on the first page thereof, in type as large as any type used in the CC&Rs, a notification in substantially the following words:

 

NOTICE

The terms of this document are legally binding. Read it carefully. A real estate broker is qualified to advise you on real estate matters. If you desire legal advice, consult an attorney.

 

    C.   The applicant shall not discriminate in the sale or in the terms and conditions of sale of any dwelling unit against any person who is or was a tenant of any such dwelling unit because such person opposed the conversion of such building into a condominium. (County code § 8‑6.509)

 

Article IV. Map and Site Plan—Application Procedure
16.64.270 Initial studies.
    Pursuant to procedures to be determined by the director, an applicant, at his or her expense, may request an initial feasibility study of a proposed condominium conversion. The study shall include a site inspection by the city building inspector and may include such other items as are agreed upon by the applicant and the director. The director shall provide the applicant with an estimate of costs for conducting the initial study.

    The applicant may choose to provide all moneys connected with the initial study or cancel the request.

    The director is authorized to promulgate regulations by which the community development department will conduct such studies and report the results thereof to an applicant. Such regulations shall require the applicant to pay all costs attributable to the study.

    Such procedures shall also provide for notice of the proposed conversion to all tenants in the building proposed for conversion and invite their initial comments and recommendations concerning the proposed conversion by use of a questionnaire to be returned to the community development department. Such questionnaire shall be supplied by and returned to the community development department with postage paid by the applicant.

    Such procedures and the associated fees shall be approved by the city council by resolution. (County code § 8‑6.601)

 

16.64.280 Preliminary building inspections.
    A.  Prior to any hearing on an application for a condominium conversion, the applicant shall arrange for an inspection of the building proposed for conversion by the city building official, environmental health office and the city fire chief. Such officials shall identify the changes, repairs or additions necessary so that the building will meet all applicable requirements of the building, housing and fire codes and the development standards of this chapter. The completion of all such repairs and/or changes shall be a condition of the tentative map permitting the condominium conversion. The applicant shall pay all building inspection fees to the building, health and fire officials for the inspections required by this section.

    B.   If the proposed project does not comply with the provisions of this chapter relating to utilities, sound attenuation, fire safety and building code compliance, or if the director has identified items to be corrected as provided in this section, no certificate of compliance shall be issued until all the conditions of approval have been completed, (County code § 8‑6.602)

 

16.64.290 Maps required.
    A.  Five or More Units. A tentative and final subdivision map shall be required for the creation of five or more units by condominium conversion, as required by Section 66426 of the Government Code of the state.

    B.   Four or Fewer Units. A tentative and final parcel map shall be required for the creation of four or fewer units by condominium conversion pursuant to Section 66428 of the Government Code of the state.

    C.   Site Plan Approval Required. No building permit shall be issued for any construction on any unit in a condominium conversion, or on any portion of the common area in such condominium, until the director has issued a site plan approval pursuant to Sections 16.64.360 and 16.64.370 of this chapter. (County code § 8‑6.603)

 

16.64.300 Applications—Contents.
    Recognizing that the conversion of existing structures which have been previously occupied and constructed as residential rental units presents unique problems to present tenants and future buyers, any application for a tentative map for a condominium conversion project shall include the following information where applicable:

    A.  A detailed site plan, drawn to scale, showing the location of all existing easements, dwelling units, parking spaces, structures, trees and other existing improvements on the property and proposed for the conversion as proposed;

    B.   The proposed organizational documents for the condominium, including the covenants, conditions and restrictions to be recorded pursuant to Sections 1350 et seq., of the Civil Code of the state and other applicable statutes. The organizational documents shall provide for the following:

    1.   The transfer of title to each unit,

    2.   The assignment of parking for each owner,

    3.   A management organization for the operation and maintenance of all common areas within the project,

    4.   A proposed annual operating budget, including a report disclosing the amount of deposit to be provided by the developer and the manner in which it was calculated, to defray the expenses of the association in replacing and maintaining major mechanical and electrical equipment, and

    5.   The Federal Housing Administration (FHA) regulatory agreement, if any;

    C.   A property report describing the condition and estimating the remaining useful life of each of the following elements of each structure situated within the project proposed for conversion:

roofs, foundations, exterior paint, paved surfaces, mechanical systems, electrical systems, plumbing systems, sewage systems, sprinkler systems for landscaping, utility delivery systems, central or community heating and air-conditioning systems, alarm systems, standpipe systems and structural elements. Such report shall be prepared and executed by an appropriately licensed engineer;

    D.  A structural pest control report prepared by a licensed structural pest control operator pursuant to Section 8516 of the Business and Professions Code of the state;

    E.   A building history report including the following:

    1.   The date of the original construction of all elements of the project,

    2.   A statement of the major uses of the project since construction,

    3.   The date and description of each major repair of any element since the date of construction. “Major repairs” means any repair requiring an expenditure of one thousand dollars or more, and

    4.   The date and description of each major renovation of any element since the date of construction. “Major renovation” means any renovation requiring an expenditure of one thousand dollars or more;

    F.   A preliminary title report reflecting the current ownership of all improvements and underlying land;

    G.  A true copy of each of the following documents submitted to the Department of Real Estate of the state:

    1.   The application for the issuance of a final public report for the project proposed for conversion, including all attachments and exhibits thereto, required pursuant to Sections 11000 et seq., of the Business and Professions Code of the state,

    2.   The statement of compliance (Form 643 as amended) submitted pursuant to 10 California Administrative Code, Section 2792.9, or its successor, relating to operating and maintenance funds during startup, and

    3.   The supplemental questionnaire for apartments converted to condominium projects supplied by the Department of Real Estate of the state, including all attachments and exhibits;

    H.  Unless already provided through a preliminary building inspection report, a report identifying all characteristics of the building not in compliance with this code, applicable building and housing codes, or Title 19 of the California Administrative Code;

    I.    A rental history report detailing the size, in square-footage, of the building or buildings, and for each dwelling unit within such buildings, the monthly rental rate for the preceding two years, the monthly vacancy over the preceding two years and copies of any governmental rental agreements or contracts;

    J.    A detailed report describing the relocation and moving assistance and information to be given to each tenant and the steps the developer will take to ensure the successful relocation of all affected tenants. In the event the conversion will terminate the tenancy of any protected tenant and/or other tenants who may encounter difficulty finding new living quarters, the report shall identify such tenants and discuss in detail the difficulties they will encounter and the applicant’s proposals to assist them. The report also shall discuss the applicant’s proposals for allowing hard-to-relocate tenants to stay on as tenants or providing such tenants additional time before the termination of tenancy, due to the conversion, for permanent relocation;

    K.  The name and address of each present tenant residing in the building proposed for conversion, the original and current rental rates and the length of residency of each;

    L.   A statement as to whether the developer will provide any capital contribution to the association for deferred maintenance of the common areas, the sum of the contribution, the date on which the association will receive the sum and the guarantees the applicant proposes to provide the association to assure the timely payment of such contribution;

    M.  An application for the approval of a tentative parcel map or tentative subdivision map as required by the Subdivision Map Act of the state and the land division regulations of this code, including copies and proof of delivery of the written notice of intention to convert having been delivered to each tenant at least sixty days prior to the date of filing such tentative map, as required by subsection (a) of Section 66427.1 and Sections 66452.8 and 66452.9 of the Government Code of the state;

    N.  Copies of all the documents delivered to all tenants in order to comply with subsections (b), (c) and (d) of Section 66427.1 of the Government Code of the state and Section 16.64.180 of this chapter, and

    O.  In addition to the information set forth in this section, the director and/or the planning commission may require additional information necessary to evaluate the conversion project in order to address the findings required to approve the application in accordance with the purposes and objectives set forth in this section and in the adopted general plan in effect at the time of such application. The requirements of the director may be appealed to the planning commission. Such information required may include, but shall not be limited to:

    1.   An economic report comparing the cost of housing in the units in the conversion project, as both rentals and ownership units, with housing available within the affected community area. As ownership units, the report shall include the projected unit costs and monthly association costs with comparable units within the affected community area,

    2.   An economic report on the proposed project unit costs, monthly association costs and comparative rates within the community area,

    3.   An economic report on the availability of comparable housing (rentals) offered at similar rental rates remaining within the affected community area, including vacancy rate information,

    4.   A report on the feasibility of providing all or a portion of the conversion units for sale to low and moderate income individuals or families,

    5.   A report on the feasibility of retaining a portion of the total units for rental occupancy,

    6.   A report on the existing tenant composition, showing the age and income of the tenants and indicating if any tenants are disabled, handicapped, elderly, have minor children or are low or moderate income families, and

    7.   Any additional information necessary to determine the housing needs, housing availability, costs and housing impacts of the proposed conversion and the affected community area. (County code § 8‑6.604)

 

16.64.310 Hearings—Notices.
    Notice of the planning commission hearing on the application shall be given to all tenants no less than ten days in advance thereof by certified mail, return receipt requested and notice thereof shall be given to all others as required by the Subdivision Map Act of the state and this code. (County code § 8‑6.701)

 

16.64.320 Findings requiring denial of tentative maps.
    The planning commission shall deny a tentative parcel map or tentative subdivision map for a condominium conversion if the planning commission finds any of the following:

    A.  That the project does not conform to the general plan and/or zoning provisions for the zoning district in which the property is located; provided, however, if the property is a legal conforming use, it shall not be held to be in violation of the zoning district for this purpose;

    B.   That any of the findings specified by the Subdivision Map Act of the state authorizing the denial of a tentative subdivision map (Section 66474 of the Government Code of the state) are made with reference to the condominium conversion;

    C.   That the proposed conversion does not comply with the development standards applicable thereto, as approved, as specified in Article II of this chapter,

    D.  That the proposed relocation plan does not comply with the requirements of Article III of this chapter,

    E.   If additional incentives for protected tenants are required by Article III of this chapter, that the application does not include such additional incentives;

    F.   That the impact of removing the units in the proposed conversion from the rental housing stock will result in a shortage of comparable rental housing stock in the affected community area, considering all the factors by which comparable housing is defined in Section 16.64.050 of this chapter,

    G.  If the planning commission makes the finding set forth in subsection F of this section, the planning commission shall then determine whether the additional incentive program for protected tenants proposed by the applicant overweighs the adverse impact on other affected tenants demonstrated in the application. In making such decision, the planning commission shall balance the benefits to existing protected tenants which will be achieved by the proposed conversion against the detriment to others by the removal of the converted units from the rental housing stock in the affected community area. In conducting such balancing, the planning commission shall consider the general plan housing element and shall not approve the proposed conversion unless the planning commission finds that the conversion will more completely accomplish the housing element policies than would occur if the conversion were not approved; and

    H.  That adequate comparable housing does not exist in the affected community area in sufficient number to allow the relocation of all tenants who would be evicted as a result of the conversion. (County code § 8‑6.702)

 

16.64.330 Approval—Conditions.
    In approving an application for a condominium conversion, the planning commission shall impose such conditions as are necessary to assure the following:

    A. That the converted structure will comply with all the development standards required by Article II of this chapter;

    B.   That all impacts on affected tenants will adequately be mitigated by the performance of relocation assistance and additional incentives for protected tenants as required by Article III of this chapter;

    C.   That all required notices will be given to all tenants and others;

    D.  That before the approval of a final subdivision map, the applicant shall propose methods to ensure compliance with all the conditions of approval which may include, but shall not be limited to, a contract between the applicant and the city providing for the actions required to comply with this chapter and/or certificates on the final map which set forth the required actions to comply with this chapter;

    E.   That no building permit shall be issued for any unit or for any work on the common areas in the proposed conversion until the director has approved a site plan authorizing the issuance of such permit; and

    F.   That no unit in the proposed conversion shall be sold prior to the issuance by the director of a certificate of compliance with this chapter. (County

code § 8‑6.703)

 

16.64.340 Hearings—Continuances—Notices.
    The planning commission may continue the hearing on an application for a tentative map for a conversion. In the event of such continuance, notice shall be given to all tenants at least ten days prior to the date for the continued hearing. Such notice shall be given in the form required for the original notice to tenants of the hearing on the tentative map. (County code § 8-6.704)

 

16.64.350 Approval of final maps—Findings.
    The city council shall approve the final map for any conversion if the council finds that the proposed map conforms to the requirements of the approved tentative map and that all the conditions on the tentative map have been or will be satisfied.

    Pursuant to Section 66443 of the Government Code of the state, the city council may direct that the final map contain a certificate and/or acknowledgment to the effect that no building permits may be issued until site plan approval has been obtained pursuant to Sections 16.64.360 and 16.64.370 of this chapter and that no unit shown thereon may be sold, leased or financed until a certificate of compliance with this chapter has been issued pursuant to said Sections 16.64.360 and 16.64.370.

    In addition to, or in lieu of, such certificates and acknowledgments, the city council may approve an agreement between the applicant and the city providing for compliance by the applicant with all the conditions imposed on the tentative map. (County code § 8-6.801)

 

16.64.360 Site plans—Approval required.
    Before any building permit shall be issued for any unit or the common areas in the approved conversion, the applicant shall apply for site plan approval pursuant to this section.

    The application for site plan approval shall include a plot plan showing the parcel proposed for conversion, all parking and landscaping proposed and each unit within the proposed conversion. Each unit shall be identified as to whether it is to be reserved for sale to any particular individual or group as a condition of the approval of the tentative subdivision map.

    With the site plan, the applicant shall submit additional information to show how all the conditions of the tentative map will be satisfied prior to the sale of any unit as to which such condition is operative. Such report shall describe the timing of the proposed improvements and the impacts the work will have on tenants who will be occupying the units during construction.

    No site plan shall be approved for any unit or for the common area if the proposed activity does not comply with the conditions of the tentative subdivision map.

    A condition of approval of any site plan pursuant to this section shall be that, before such unit is sold, a certificate of compliance with this chapter shall be issued. (County code § 8-6.901)

 

16.64.370 Certificates of compliance.
    No unit shall be sold in a conversion until the director issues a certificate of compliance indicating that the sale of such unit would be consistent with the requirements of this chapter and the conditions imposed on the tentative subdivision map approved pursuant to this chapter.

    Such certificate of compliance may be issued upon the completion of the work if the approved subdivision map allows the sale of the unit to any member of the public.

    If the approved subdivision map requires the sale of the particular unit to a member of a particular class or category of buyers, the certificate of compliance shall not be issued until the director is satisfied that the proposed sale is in conformity with the conditions of the approved map. (County code § 8-6.902)

 

16.64.380 Appeals from actions of the planning commission.
    Filing. The action of the planning commission on any decision made pursuant to this chapter shall be final unless, within fifteen days after such action, any person with standing to appeal, including the city council or any individual city council member, shall appeal therefrom by filing a written appeal with the city clerk. Any appeal, except an appeal filed by the city council or a city council member, shall be accompanied by an appeal fee as established by resolution of the city council. Such appeal shall specifically delineate the decision which is appealed and specifically recite the grounds for the appeal. (Ord. 95-7 § 2; Ord. 95-1 § 1; county code § 8-6.1001)

 

16.64.390 Appeals from actions of the director of community development.
    All decisions of the director may be appealed to the planning commission in the same manner and upon the payment of the same fees as are provided for appeals of zoning administrator decisions by Section 17.14.060 of this code. (Ord. 95-1 § 1; county code § 8-6.1002)

 

16.64.400 Fees.
    The city council, by resolution, shall establish fees reasonably calculated to allow the city to recover the costs of the enforcement of this chapter. (County code § 8-6.1101)

 

Article V. Violations and Enforcement
16.64.410 Violations and enforcement.
    The city council declares that any condominium resulting from a conversion in violation of this chapter shall constitute both a violation of the zoning provisions (Title 17 of this code) and a violation of the Subdivision Map Act (Sections 66410 et seq., of the Government Code of the state) and the land development provisions of this title. All remedies provided for the enforcement of said statutes and laws are declared to apply to violations of this chapter. (County code § 8-6.1201)

 

16.64.420 Unauthorized sales.
    A.  It is a violation of this chapter for any person to sell any unit in a condominium conversion, as defined by Section 16.64.050, unless the director has issued a certificate of compliance for such unit as required by this chapter.

    B.   Such violation shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be referred to the city attorney for prosecution.

    C.   The zoning enforcement officer is authorized to investigate violations of this chapter pursuant to regulations adopted from time to time by the council by resolution or by the director by administrative action. (County code § 8-6.302)

 

16.64.430 Unjust evictions—Violation.
    It is a violation of this chapter for any person to evict any tenant in a condominium conversion in violation of Section 16.64.210 of this chapter or to raise rents in violation of Section 16.64.220. (County code § 8-6.303)

Title 17 ZONING
Division I: Introductory Provisions
Division II: Zone Regulations
Division III: Citywide Regulations
Division IV: Administration and Permits
Division V: Terms and Definitions

Division I: Introductory Provisions
Chapter 17.01 PURPOSE AND EFFECT OF THE ZONING CODE
17.01.010 Title
Title 17 of the West Sacramento Municipal Code shall be known and cited as the “West Sacramento Zoning Code,” “Zoning Code of the City of West Sacramento,” “Zoning Code,” or “Code.” (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.01.020 Authority
The West Sacramento Zoning Code is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in Section 65850 of the California Government Code. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.01.030 Purpose
The purpose of this Code is to implement the City’s General Plan and to protect and promote the public health, safety, peace, comfort, convenience, prosperity, and general welfare. More specifically, the Code is adopted to achieve the following objectives:

A.    Provide standards for the orderly growth and development of the City, and guide and control the use of land to provide a safe, harmonious, attractive, and sustainable community.

B.     Achieve the arrangement of land uses depicted in the West Sacramento General Plan, consistent with the goals and policies of the General Plan.

C.     Enhance the appearance of the City and promote high-quality design.

D.    Preserve and enhance the quality of life and character of residential neighborhoods.

E.             Promote economic growth and the creation of jobs.

F.     Facilitate the appropriate location of community facilities, institutions, transportation, and parks and recreational areas.

G.    Allow for public participation in government decision-making regarding land use and development in a manner consistent with State law.

H.    Define duties and powers of administrative bodies and officers responsible for implementation of the Code. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.01.040 Relationship to the General Plan
This Code implements the goals and policies of the West Sacramento General Plan by regulating the use of land and structures within the City. This Code and the General Plan shall be consistent with one another. Any permit, license, or approval issues pursuant to this Code must be consistent with the General Plan and all applicable specific plans. In any case where there is a conflict between this Code and the General Plan, the General Plan shall control. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.01.050 Applicability
A.    Applicability to Property. This Code shall apply, to the extent permitted by law, to all property within the corporate limits of the City of West Sacramento and to property for which applications for annexation and/or subdivisions have been submitted to the City of West Sacramento, including all uses, structures, and land owned by any private person, firm, corporation or organization, or the City of West Sacramento or other local, State or Federal agencies. Any governmental agency shall be exempt from the provisions of this Code only to the extent that such property may not be lawfully regulated by the City of West Sacramento.

B.     Minimum Requirements. The provisions of this Code shall be minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare. Where this Code provides for more discretion on the part of a City official or body, that discretion may be exercised to impose more stringent requirements than set forth in this Code as may be necessary to promote orderly land use development and the purposes of this Code.

C.     Compliance with Regulations. No land shall be used, and no structure shall be constructed, occupied, enlarged, altered, demolished, or moved in any zone, except in accordance with the provisions of this Code, including the development and performance standards herein, and any permit issued pursuant hereto. The temporary or transitory nature of a use does not exempt it from this requirement.

D.    Conflicting Regulations. The regulations of this Code and requirements or conditions imposed pursuant to this Code shall not supersede any other regulations or requirements adopted or imposed by the West Sacramento City Council, the State of California, or any Federal agency that has jurisdiction by law over uses and development authorized by this Code. All uses and development authorized by this Code shall comply with all other such regulations and requirements. Where conflict occurs between the provisions of the Code and any other City ordinance, chapter, resolution, guideline, or regulation, the more restrictive provisions shall control, unless otherwise specified.

E.     Private Agreements. This Code shall not interfere with or annul any recorded easement, covenant, or other agreement now in effect, provided that where this Code imposes greater restriction than imposed by an easement, covenant, or agreement, this Code shall control. The City of West Sacramento shall not be responsible for monitoring or enforcing private agreements.

F.     Prior Ordinance. The provisions of this Code supersede all prior ordinances codified in Title 17 of the West Sacramento Municipal Code and any amendments. No provisions of this Code shall validate any land use or structure established, constructed, or maintained in violation of the prior Zoning Code, unless such validation is specifically authorized by this Code and is in conformance with all other regulations.

G.    Effect on Previously Approved Projects and Projects in Progress.

1.     Building Permit. Any building or structure for which a Building Permit has been issued may be completed and used in accordance with the plans, specifications, and permits on which said Building Permit was granted, provided at least one inspection has been requested and posted for the primary structure on the site where the permit is issued and provided construction is diligently pursued and completed within six months of permit issuance. No extensions of time except as provided for in the Building Code shall be granted for commencement of construction, unless the applicant has secured an allowed permit extension from the Planning Division.

2.     Previously Approved Land Use Authorization. This Zoning Code shall not interfere with, repeal, abrogate, or annul any previously granted land use authorization. All allowances, requirements, and conditions of approval of previous land use authorizations shall apply until the applicable review authority specifically repeals the allowance, requirement, or condition.

3.     Land Use Authorization in Process. An application for a discretionary land use authorization that has been accepted by the Planning Division as complete for processing prior to the adoption of this Code or any applicable amendment shall be processed according to the requirements of this Zoning Code or the prior Code upon written request from the project applicant. The written request shall be made no later than 30 days after the effective date of this Zoning Code and at least one action must be taken by the review authority within 210 days of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Code.

H.    Application During Local Emergency. The City Council may authorize a deviation from a provision of this Code during a local emergency declared and ratified under the West Sacramento Municipal Code. The City Council may authorize a deviation by resolution without notice or public hearing. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.01.060 Responsibility for Administration
The Zoning Code shall be administered by the West Sacramento City Council, Planning Commission, and Community Development Department as established in Chapter 17.34, Planning Authorities. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.01.070 Severability
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this Code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Code. The West Sacramento City Council hereby declares that it would have passed this Code, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, and phrase thereof, regardless of the fact that any or one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, or phrases be declared invalid or unconstitutional. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.01.080 Fees
The City Council shall establish by resolution, and may amend and revise from time to time, fees for processing the discretionary entitlement applications and other permits authorized or required by this Code. All fees shall be paid at the time an application is filed, and no processing shall commence until the fees are paid in full. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

Chapter 17.02 INTERPRETATION OF THE ZONING CODE
17.02.010 Purpose
The purpose of this chapter is to provide precision in the interpretation of the Zoning Code. The meaning and construction of words and phrases defined in this chapter apply throughout the Code, except where the context indicates a different meaning. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.02.020 Rules of Interpretation
In interpreting the various provisions of the Code, the following rules of interpretation shall apply:

A.    General Rules. The following general rules apply to the interpretation and application of the Zoning Code.

1.     The specific controls the general.

2.     In case of conflict between the text and a figure, illustration, heading, caption, diagram, or graphic, the text controls.

3.     Sections and section headings contained herein shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify, or in any manner affect the scope, meaning, or intent of any section.

4.     Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, the following conjunctions shall be interpreted as follows:

a.     “And” indicates that all connected words or provisions shall apply.

b.     “And/or” indicates that the connected words or provisions may apply singularly or in any combination.

c.     “Or” indicates that the connected words or provisions may apply singularly or in any combination.

d.     “Either… or” indicates that the connected words or provisions shall apply singularly but not in combination.

5.     The words “shall,” “will,” “must,” and “is to” are always mandatory and not discretionary. “Should” is a regulation that is not mandatory but must be either fulfilled or the applicant must demonstrate an alternative that fulfills the intent of the regulation. “May” is permissive.

6.     The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the future tense includes the past.

7.     The singular number includes the plural, and the plural, the singular.

8.     All references to departments, committees, commissions, boards, or other public agencies are to those of the City of West Sacramento, unless otherwise indicated.

9.     All references to public officials are to those of the City of West Sacramento, and include designated deputies of such officials, unless otherwise indicated.

B.     Calendar Days. All references to days are to calendar days, unless otherwise indicated. If a deadline falls on a weekend or holiday, or a day when the City offices are closed, it shall be extended to the next working day. The end of a time period shall be the close of business on the last day of the period (5:00 p.m.).

C.     Definitions. The Director shall make the interpretation for any definition not expressly identified in this Code.

D.    Uncertainty of Boundaries. If an uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any zone shown on the Official Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:

1.     Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of alleys, lanes, streets, highways, streams, or railroads shall be construed to follow such centerlines.

2.     Boundaries indicated as approximately following lot lines, City limits, or extraterritorial boundary lines shall be construed as following such lines, limits, or boundaries. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.02.030 Rules of Measurement
For all calculations, the applicant shall be responsible for supplying drawings illustrating the measurements that apply to a project. These drawings shall be drawn to scale and of sufficient detail to allow easy verification upon inspection by the Director.

A.    Fractions. Whenever this Code requires consideration of distances, parking spaces, dwelling units, or other aspects of development or the physical environment expressed in numerical quantities, and the result of a calculation contains a fraction of a whole number, the results will be rounded as follows:

1.     General Rounding. Fractions exceeding one-half or greater shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number and fractions equal to or less than one-half shall be rounded down to the nearest whole number, except as otherwise provided.

2.     Exception for State Affordable Housing Density Bonus. The calculation of fractions related to permitted bonus density units for projects eligible for bonus density pursuant to Government Code Section 65915 or any successor statute, and Chapter 17.23, Affordable Housing, Density Bonuses, and Incentives, any fractional number of units shall be rounded up to the next whole number.

B.     Measuring Distances.

1.     Measurements Are Shortest Distance. When measuring a required distance, such as the minimum distance between a structure and a lot line, the measurement is made at the closest or shortest distance between the two objects.

2.     Distances Are Measured Horizontally. When determining distances for setbacks and structure dimensions, all distances are measured along a horizontal plane from the appropriate line, edge of building, structure, storage area, parking area, or other object. These distances are not measured by following the topography or slope of the land.

3.     Measurements Involving a Structure. Measurements involving a structure are made to the closest support element of the structure. Structures or portions of structures that are entirely underground are not included in measuring required distances.

4.     Measurement of Vehicle Stacking or Travel Areas. Measurement of a minimum travel distance for vehicles, such as garage entrance setbacks and stacking lane distances, are measured down the center of the vehicle travel area. For example, curving driveways and travel lanes are measured along the center arc of the driveway or traffic lane.

5.     Measuring Radius. When a specified land use is required to be located a minimum distance from another land use, the minimum distance is measured in a straight line from all points along the lot line of the subject project, in all directions.



FIGURE 17.02.030.B: MEASURING DISTANCES

 

C.     Measuring Height.

1.     Measuring Building Height. Building height is measured from the average level of the highest and lowest points where the vertical plane of the exterior walls touch existing or finished grade, whichever is lower, to the highest point on the roof.



FIGURE 17.02.030.C.1: MEASURING BUILDING HEIGHT

 

2.     Measuring the Number of Stories. In measuring the number of stories in a building, the following rules shall apply:

a.     An interior balcony or mezzanine shall be counted as a full story if its floor area exceeds one-third of the total area of the nearest full floor directly below it or if it is enclosed on more than two sides.

b.     A basement shall be counted as a full story if the vertical distance between finished grade and the finished surface of the floor above the basement is more than six feet at any point.

c.     A story shall not exceed 25 feet in height from the upper surface of the floor to the ceiling above.



FIGURE 17.02.030.C.2: MEASURING THE NUMBER OF STORIES

3.     Measuring Height of Fences or Walls. The height of a fence or wall is measured as the vertical distance from the average of the ground levels immediately adjacent to both sides of the fence or wall to the height of such fence or wall.



FIGURE 17.02.030.C.3: MEASURING HEIGHT OF FENCES OR WALLS

 

4.     Measuring the Height of Decks. Deck height is determined by measuring from the ground to the top of the floor of the deck directly above the ground below.



FIGURE 17.02.030.C.4: MEASURING HEIGHT OF DECKS

 

D.    Measuring Lot Width and Depth.

1.     Lot Width. Lot width is the horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured at right angles to the lot depth at a point midway between the front and rear lot lines.

2.     Lot Depth. Lot depth is measured along a straight line down from the midpoint of the front property line of the lot to the midpoint of the rear property line or to the most distant point on any other lot line where there is no rear lot line.



FIGURE 17.02.030.D: MEASURING LOT WIDTH AND DEPTH

 

E.     Determining Average Slope. The average slope of a parcel is calculated using the following formula: S = 100(I)(L)/A, where:

1.     S = Average slope (in percent)

2.     I = Contour interval (in feet)

3.     L = Total length of all contour lines on the parcel (in feet)

4.     A = Area of subject parcel (in square feet)

F.     Determining Floor Area. The floor area of a building is the sum of the gross horizontal areas of all floors of a building or other enclosed structure, measured from the outside perimeter of the exterior walls and/or the centerline of interior walls.

1.     Included in Floor Area. Floor area includes, but is not limited to, all habitable space (as defined in the California Building Code) that is below the roof and within the outer surface of the main walls of principal or accessory buildings or the centerlines of party walls separating such buildings or portions thereof or within lines drawn parallel to and two feet within the roof line of any building without walls. In the case of a multi-story building that has covered or enclosed stairways, stairwells, or elevator shafts, the horizontal area of such features shall be counted only once at the floor level of their greatest area of horizontal extent.

2.     Excluded from Floor Area. Floor area does not include mechanical, electrical, and communication equipment rooms that do not exceed two percent of the building’s gross floor area; bay windows or other architectural projections where the vertical distance between the lowest surface of the projection and the finished floor is 30 inches or greater; areas that qualify as usable open space such as balconies and outdoor terraces; rooms submerged more than 50% below the finished grade of the property; and areas used for off-street parking spaces or loading spaces, driveways, ramps between floors of a multi-level parking garage, and maneuvering aisles that are located below the finished grade of the property.

3.     Non-Residential Uses. For non-residential uses, gross floor area includes pedestrian access interior walkways or corridors, interior courtyards, walkways, paseos, or corridors covered by a roof or skylight. Non-residential gross floor area does not include arcades, porticoes, and similar open areas that are located at or near street level and are accessible to the public but are not designed or used as sales, display, storage, service, or production areas.



FIGURE 17.02.030.F: DETERMINING FLOOR AREA

 

G.    Determining Floor Area Ratio. The floor area ratio (FAR) is the ratio of the floor area, excluding the areas described below, of all primary and accessory buildings on a site to the site area. To calculate the FAR, floor is divided by site area, and typically expressed as a decimal. For example, if the floor area of all buildings on a site totals 20,000 square feet, and the site area is 10,000 square feet, the FAR is expressed as 2.0.



FIGURE 17.02.030.G: DETERMINING FLOOR AREA RATIO

 

H.    Determining Lot Coverage. Lot coverage is the ratio of the total footprint area of all structures on a lot to the net lot area, typically expressed as a percentage. The footprints of all principal and accessory structures, including garages, carports, covered patios, and roofed porches, shall be summed to calculate lot coverage. The following structures shall be excluded from the calculation:

1.     Unenclosed and unroofed decks, uncovered patio slab, porches, landings, balconies and stairways less than four feet in height;

2.     Eaves and roof overhangs projecting up to three feet from a wall;

3.     Trellises and similar structures that have roofs that are at least 50% open to the sky through uniformly distributed openings;

4.     Swimming pools and hot tubs that are not enclosed in roofed structures or decks.



FIGURE 17.02.030.H: DETERMINING LOT COVERAGE

 

I.      Determining Lot Frontage.

1.     Corner Lot. The front of a lot is the narrowest dimension of the lot with street frontage.

2.     Through Lot. The front of a through lot abuts the street that neighboring lots use to provide primary access.

J.      Determining Setbacks (Yards). A setback line defining a required yard is parallel to and at the specified distance from the corresponding front, side, or rear property line. Required setbacks shall be unobstructed from the ground to the sky except where allowed pursuant to Section 17.22.050, Encroachments into Required Setbacks, subject to compliance with the Building Code. The following special regulations for determining yards apply when a lot abuts a proposed street or alley.

1.     Yards Abutting Planned Street Expansions. If a property abuts an existing or proposed street for which the existing right-of-way is narrower than the right-of-way ultimately required for the street, the required setback shall be established from the future right-of-way rather than the property line.

2.     Yards on Alleys.

a.     If a side lot line abuts an alley, the yard shall be considered an interior side yard rather than a corner side yard.

b.     In calculating the minimum yard for any lot with an interior side yard abutting an alley, no part of the width of the alley may be considered as part of the required yard.



FIGURE 17.02.030.J: DETERMINING SETBACKS (YARDS)

 

K.    Measuring Signs. The calculations of measurements related to signs are described in Chapter 17.29, Signs. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

Chapter 17.03 ZONES AND ZONING MAP
17.03.010 Zones Established
The City shall be classified into zones, the designation and regulation of which are set forth in this Code and as follows.

A.    Base Zones. The City is divided into base zones which are established as shown in Table 17.03.010, Base Zones, Specific Plan Zones, and Overlay Zones.

B.     Specific Plan Zones. Specific plan zones are established as shown in Table 17.03.010, Base Zones, Specific Plan Zones, and Overlay Zones.

C.     Overlay Zones. Overlay zones, one or more of which may be combined with a base zone, are established as shown in Table 17.03.010, Base Zones, Specific Plan Zones, and Overlay Zones.

TABLE 17.03.010: BASE ZONES, SPECIFIC PLAN ZONES, AND OVERLAY ZONES

Zone Symbol

Zone Name

General Plan Land Use Designation Implemented by Zone

BASE ZONES

 

 

Agricultural Zone

 

AG

Agricultural

Agricultural

Residential Zones

 

RE

Residential Rural Estates

Rural Estates

RRA

Residential-Rural Agricultural

Rural Residential

R-1

Residential One Family

Low-Density Residential

R-2

Residential-Medium Density

Medium-Density Residential

R-2.5

Residential-Medium High Density

Medium High-Density Residential

R-3

Residential-Multifamily

High Density Residential

Commercial and Mixed Use Zones

 

CBD

Central Business District

Central Business District

C

Commercial

Commercial

CH

Commercial-Highway

Highway Service Commercial

MU-NC

Mixed Use Neighborhood Commercial

Neighborhood Commercial Mixed Use

MU-C

Mixed Use Corridor

Corridor Mixed Use

WF

Waterfront

Riverfront Mixed Use

Employment Zones

 

M-L

Limited Industrial

Mixed Commercial/Industrial

M-1

Light Industrial

Light Industrial

M-2

Heavy Industrial

Heavy Industrial

M-3

Water-Related Industrial

Water-Related Industrial

BP

Business Park

Business Park

Public and Semi-Public Zones

 

PQP

Public/Quasi Public

Public/Quasi-Public

RP

Recreation and Parks

Recreation and Parks

POS

Public Open Space

Open Space

SPECIFIC PLAN ZONES

 

N/A

Bridge District Specific Plan

N/A

N/A

Washington Specific Plan

N/A

N/A

Liberty Specific Plan

N/A

OVERLAY ZONES

 

GG

Grand Gateway Overlay

N/A

SFP

Southport Framework Plan Overlay

N/A

PD

Planned Development Overlay

N/A

SC

Streetcar Overlay

N/A

(Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.03.020 Official Zoning Map and Zone Boundaries
The boundaries of the zones established by this Code are not included in this Code but are shown on the Official Zoning Map maintained by the City Clerk. The Official Zoning Map, together with all legends, symbols, notations, references, zone boundaries, map symbols, and other information on the maps, have been adopted by the Council and are hereby incorporated into this Code by reference, together with any amendments previously or hereafter adopted, as though they were fully included here. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

Division II: Zone Regulations
Chapter 17.07 AGRICULTURAL ZONE
17.07.010 Purpose and Applicability
The purpose of the Agricultural (AG) Zone is to:

A.    Preserve lands best suited for agricultural use; and

B.     Protect agricultural lands from the encroachment of incompatible uses.

The AG Zone is intended to provide areas for agricultural uses, single-unit development, commercial and industrial uses directly related to agriculture, and other compatible uses that may be appropriate in an agricultural area. This zone implements the Agricultural (AG) General Plan Land Use Designation. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.07.020 Land Use Regulations
Table 17.07.020, Land Use Regulations—Agricultural Zone, sets the land use regulations for the Agricultural Zone. Land uses are defined in Chapter 17.50, Use Classifications. In cases where a specific land use or activity is not defined, the Director shall assign the land use or activity to a classification that is substantially similar in character. Land uses not listed in the table and not substantially like the uses below may be allowed pursuant to Conditional Use Permit approval. Section numbers in the righthand column refer to other sections of this title.

TABLE 17.07.020: LAND USE REGULATIONS—AGRICULTURAL ZONE

“P” = Permitted use

“M” = Minor Use Permit required

“C” = Conditional Use Permit required

“-” Use not allowed

Land Use Classification

AG

Additional Regulations

Residential Uses

 

 

Residential Housing Types

See subclassifications below

Single-Unit Dwelling, Detached

P

 

Accessory Dwelling Unit

P

See §17.30.040, Accessory Dwelling Units

Family Day Care

See subclassifications below

Small

P

 

Large

P

 

Residential Care Facilities

See subclassifications below

Small

P

 

Large

C

 

Single-Room Occupancy

C

See §17.30.200, Single-Room Occupancy

Supportive Housing

Transitional and supportive housing constitute a residential use and are subject only to those restrictions that apply to other residential uses of the same type in the same zone.

Transitional Housing

 

 

Public/Semi-Public Uses

 

 

Park and Recreation Facilities

P

 

Commercial Uses

 

 

Animal Care, Sales, and Services

See subclassifications below

Boarding/Kennels

P

 

Veterinary Services

M

 

Lodging

See subclassification below

Short-Term Rental

P

 

Nurseries and Garden Centers

M

 

Industrial Uses

 

 

Food and Beverage Manufacturing

See subclassifications below

Small Scale

P

 

Large Scale

M

 

General Industrial

C

 

Transportation, Communication, and Utility Uses

Communication Facilities

See subclassification below

Telecommunication

See §17.30.240, Wireless Telecommunication Facilities

Agricultural Uses

 

 

Agriculture

See subclassifications below

Animal Production

C

 

Crop Production

P

 

Horticultural Production

P

 

Mineral Extraction

C

 

Urban Agriculture

See subclassifications below

Aquaculture

P

See §17.30.230, Urban Agriculture

Community Garden

P

See §17.30.230, Urban Agriculture

Market Garden

P

See §17.30.230, Urban Agriculture

Private Garden

P

See §17.30.230, Urban Agriculture

Other Uses

 

 

Accessory Uses and Structures

See §17.30.030, Accessory Uses, and §17.22.020, Accessory Buildings and Structures

Animal Keeping

See §17.30.060, Animal Keeping

Home Occupations

See §17.30.120, Home Occupations

Nonconforming Use

See Chapter 17.26, Nonconforming Uses, Structures, and Lots

Solar Energy Systems

See §17.30.210, Solar Energy Systems

Temporary Uses

See §17.30.220, Temporary Uses

(Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.07.030 Development Standards
Table 17.07.030, Development Standards—Agricultural Zone, prescribes the development standards for the Agricultural Zone. Additional regulations are denoted in the righthand column. Section numbers in this table refer to other sections of this title.

TABLE 17.07.030: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS—AGRICULTURAL ZONE

Standard

AG

Additional Regulations

Lot and Density Standards

 

 

Density (unit/parcel)

1

 

Minimum Lot Size (acres)

5

Smaller lots may be approved through PD approval pursuant to Chapter 17.18, Planned Development (PD) Overlay Zone, to accommodate clustered residential units and protection of agricultural lands.

Minimum Lot Width (feet)

300

 

Minimum Lot Depth to Width Ratio

4:1

 

Building Form and Location

 

 

Maximum Height (feet)

35

See §17.22.070, Height and FAR Exceptions

Minimum Setbacks (feet)

In the AG Zone, setbacks are measured from the edge of the public right-of-way.

Front

90

See §17.22.050, Encroachments into Required Setbacks

Street Side

20

See §17.22.050, Encroachments into Required Setbacks

Interior Side

20

See §17.22.050, Encroachments into Required Setbacks

Rear

30

See §17.22.050, Encroachments into Required Setbacks

(Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

Chapter 17.08 RESIDENTIAL ZONES
17.08.010 Purpose and Applicability
The purposes of the Residential Zones are to:

A.    Provide for a full range of housing types consistent with the General Plan;

B.     Preserve, protect, and enhance the character of the City’s different residential neighborhoods;

C.     Enhance the quality of life for City residents;

D.    Ensure that the scale and design of new development and alterations to existing development are compatible with surrounding residences and appropriate to the physical and aesthetic characteristics of proposed locations; and

E.     Provide sites for public and semi-public land uses such as parks, schools, day care, and other community uses that will serve City residents and will complement surrounding residential development.

Additional purposes of each Residential Zone:

Residential Rural Estates (RE). The RE Zone is intended to provide for residential development on large lots and provide a transition between agricultural lands and residential designated lands. This zone provides for residential development of up to one unit per 2.5 acres. Allowed uses include detached single units and accessory dwelling units, limited agricultural uses, public and quasi-public uses, and other uses that may be appropriate in a rural residential area. This zone implements the Rural Estates (RE) General Plan Land Use Designation.

Residential-Rural Agricultural (RRA). The RRA Zone is intended to provide areas for rural residential development with limited agricultural uses and limited on-site water and sewer systems. This zone provides for residential development of between 0.5 and 1.0 units per acre. Allowed uses include detached single units and accessory dwelling units, limited agricultural uses, public and quasi-public uses, and other uses that may be appropriate in a residential-rural agricultural area. This zone implements the Rural Residential General Plan Land Use Designation.

Residential One Family (R-1-A/B). The R-1 Zone is intended to provide areas for single-unit dwellings and to protect the characteristics of existing single-unit neighborhoods. This zone also provides for public and quasi-public uses, and similar and compatible uses that may be appropriate in a medium density residential environment. Residential densities shall be in the range of 1.1 to 6.0 units per gross acre. This zone implements the Low-Density Residential General Plan Land Use Designation.

Residential-Medium Density (R-2). The R-2 Zone is intended to provide areas for a variety of housing types at densities in the range of 6.1 to 12.0 units per acre. This zone also provides for public and quasi-public uses, and similar and compatible uses that may be appropriate in a medium density residential environment. Residential densities shall be in the range of 6.1 to 12.0 units per gross acre. This zone implements the Medium-Density Residential General Plan Land Use Designation.

Residential-Medium High Density (R-2.5). The R-2.5 Zone is intended to provide areas for a variety of housing types at densities in the range of 12.1 to 20.0 units per acre. Types of dwelling units include attached and detached single-unit dwellings, townhomes, condominiums, two-unit dwellings, multi-unit developments, and apartments. This zone also provides for public and quasi-public uses, and similar and compatible uses that may be appropriate in a medium high density residential environment. This zone implements the Medium High-Density Residential General Plan Land Use Designation.

Residential-Multifamily (R-3). The R-3 Zone is intended to provide areas for a wide variety of high-density residential development. Housing types include single-unit attached, townhouses, condominiums, and apartment buildings at densities ranging from 20.1 to 50.0 units per acre. This zone also provides for public and quasi-public uses, and similar and compatible uses that may be appropriate in a higher-density residential environment. This zone implements the High Density Residential General Plan Land Use Designation. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.08.020 Land Use Regulations
Table 17.08.020, Land Use Regulations—Residential Zones, sets the land use regulations for the Residential Zones. Land uses are defined in Chapter 17.50, Use Classifications. In cases where a specific land use or activity is not defined, the Director shall assign the land use or activity to a classification that is substantially similar in character. Land uses not listed in the table and not substantially like the uses below may be allowed pursuant to Conditional Use Permit approval. Section numbers in the righthand column refer to other sections of this title.

TABLE 17.08.020: LAND USE REGULATIONS—RESIDENTIAL ZONES

“P” = Permitted use

“M” = Minor Use Permit required

“C” = Conditional Use Permit required

“-” Use not allowed

Use Classification

RE

RRA

R-1

R-2

R-2.5

R-3

Additional Regulations

Residential Uses

Residential Housing Types

See subclassifications below

Single-Unit Dwelling, Detached

P

P

P

P

M

C

 

Single-Unit Dwelling, Attached

-

-

P

P

P

M

 

Two-Unit Dwelling

-

-

-

P

P

C

 

Multi-Unit Residential

-

-

-

P

P

P

 

Accessory Dwelling Unit

P

P

P

P

P

P

See §17.30.040, Accessory Dwelling Units

Family Day Care

See subclassifications below

Small

P

P

P

P

P

P

 

Large

P

P

P

P

P

P

 

Group Residential

-

-

C

C

P

P

 

Manufactured Home Park

-

-

-

C

C

C

 

Residential Care Facilities

See subclassifications below

Small

P

P

P

P

P

P

 

Large

M

M

M

P

P

P

 

Residential Facility, Assisted Living

-

-

-

P

P

P

 

Single-Room Occupancy

C

C

C

C

P

P

See §17.30.200, Single-Room Occupancy

Supportive Housing

Transitional and supportive housing constitute a residential use and are subject only to those restrictions that apply to other residential uses of the same type in the same zone.

Transitional Housing

Public/Semi-Public Uses

Colleges and Trade Schools

-

-

-

 

C

C

 

Community Assembly

See below

Less than 5,000 sq. ft.

-

-

P

P

P

P

 

5,000 sq. ft. or greater

-

-

M

M

M

M

 

Cultural Institutions

See below

Less than 5,000 sq. ft.

M

M

P

P

P

P

 

5,000 sq. ft. or greater

M

M

M

M

M

M

 

Day Care Centers

M

M

M

P

P

P

 

Hospitals and Clinics

See subclassification below

Skilled Nursing Facility

-

-

-

-

M

M

 

Park and Recreation Facilities

P

P

P

P

P

P

 

Schools (TK-12)

C

C

C

C

C

C

 

Commercial Uses

Animal Care, Sales, and Services

See subclassification below

Boarding/Kennels

C

C

-

-

-

-

 

Farmer’s Markets

-

-

M

M

M

M

See §17.30.110, Farmer’s Markets

Lodging

See subclassification below

Short-Term Rental

P

P

P

P

P

P

 

Transportation, Communication, and Utility Uses

Communication Facilities

See subclassification below

Telecommunication

See §17.30.240, Wireless Telecommunication Facilities

Agricultural and Extractive Uses

Agriculture

See subclassifications below

Animal Production

C

C

-

-

-

-

 

Crop Production

P

P

-

-

-

-

 

Horticultural Production

C

C

-

-

-

-

 

Urban Agriculture

See subclassifications below

Aquaculture

P

P

P

P

P

P

See §17.30.230, Urban Agriculture

Community Garden

P

P

P

P

P

P

See §17.30.230, Urban Agriculture

Market Garden, less than 1 acre

P

P

P

P

P

P

See §17.30.230, Urban Agriculture

Market Garden, 1 acre or more

M

M

M

M

M

M

See §17.30.230, Urban Agriculture

Private Garden

P

P

P

P

P

P

See §17.30.230, Urban Agriculture

Other Uses

Accessory Uses and Structures

See §17.30.030, Accessory Uses and §17.22.020, Accessory Buildings and Structures

Animal Keeping

See §17.30.060, Animal Keeping

Home Occupations

See §17.30.120, Home Occupations

Nonconforming Use

See Chapter 17.26, Nonconforming Uses, Structures, and Lots

Recharging Stations

See §17.30.180, Recharging Stations

Solar Energy Systems

See §17.30.210, Solar Energy Systems

Temporary Uses

See §17.30.220, Temporary Uses

(Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.08.030 Development Standards
Table 17.08.030, Development Standards—Residential Zones, prescribes the development standards for the Residential Zones. Individual letters in parenthesis refer to subsections that directly follow the table. Additional regulations are also denoted in the righthand column. Section numbers in this column refer to other sections of this title.

TABLE 17.08.030: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS—RESIDENTIAL ZONES

Standard

RE

RRA

R-1

R-2

R-2.5

R-3

Additional Regulations

Lot and Density Standards

Maximum Density (units/acre)

0.4

1

6

12

20

50

 

Minimum Lot Size (square feet, unless otherwise indicated)

2.5 acres (A)

1 acre

R-1A: 5,000

R-1B: 6,000

5,000

10,000

20,000

In the R-1, R-2, R-2.5, and R-3 Zones, smaller lots may be allowed through Conditional Use Permit approval pursuant to §17.08.040.C, Small Lot Single-Unit Development

Minimum Lot Width (feet)

100

100

50

50

80

100

Corner Lot (feet)

110

110

60

60

90

110

Minimum Lot Depth to Width Ratio

3:1

3:1

3:1

3:1

3:1

3:1

Maximum Lot Coverage (% of lot)

25

25

50

50

60

70

 

Building Form and Location

Maximum Height (feet)

30(B)

30(B)

30(B)

45(B)

55(B)

65(B)

See §17.22.070, Height and FAR Exceptions

Minimum Setbacks (feet)

Certain setback requirements in the R-2, R-2.5, and R-3 zones differ whether the development is located north or south of the Deep Water Ship Channel (DWSC).

Front

30

20

R-1A: 20

R-1B: 15

N of DWSC: Major arterials: 20,

Other streets: 15

S of DWSC: 10

See §17.22.050, Encroachments into Required Setbacks, and §17.27.090.B.3, Driveway Length

Street Side

20

16

R-1A: 15

R-1B: 10

N of DWSC: Major arterials: 20,

Other streets: 15

S of DWSC: 10

Interior Side

10

10

5(C)

5(C)

N of DWSC: 8(C)

S of DWSC: 5(C)

Rear

20

20

R-1A: 10(C)

R-1B: 15(C)

10(C)

N of DWSC: 8(C)

S of DWSC: 15(C)

Alley

20

20

5

5

5

5

 

Open Space Standards

Minimum Open Space (square feet per unit)

N/A

N/A

N/A

200, of which 100 must be private

150, of which 50 must be private

150, a minimum of 50% of the units must have 50 sf of private open space

See §17.22.090, Open Space

 

A.    Clustered Housing. In the RE Zone, smaller lots, at a minimum of 1.25 acres, may be approved through a Planned Development (PD) Permit pursuant to Chapter 17.18, Planned Development (PD) Overlay Zone, to accommodate clustered housing development.

B.     Maximum Height, First Floor Plate. For detached single unit dwellings the first floor plate height shall not exceed 12 feet in the front one-third of the structure.



FIGURE 17.08.030.B: MAXIMUM HEIGHT, FIRST FLOOR PLATE

 

C.     Zero Lot Line Option.

1.     All or part of the setback requirements of interior yards along property lines adjoining other private lots may be waived with the written approval of the City and the property owner of the lot adjoining the yard which is being encroached upon. This written agreement shall take the form of a zero lot line agreement which shall be recorded on the chain of title of both properties involved. The zero lot line agreement shall describe in detail the extent of said waiver. Zero lot line agreements may be executed between private property owners only. Swimming pools are not eligible for zero lot line agreements.

2.     Approval of a zero lot line agreement shall be subject to the following requirements:

a.     All building and fire code requirements resulting from the waiver of the setback requirement shall be met by the construction;

b.     Approval by the Fire Chief of the City of West Sacramento to ensure that adequate firefighting access is retained shall be obtained; and

c.     Where the setback is reduced to less than three feet, a maintenance access easement of five feet in width shall be provided on the adjoining property. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.08.040 Supplemental Regulations
A.    Paving. The maximum amount of impervious surfaces in street-facing yards is 50% of the required yard.

B.     Attached Single Unit and Multi-Unit Development. All attached single-unit and multi-unit development shall meet the following development standards.

1.     Building Entrances.

a.     Orientation. All units located along public rights-of-way shall have the primary entrance facing this right-of-way. Exceptions to this requirement may be approved for projects where the project site is located on major arterials carrying high traffic volumes and/or streets that do not allow on-street parking.

b.     Projection or Recess. Building entrances shall have a roofed projection (such as a porch) or recess with a minimum depth of at least five feet and a minimum horizontal area of 30 square feet. Exceptions to this requirement may be approved for alternative designs that create a welcoming entry feature facing the street, such as a trellis or landscaped courtyard entry.



FIGURE 17.08.040.B.1.b: PROJECTION OR RECESS,

ATTACHED SINGLE-UNIT AND MULTI-UNIT DEVELOPMENT

 

c.     Dwelling Unit Access. Exterior entrances to units shall be in a form of individual or shared entrances at the ground floor of the building. Unit entrances above the ground floor are also permitted; however, no exterior access corridor located above the ground floor may provide access to five or more units.

2.     Building Design. Buildings shall include adequate design features to create visual variety and avoid a large-scale and bulky appearance.

a.     Roof Line. The roof line at each elevation shall demonstrate an offset of at least 18 inches for each one to three units exposed on that elevation. Large, continuous roof planes are prohibited.



FIGURE 17.08.040.B.2.a: ROOF LINE, ATTACHED SINGLE-UNIT

AND MULTI-UNIT DEVELOPMENT

b.     Window Trim or Recess. Trim at least one-half inch in depth shall be provided around all windows, or windows shall be recessed at least two inches from the plane of the surrounding exterior wall. Foam is not a permitted trim material.



FIGURE 17.08.040.B.2.b: WINDOW TRIM OR RECESS,

ATTACHED SINGLE-UNIT AND MULTI-UNIT DEVELOPMENT

 

c.     Façade Articulation. All street-facing façades shall have at least one horizontal or vertical projection or recess at least two feet in depth, for every 25 horizontal feet of wall. Building entrances and front porches may count towards meeting this requirement.



FIGURE 17.08.040.B.2.c: FAÇADE ARTICULATION,

ATTACHED SINGLE-UNIT AND MULTI-UNIT DEVELOPMENT

 

d.     Façade Detailing and Materials. All visible building façades shall incorporate details, such as window and door trim, window recesses, cornices, changes in materials or other design elements, in an integrated composition. Each side of a building that is visible from a public right-of-way shall be designed with a complementary level of detailing and quality of materials.

e.     Building Colors. A unified palette of quality materials shall be used on all sides of buildings. Every building shall have at least two complementary colors. Every building shall have at least two complementary colors.

f.      Transition Areas. Where new multi-unit development is built adjacent to existing lower-scaled residential development, the façade facing the existing lower-scaled residential development shall be designed to provide architectural relief and interest, while also respecting the scale of adjacent neighbors.

i.      Height. Full-height recesses, a minimum of two feet deep, shall be provided along the façade to break the building into smaller discrete masses.



FIGURE 17.08.040.B.2.f.i: FULL-HEIGHT RECESSES,

ATTACHED SINGLE-UNIT AND MULTI-UNIT DEVELOPMENT

 

ii.     Window and Balcony Placement. Windows shall be offset to avoid direct sightlines into and from neighboring properties. Balconies and other private open space shall be positioned so they minimize views into neighboring properties.



FIGURE 17.08.040.B.2.f.ii: WINDOW AND BALCONY PLACEMENT,

ATTACHED SINGLE-UNIT AND MULTI-UNIT DEVELOPMENT

 

3.     Private Storage Space. Each unit shall have at least 200 cubic feet of enclosed, weather-proofed, and lockable private storage space with a minimum horizontal dimension of four feet. The required private storage space may be used for bicycle parking.

4.     Pedestrian Access. On-site pedestrian circulation and access shall be provided according to the following standards.

a.     Internal Connections. A system of pedestrian walkways shall connect all buildings on a site to each other, to on-site automobile and bicycle parking areas, and to any on-site open space areas or pedestrian amenities.

b.     To Circulation Network. Regular connections between on-site walkways and the public sidewalk and other planner or existing pedestrian routes or trails shall be provided. An on-site walkway shall connect the primary building entry or entries to a public sidewalk on each street frontage.

c.     To Neighbors. Direct and convenient access shall be provided to adjoining residential and commercial areas to the maximum extent feasible while still providing for safety and security.

d.     To Transit. Safe and convenient pedestrian connections shall be provided from transit stops to building entrances.

e.     Pedestrian Walkway Design.

i.      Walkways shall be a minimum of six feet wide, shall be hard-surfaced, and paved with concrete, stone, tile, brick, or comparable material.

ii.     Where a required walkway crosses parking areas or loading areas, it shall be clearly identifiable by a raised crosswalk, a different paving material, or similar method.

iii.    Where a required walkway is parallel and adjacent to an auto travel lane, it shall be raised or separated from the auto travel lane by a raised curb at least four inches high, bollards, or other physical barrier.

C.     Small Lot Single-Unit Development. Detached single-unit development located on lots less than the minimum lot size established for zones allowing single-family or multifamily residential uses may be approved with a Conditional Use Permit subject to the following standards. Small lot single-unit development that does not meet the following standards may be approved through a Planned Development pursuant to Chapter 17.18, Planned Development (PD) Overlay Zone, or a PD Permit if the development is proposed within an existing PD Overlay Zone.

1.     Development Standards. Small lot single-unit development is subject to the development standards and supplemental regulations of the base zone except as specified below.

a.     Maximum Density. Density shall be determined by the base zone.

b.     Minimum Lot Size. The minimum lot size is 2,000 square feet.

c.     Minimum Lot Width. 25 feet.

d.     Minimum Lot Depth. 50 feet.

e.     Maximum Lot Coverage. 75%.

f.      Setbacks.

i.      Perimeter Setbacks. The minimum setbacks from the property lines on the perimeter of the small lot single-unit development shall be the required setbacks of the underlying base zone.

ii.     Interior Street Setbacks. The minimum setbacks from the back of sidewalk of any interior street shall be 18 feet to the garage door and 10 feet to any living area or covered porch.

iii.    Side Yard Setbacks. The side yard setback shall be a minimum of three feet. For attached units, a minimum side yard setback of 10 feet shall be provided at the end of the row of the attached units.

iv.    Rear Yard Setbacks. Rear yard setback shall be a minimum of 10 feet.

2.     Entrances.

a.     Dwelling units that abut a public right-of-way or private street shall orient the primary entryway toward the street.

b.     Dwelling units located in the interior of the development shall orient the primary entryway toward and visible from a pedestrian pathway that is connected to a public right-of-way or private street.

c.     There shall be a minimum eight-foot separation between the primary entryway of a unit and the adjacent building wall of a neighboring unit.



FIGURE 17.08.040.C.2: ENTRANCES, SMALL LOT SINGLE UNIT DEVELOPMENT

 

3.     Open Space. Open space shall be provided pursuant to the open space requirements of the underlying base zone. In the R-1 Zone, open space shall be provided pursuant to the open space requirements of the R-2 Zone.

4.     Parking.

a.     Garages shall not be oriented to face perimeter streets.

b.     Required parking shall be provided on each lot, within a common parking area, or in a combination of the two.

c.     A maximum of one driveway curb cut shall be permitted for each 50 feet of perimeter street frontage.

5.     Pedestrian Circulation. Pedestrian pathways a minimum three feet wide shall be provided from the public right-of-way to all primary entryways and common areas, guest parking, and centralized trash enclosures.

6.     Required Findings. A Conditional Use Permit for a small lot single-unit development shall only be approved if the following findings are made in addition to any other findings required by this Code:

a.     The development will result in an intensity that is no higher than otherwise permitted in the zone and open space standards that are no less than required for a similar development within the zone;

b.     The design of the development provides for a comprehensive and harmonious arrangement of buildings, open spaces, circulation ways, parking, and development amenities; and

c.     The project relates to the existing and planned land use and circulation plans of the community and does not constitute a disrupting element in the development pattern of the neighborhood.

 

D.    Metal Storage Containers. Metal storage containers may not be used as permanent storage in Residential Zones. Metal storage containers may be allowed on a temporary basis in connection with a valid building permit in any zone in the City. (Ord. 20-4 § 2; Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

Chapter 17.09 COMMERCIAL AND MIXED-USE ZONES
17.09.010 Purpose and Applicability
The purposes of the Commercial and Mixed-Use Zones are to:

A.    Provide for the orderly, well-planned, and balanced development of commercial and mixed-use zones;

B.     Designate adequate land for a full range of local- and regional-serving commercial and retail services consistent with the General Plan;

C.     Maintain and strengthen the City’s economic resources;

D.    Provide appropriately located commercial areas that provide a variety of goods and services for residents, employees, and visitors;

E.     Provide opportunities for a mix of complementary uses that may combine residential and non-residential uses or combine a variety of nonresidential uses on the same site; and

F.     Promote pedestrian-oriented, mixed-use centers at appropriate locations.

Additional purposes of each Commercial and Mixed-Use Zone:

Central Business District (CBD). The CBD Zone is intended to preserve and expand the unique characteristics of the City’s original commercial center. This zone provides for development of an urban civic and cultural core, including civic uses such as City Hall and the public library, as well as restaurants, retail, service, professional office, multi-unit residential, and similar and compatible uses. Residential densities range between 20.0 and 60.0 dwelling units per acre. This zone implements the Central Business District General Plan Land Use Designation.

Commercial (C). The C Zone is intended to provide areas for locally-oriented retail and service uses, multi-unit residential above ground floor, public and quasi-public uses, and similar and compatible uses. Residential densities range between 5.1 to 18.0 dwelling units per acre. This zone implements the Commercial General Plan Land Use Designation.

Commercial-Highway (CH). The CH Zone is intended to provide for retail, commercial, service, amusement, and transient residential uses proximate to highway locations and dependent upon highway travel. This zone implements the Highway Service Commercial General Plan Land Use Designation.

Mixed Use Neighborhood Commercial (MU-NC). The MU-NC Zone is intended to provide areas for a mix of medium-density residential units that support commercial retail, office, and open space uses. This zone provides for lower intensity mixed-use development that contains a mix of residential townhomes, condominiums, and apartments that support pedestrian-oriented shopping, office, and open space. This zone is intended to accommodate uses that provide essential daily services and retail needs as well as recreational amenities, within walking distance of the surrounding neighborhood. Residential densities range between 12.0 and 60.0 units per acre. This zone implements the Neighborhood Commercial Mixed Use General Plan Land Use Designation.

 

Mixed-Use Corridor (MU-C). The MU-C Zone is intended to provide areas for a mix of higher-density residential uses that support commercial retail and office uses along the City’s major corridors. This zone provides for mixed-use developments along major corridors (e.g., West Capitol Avenue) that include a mix of residential and office/commercial or single-use residential, office, or commercial, with an emphasis on non-residential uses. Residential densities range between 20.0 and 60.0 units per acre. This zone implements the Corridor Mixed Use General Plan Land Use Designation.

Waterfront (WF). The WF Zone is intended to provide areas for high-intensity mixed uses which capitalize on the City’s river frontage, including amusement, retail, and visitor-serving amenities. This zone provides for marinas, restaurants, retail, amusement, hotel and motel uses, mid-rise and high-rise offices, multi-unit residential units which are oriented principally to the river, public and quasi-public uses, and similar and compatible uses. Residential densities range between 40 and 120 dwelling units per acre. This zone implements the Riverfront Mixed Use General Plan Land Use Designation. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.09.020 Land Use Regulations
Table 17.09.020, Land Use Regulations—Commercial and Mixed Use Zones, sets the land use regulations for the Commercial and Mixed Use Zones. Land uses are defined in Chapter 17.50, Use Classifications. In cases where a specific land use or activity is not defined, the Director shall assign the land use or activity to a classification that is substantially similar in character. Land uses not listed in the table and not substantially like the uses below may be allowed pursuant to Conditional Use Permit approval. Section numbers in the righthand column refer to other sections of this title.

TABLE 17.09.020: LAND USE REGULATIONS—COMMERCIAL AND MIXED USE ZONES

“P” = Permitted use

“M” = Minor Use Permit required

“C” = Conditional Use Permit required

“-” Use not allowed

Use Classification

CBD

C

CH

MU-NC

MU-C

WF

Additional Regulations

Residential Uses

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Residential Housing Type

See subclassifications below

Single-Unit Dwelling, Attached

P(1)/C

P(2)

-

P(3)/C

P(3)/C

C

 

Two-Unit Dwelling

P(1)/C

P(2)

-

P(3)/C

P(3)/C

P

 

Multi-Unit Residential

P(1)/C

P(2)

-

P(3)/C

P(3)/C

P

 

Accessory Dwelling Units

P

P

 

P

P

P

See §17.30.040, Accessory Dwelling Units

Family Day Care

See subclassifications below

Small

P

P

-

P

P

P

 

Large

M

M

-

M

M

M

 

Residential Facility, Assisted Living

-

-

-

C

C

-

 

Single-Room Occupancy

C

C

-

C

C

C

See §17.30.200, Single-Room Occupancy

Supportive Housing

Transitional and supportive housing constitute a residential use and are subject only to those restrictions that apply to other residential uses of the same type in the same zone.

Transitional Housing

Public/Semi-Public Uses

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Campground

-

-

C

-

-

-

 

Colleges and Trade Schools

P

P

-

-

-

-

 

Community Assembly

P

P

-

P

 

P

 

Cultural Institutions

P

P

-

P

P

P

 

Day Care Centers

P

M

-

P

P

M

 

Government Offices

P

P

-

P

P

P

 

Hospitals and Clinics

See subclassifications below

Clinic

C

M

-

M

M

M

 

Hospitals

C

C

-

C

C

C

 

Skilled Nursing Facility

-

-

-

M

-

-

 

Instructional Services

P

P

-

P

P

P

 

Park and Recreation Facilities

P

P

P

P

P

P

 

Parking Lots and Structures

C

C

P

-

M

C

 

Schools (TK-12)

C

-

-

C

-

C

 

Social Service Facilities

P

P

-

C

C

-

 

Tutoring Facilities

P

P

-

P

P

M

 

Commercial Uses

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Adult Entertainment

-

C

-

-

-

-

See §17.30.050, Adult Entertainment Uses

Animal Care, Sales, and Services

See subclassifications below

Animal Sales and Grooming

P

P

-

P

P

P

 

Veterinary Services

P

P

-

P

P

-

 

Automobile/Vehicle Sales and Services

See subclassifications below

Automobile Rentals

-

P

C

-

-

-

See §17.30.070, Automobile/ Vehicle Sales and Services

Automobile Repair, Major

-

C

P

-

-

-

See §17.30.070, Automobile/ Vehicle Sales and Services

Automobile Repair, Minor

-

P

P

M

-

-

See §17.30.070, Automobile/ Vehicle Sales and Services

Automobile/Vehicle Sales and Leasing

-

M

M

-

-

-

See §17.30.070, Automobile/ Vehicle Sales and Services

Must be located completely within an enclosed structure, including all vehicles for lease, sale, or display except as required by the DMV.

Fueling Stations

-

P

P

M

-

-

See §17.30.070, Automobile/ Vehicle Sales and Services

Large Vehicle and Equipment Sales, Service and Rental

-

-

P

-

-

-

See §17.30.070, Automobile/ Vehicle Sales and Services

Towing and Impound

-

-

P

-

-

-

See §17.30.070, Automobile/ Vehicle Sales and Services

Washing

-

P(4)

P

M

-

-

See §17.30.070, Automobile/ Vehicle Sales and Services

Banks and Financial Institutions

See subclassifications below

Banks and Credit Unions

P

P

-

P

P

P

 

Business Services

P

P

-

P

P

P

 

Commercial Entertainment and Recreation

See subclassifications below

Cinema/Theaters

P

P

-

P

P

P

 

Indoor Sports and Recreation

P

P

-

P

M

P

 

Outdoor Entertainment

-

-

C

-

-

M

 

Outdoor Sports and Recreation

-

M

C

-

-

M

 

Drive-Through Facility

See §17.30.090, Drive-Through Facility

Eating and Drinking Establishments

See subclassifications below

Bars/Night Clubs/Lounges

M

C

-

M

M

M

See §17.30.160, Outdoor Dining and Seating

Restaurant

P

P

P

P

P

P

See §17.30.160, Outdoor Dining and Seating

Farmer’s Markets

P

P

P

P

P

P

See §17.30.110, Farmer’s Markets

Food Preparation

P

P

-

P

P

P

 

Funeral Parlors and Interment Services

-

P

-

-

-

-

 

Lodging

See subclassification below

Hotels

M

M

P

M

M

P

 

Maintenance and Repair Services

P

P

-

P

P

P

 

Mobile Vendor

See §17.30.140, Mobile Vending

Nurseries and Garden Center

P

P

-

P

P

M

 

Offices

See subclassifications below

Business, Professional, and Technology

P

P

-

P

P

P

 

Medical and Dental

P

P

-

P

P

P

 

Personal Services

See subclassifications below

General Personal Services

P

P

-

P

P

P

See §17.30.170, Personal Services

Fortunetelling

P

P

-

P

P

P

See §17.30.170, Personal Services

Massage Establishments

M

P

-

M

-

M

See §17.30.170, Personal Services

Tattoo or Body Modification Parlor

P

P

-

P

P

P

See §17.30.170, Personal Services

Retail Sales

See subclassifications below

Building Materials Sales and Services

-

P

-

M

-

-

 

Convenience Markets

P

P

P

P

P

P

 

Liquor Sales (primary use)

C

C

 

C

C

C

 

Liquor Sales - Accessory (building less than 10,000 square feet)

C

C

 

C

C

C

 

Liquor Sales - Accessory (building more than 10,000 square feet)

P

M

 

M

M

P

 

Food and Beverage Sales

P

P

-

P

P

P

 

General Retail

P

P

-

P

P

P

 

Secondhand Store

P

P

-

P

P

P

 

Industrial Uses

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Custom and Artisan Manufacturing

P

P

-

P

P

P

 

Food and Beverage Manufacturing

See subclassifications below

Small Scale

M

P

-

M

M

M

 

Transportation, Communication, and Utility Uses

 

 

 

 

 

Airports and Heliports

-

-

C

-

-

-

 

Communication Facilities

See subclassifications below

Telecommunication

See §17.30.240, Wireless Telecommunication Facilities

 

Docking Facilities

-

-

-

-

-

C

 

Light Fleet-Based Services

-

P

P

-

-

-

 

Marinas

-

-

-

-

-

C

 

Recycling Facility

See subclassifications below

Reverse Vending Machine

-

P

P

M

M

-

See §17.30.190, Recycling Facilities

Agricultural and Extractive Uses

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Urban Agriculture

See subclassifications below

Community Garden

P

P

-

P

P

P

See §17.30.230, Urban Agriculture

Market Garden, less than 1 acre

P

P

-

P

P

P

See §17.30.230, Urban Agriculture

Market Garden, 1 acre or more

C

-

-

C

C

C

See §17.30.230, Urban Agriculture

Private Garden

P

P

-

P

P

P

See §17.30.230, Urban Agriculture

Other Uses

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Accessory Uses and Structures

See §17.30.030, Accessory Uses, and §17.22.020, Accessory Buildings and Structures

Home Occupations

See §17.30.120, Home Occupations

Nonconforming Use

See Chapter 17.26, Nonconforming Uses, Structures, and Lots

Outdoor Dining and Seating

See §17.30.160, Outdoor Dining and Seating

Outdoor Display and Sales

See §17.30.150, Outdoor Display and Sales

Recharging Stations

See §17.30.180, Recharging Stations

Solar Energy Systems

See §17.30.210, Solar Energy Systems

Temporary Uses

See §17.30.220, Temporary Uses

Specific Limitations:

(1)   Permitted on upper stories in a mixed-use development. Ground floor residential and residential-only development is allowed subject to Conditional Use Permit approval.

(2)   Permitted on upper stories in a mixed-use development.

(3)   Permitted on upper stories and in the rear of the site where nonresidential space with a minimum depth of 45 feet is provided along the street frontage. Street fronting residential and residential-only development is allowed subject to Conditional Use Permit approval.

(4)   Only as accessory to a fueling station.

 

(Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.09.030 Development Standards
Table 17.09.030, Development Standards—Commercial and Mixed Use Zones, prescribes the development standards for the Commercial and Mixed Use Zones. Additional regulations are denoted in the righthand column. Section numbers in this table refer to other sections of this title.

TABLE 17.09.030: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS—COMMERCIAL AND MIXED USE ZONES

Standard

CBD

C

CH

MU-NC

MU-C

WF

Additional Regulations

Lot, Density, and Open Space

 

 

 

 

 

 

Density (units/acre)

Residential development that is part of a mixed-use building shall comply with the allowed floor area ratio (FAR) range and is not subject to the allowed density range. Standalone residential development shall comply with the allowed density range.

Minimum

20

5

N/A

12

20

40

 

Maximum

60

18

N/A

60

60

120

 

Minimum Lot Size (square feet)

5,000

10,000

10,000

10,000

10,000

10,000

 

Minimum Lot Width (feet)

50

80

80

80

80

80

 

Maximum Lot Depth to Width Ratio

4:1

4:1

4:1

4:1

4:1

4:1

 

Building Form and Location

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Floor Area Ratio (FAR)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Minimum

0.3

0.25

N/A

0.3

0.3

.5

 

Maximum

3.0

0.5

0.5

1.5

3.0

10 (office)

3 (other)

 

Maximum Height (feet)

65(A)

65(A)

55(A)

65(A)

65 (A)

250(A)

 

Minimum Setbacks (feet)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Front

0(B)

0

15

0(B)

0(B)

0

See §17.22.050, Encroachments into Required Setbacks

Street Side

0(B)

0

15

0(B)

0(B)

0

See §17.22.050, Encroachments into Required Setbacks

Interior Side

0

0

8

0

0

0

See §17.22.050, Encroachments into Required Setbacks

Rear

10

10

10

10

10

0

See §17.22.050, Encroachments into Required Setbacks

Alley

0

0

0

0

0

0

 

Parking, from front and street side lot line

40(C)

40(C)

40(C)

40(C)

40(C)

40(C)

 

 

Open Space Standards

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Minimum Open Space (square feet per residential unit)

Total/unit: 150

Private: minimum 50 sf for 50% of units

Common: minimum 100 sf/unit

See §17.22.090, Open Space

 

A.    Maximum Height Adjacent to Residential Zones. The maximum height within 40 feet of a Residential Zone is limited to 40 feet. The maximum height within 50 feet of a Residential Zone is 50 feet.



FIGURE 17.09.030.A: MAXIMUM HEIGHT ADJACENT TO RESIDENTIAL ZONES

 

B.     Required Building Location. The following building location requirements apply in the CBD, MU-NC, and MU-C Zones:

1.     Build-To Line. Buildings shall be located within 10 feet of the required setback line for at least 40% of the linear street frontage.

2.     Corner Build Area. Buildings shall be located within 10 feet of the required setback line within 30 feet of the street corner.

3.     Frontage Improvements. The area between buildings and the property line shall be improved as part of a wider sidewalk, as outdoor dining/seating area, or with landscaping.

4.     Exceptions. These requirements may be modified or waived by the Director upon finding that:

a.     Entry courtyards, plazas, entries, or outdoor eating areas are located adjacent to the property line and buildings are built to the edge of the courtyard, plaza, or dining area; or

b.     The building incorporates an alternative entrance design that creates a welcoming entry feature facing the street.



FIGURE 17.09.030.B: REQUIRED BUILDING LOCATION, CBD, MU-NC, AND MU-C ZONES

 

C.     Limitations on Location of Parking. Off-street parking spaces shall be located to the rear of principal buildings whenever possible. Above ground parking may not be located within 40 feet of a street facing property line. Exceptions may be granted where the Director makes the following findings:

1.     The design incorporates habitable space built close to the public sidewalk to the maximum extent feasible; and

2.     The site is small and constrained such that underground parking or surface parking located more than 40 feet from the street frontage is not feasible. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.09.040 Supplemental Regulations
A.    Building Transparency/Required Openings. Exterior walls facing and within 20 feet of a front or street side lot line or pedestrian walkway shall include windows, doors, or other openings for at least 50% of the building wall area located between two and one-half and seven feet above the level of the sidewalk level. Such walls may run in a continuous plane for no more than 30 feet without an opening.

1.     Design of Openings. Openings fulfilling this requirement shall have transparent glazing and provide views into work areas, display areas, sales areas, lobbies, or similar active spaces, or into window displays that are at least three feet deep.

2.     Exceptions for Parking Garages. Multi-level garages are not required to meet the ground-floor transparency requirement.

3.     Reductions. The building transparency requirement may be reduced or waived by the review authority upon finding that:

a.     The proposed use has unique operational characteristics with which providing the required windows and openings is incompatible; and

b.     Street-facing building walls will exhibit architectural relief and detail and will be enhanced with landscaping in such a way as to create visual interest at the pedestrian level.



FIGURE 17.09.040.A: BUILDING TRANSPARENCY/REQUIRED OPENINGS

 

B.     Building Articulation. Any building over 125 feet wide shall be broken down to read as a series of buildings no wider than 75 feet each.



FIGURE 17.09.040.B: BUILDING ARTICULATION

C.     Building Orientation.

1.     Buildings shall be oriented to face streets and pedestrian walkways.

2.     Building frontages shall be generally parallel to streets and pedestrian walkways.

3.     Buildings shall be designed and oriented to minimize the visual intrusion into adjoining residential properties. Window, balcony, and deck locations shall be directed away from window areas of adjoining residences (on site or off site).

D.    Building Entrances.

1.     The primary building entrance shall face a public sidewalk.

2.     Entrances located at corners shall generally be located at a 45-degree angle to the corner and shall have a distinct architectural treatment to animate the intersection and facilitate pedestrian flow around the corner. Different treatments may include angled or rounded corners, arches, and other architectural elements.

3.     All building and dwelling units located in the interior of a site shall have entrances from a pedestrian walkway that is designed as an extension of the public sidewalk and connect to a public sidewalk.



FIGURE 17.09.040.D: BUILDING ENTRANCES

 

E.     Exterior Building Materials and Colors.

1.     A unified palette of quality materials shall be used on all sides of buildings.

2.     Exterior building materials shall be stone, brick, stucco, concrete block, painted wood clapboard, painted metal clapboard or other quality, durable materials approved by the review authority. Stucco, when used, shall cover no more than 50% of the front façade of the ground floor.

F.     Pedestrian Access. On-site pedestrian circulation and access shall be provided according to the following standards.

1.     Internal Connections. A system of pedestrian walkways shall connect all buildings on a site to each other, to on-site automobile and bicycle parking areas, and to any on-site open space areas or pedestrian amenities.

2.     To Circulation Network. Regular connections between on-site walkways and the public sidewalk and other planner or existing pedestrian routes or trails shall be provided. An on-site walkway shall connect the primary building entry or entries to a public sidewalk on each street frontage.

3.     To Neighbors. Direct and convenient access shall be provided to adjoining residential and commercial areas to the maximum extent feasible while still providing for safety and security.

4.     To Transit. Safe and convenient pedestrian connections shall be provided from transit stops to building entrances.

5.     Pedestrian Walkway Design.

a.     Walkways shall be a minimum of six feet wide, shall be hard-surfaced, and paved with concrete, stone, tile, brick, or comparable material.

b.     Where a required walkway crosses parking areas or loading areas, it shall be clearly identifiable through use of a raised crosswalk, a different paving material, or similar method.

c.     Where a required walkway is parallel and adjacent to an auto travel lane, it shall be raised or separated from the auto travel lane by a raised curb at least four inches high, bollards, or other physical barrier.

G.    Limitations on Curb Cuts. Curb cuts shall be minimized and located in the location least likely to impede pedestrian circulation. Curb cuts shall be located at least 10 feet from an intersection curb return or pedestrian crosswalk.

H.    Metal Storage Containers. Metal storage containers may not be used as permanent storage in Commercial and Mixed-Use Zones. Metal storage containers may be allowed on a temporary basis in connection with a valid building permit in any zone in the City. (Ord. 20-4 § 2; Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

Chapter 17.10 EMPLOYMENT ZONES
17.10.010 Purpose and Applicability
The purposes of the Employment Zones are to:

A.    Designate adequate land for industrial uses and growth consistent with the General Plan;

B.     Maintain and strengthen the City’s economic resources;

C.     Provide a range of employment opportunities to meet the needs of current and future residents; and

D.    Provide areas for a wide range of manufacturing, industrial processing, and service industrial uses and protect areas where such uses now exist.

Additional purposes of each Employment Zone:

Limited Industrial (M-L). The M-L Zone is intended to accommodate a limited group of business, professional, research and technical manufacturing uses that have requirements for space, light and air. This zone provides for industrial parks, wholesale and intensive retail commercial uses, warehouses, distribution centers, light manufacturing, offices, public and quasi-public uses, and similar and compatible uses. This zone implements the Mixed Commercial/Industrial General Plan Land Use Designation.

Light Industrial (M-1). The M-1 Zone is intended to accommodate a diverse range of light industrial and workplace uses and protect these areas from incompatible uses. This zone provides for industrial parks, warehouses, light manufacturing, public and quasi-public uses, and similar and compatible uses. This zone implements the Light Industrial General Plan Land Use Designation.

Heavy Industrial (M-2). The M-2 Zone is intended to accommodate manufacturing, processing, storage, and similar industrial uses, including those which may create some objectionable conditions, subject to the regulations needed to control congestion and to protect the surrounding area or adjoining premises. This zone provides for manufacturing, processing, assembly, research, wholesale and storage uses, trucking terminals, railroad facilities, and public and quasi-public uses, and similar and compatible uses. This zone implements the Heavy Industrial General Plan Land Use Designation.

Water-Related Industrial (M-3). The M-3 Zone is intended to provide for heavy, water-related industrial activity, including those which may create some objectionable conditions, subject to the regulations needed to control congestion and to protect the surrounding area or adjoining premises. This zone provides for docking facilities, bulk cargo handling, manufacturing and assembly, processing, warehousing, trucking terminals, railroad facilities, and wholesale and storage uses for industrial use and similar and compatible uses which are dependent on water transportation, and public and quasi-public uses. This zone implements the Water-Related Industrial General Plan Land Use Designation.

Business Park (BP). The BP Zone is intended to provide areas for large-scale, planned business park development. This zone provides for professional and administrative offices, medical and dental offices, laboratories, financial institutions, industrial parks, warehouses, distribution centers, light manufacturing, locally-oriented retail and service uses, public and quasi-public uses, and similar and compatible uses. This zone implements the Business Park General Plan Land Use Designation. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

17.10.020 Land Use Regulations
Table 17.10.020, Land Use Regulations—Employment Zones, sets the land use regulations for the Employment Zones. Land uses are defined in Chapter 17.50, Use Classifications. In cases where a specific land use or activity is not defined, the Director shall assign the land use or activity to a classification that is substantially similar in character. Land uses not listed in the table and not substantially like the uses below may be allowed pursuant to Conditional Use Permit approval. Section numbers in the righthand column refer to other sections of this title.

TABLE 17.10.020: LAND USE REGULATIONS—EMPLOYMENT ZONES

“P” = Permitted use

“M” = Minor Use Permit required

“C” = Conditional Use Permit required

“-” Use not allowed

Use Classification

M-L

M-1

M-2

M-3

B-P

Additional Regulations

Public/Semi-Public Uses

 

 

 

 

 

 

Colleges and Trade Schools

P

P

P

P

C

 

Emergency Shelter

C

C

C

C

C

See §17.30.100, Emergency Shelters and Daytime Services Facilities

Government Offices

P

P

P

P

P

 

Hospitals and Clinics

See subclassifications below

Hospitals

-

-

-

-

M

 

Instructional Services

P

P

-

-

P

 

Park and Recreation Facilities

P

P

P

P

P

 

Parking Lots and Structures

C

P

P

P

C

 

Public Safety Facilities

P

P

P

P

P

 

Schools

-

-

-

-

P

 

Social Service Facilities

P

M

C

C

C

 

Commercial Uses

 

 

 

 

 

 

Adult Entertainment

 

 

C

 

 

See §17.30.050, Adult Entertainment Uses

Animal Care, Sales, and Services

See subclassifications below

Animal Sales and Grooming

P

-

-

-

-

 

Boarding/Kennels

P

P

P

P

-

 

Veterinary Services

P

P

-

-

-

 

Automobile/Vehicle Sales and Services

See subclassifications below

Automobile Rentals

C

C

C

C

-

See §17.30.070, Automobile/Vehicle Sales and Services

Automobile/Vehicle Repair, Major

M

M

P

P

-

See §17.30.070, Automobile/Vehicle Sales and Services

Automobile/Vehicle Service and Repair, Minor

P

P

P

P

-

See §17.30.070, Automobile/Vehicle Sales and Services

Automobile/Vehicle Sales and Leasing

M

M

M

P

-

See §17.30.070, Automobile/Vehicle Sales and Services

Outdoor use area, including vehicle display area, is limited to 25% of the indoor unless additional outdoor use area is authorized pursuant to CUP approval.

Fueling Stations

-

P

P

P

-

See §17.30.070, Automobile/Vehicle Sales and Services

Large Vehicle and Equipment Sales, Service, and Rental

M

M

P

P

-

See §17.30.070, Automobile/Vehicle Sales and Services

Towing and Impound

C

C

C

C

-

See §17.30.070, Automobile/Vehicle Sales and Services

Washing

P

P

P

P

-

See §17.30.070, Automobile/Vehicle Sales and Services

Banks and Financial Institutions

See subclassifications below

Banks and Credit Unions

-

-

-

-

P

 

Check-Cashing Businesses

-

-

-

-

P

 

Business Services

P

P

P

P

P

 

Commercial Entertainment and Recreation

See subclassifications below

Cinema/Theaters

M

M

-

-

-

 

Indoor Sports and Recreation

M

M

C

-

P

 

Outdoor Sports and Recreation

M

M

C

-

C

 

Drive-Through Facility

See §17.30.090, Drive-Through Facility

Eating and Drinking Establishments

See subclassifications below

Bars/Night Clubs/Lounges

C

C

-

-

-

See §17.30.160, Outdoor Dining and Seating

Restaurant

P

P

P

P

P

See §17.30.160, Outdoor Dining and Seating

Farmer’s Markets

-

-

-

-

P

See §17.30.110, Farmer’s Markets

Food Preparation

P

P

P

P

P

 

Funeral Parlors and Interment Services

P

-

-

-

P

 

Lodging

See subclassifications below

Hotels

C

-

-

-

P

 

Maintenance and Repair Services

P

P

P

P

P

 

Mobile Vendor

See §17.30.140, Mobile Vending

Nurseries and Garden Centers

P

P

-

-

P

 

Offices

See subclassifications below

Business, Professional, and Technology

P

P

P

P

P

 

Medical and Dental

M

M

-

-

P

 

Personal Services

See subclassifications below

General Personal Services

P

P

P

P

P

See §17.30.170, Personal Services

Massage Establishments

P

-

-

-

-

See §17.30.170, Personal Services

Tattoo or Body Modification Parlor

P

P

-

-

-

See §17.30.170, Personal Services

Retail Sales

See subclassifications below

Building Materials Sales and Services

P

P

P

P

P

 

Convenience Markets

P

C

C

P

P

 

Food and Beverage Sales (less than 10,000 sq. ft.)

P

P

P

P

P

 

Food and Beverage Sales (10,000 sq. ft. or more)

-

M

M

M

-

 

General Retail (less than 10,000 sq. ft.)

P

P

P

P

P

 

General Retail (10,000 sq. ft. or more)

M

M

M

M

M

 

Industrial Uses

 

 

 

 

 

 

Cannabis-Related Industrial

See subclassifications below

Cannabis Indoor Commercial Cultivation Facility

C

C

C

-

-

See §17.30.080, Cannabis

Cannabis Laboratory Materials Testing Facility

C

C

C

C

C

See §17.30.080, Cannabis

Cannabis Manufacturing Facility

C

C

C

 

-

See §17.30.080, Cannabis

Wholesale Cannabis Logistics, Distribution, and Transportation Facility

C

C

C

-

-

See §17.30.080, Cannabis

Cargo Handling

-

-

-

P

-

 

Construction and Material Yards

P

P

P

P

-

 

Custom and Artisan Manufacturing

P

P

P

P

-

 

Donation Center/Station

C

C

C

-

-

 

Food and Beverage Manufacturing

See subclassifications below

Small Scale

P

P

P

P

P

 

Large Scale

P

P

P

P

M

 

General Industrial

M

M

P

P

C

 

Light Industrial

P

P

P

P

P

 

Research and Development

P

P

P

P

P

 

Salvage and Wrecking

-

-

C

C

-

 

Warehousing, Storage, and Wholesaling and Distribution

See subclassifications below

Indoor Warehousing, Storage and Wholesaling and Distribution

P

P

P

P

P

 

Outdoor Storage

-

-

C

C

-

 

Personal Storage

C

-

-

-

-

 

Transportation, Communication, and Utility Uses

 

 

 

 

Airports and Heliports

-

-

C

C

-

 

Communication Facilities

See subclassifications below

Facilities Within Buildings

P

P

P

-

P

 

Telecommunication

See §17.30.240, Wireless Telecommunication Facilities

Docking Facilities

-

-

-

C

-

 

Freight/Trucking Facilities

-

-

C

C

-

 

Light Fleet-Based Services

P

P

P

P

P

 

Marinas

-

-

-

P

-

 

Public Works and Utilities

-

-

C

C

-

 

Rail Car Loading Facility

-

C

C

C

-

 

Recycling Facility

See subclassifications below

Reverse Vending Machine

M

M

M

-

-

See §17.30.190, Recycling Facilities

Recycling Collection Facility

-

-

C

C

-

See §17.30.190, Recycling Facilities

Recycling Processing Facility

-

-

-

C

-

See §17.30.190, Recycling Facilities

Other Uses

 

 

 

 

 

 

Accessory Uses and Structures

See §17.30.030, Accessory Uses, and §17.22.020, Accessory Buildings and Structures

Nonconforming Use

See Chapter 17.26, Nonconforming Uses, Structures, and Lots

Outdoor Dining and Seating

See §17.30.160, Outdoor Dining and Seating

Outdoor Display and Sales

See §17.30.150, Outdoor Display and Sales

Recharging Stations

See §17.30.180, Recharging Stations

Solar Energy Systems

See §17.30.210, Solar Energy Systems

Temporary Uses

See §17.30.220, Temporary Uses

(Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.10.030 Development Standards
Table 17.10.030, Development Standards—Employment Zones, prescribes the development standards for the Employment Zones. Individual letters in parenthesis refer to subsections that directly follow the table. Additional regulations are also denoted in the righthand column. Section numbers in this column refer to other sections of this title.

TABLE 17.10.030: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS—EMPLOYMENT ZONES

Use Classification

M-L

M-1

M-2

M-3

B-P

Additional Regulations

Lot and Density Standards

 

 

 

 

 

 

Minimum Lot Size (sq. ft. unless otherwise indicated)

10,000

10,000

1 acre

1 acre

10,000

 

Minimum Lot Width (feet)

80

100

100

100

80

 

Minimum Lot Depth to Width Ratio

4:1

4:1

4:1

4:1

4:1

 

Building Form and Location Standards

Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR)

0.5

0.5

0.5

0.5

0.5

 

Maximum Height (feet)

65(A)

65(A)

75(A)

85(A)

65(A)

See §17.22.070, Height and FAR Exceptions

Minimum Setbacks (feet)

 

 

 

 

 

 

Front

Major arterial: 25

Other street: 15

See §17.22.050, Encroachment into Required Setbacks

Street Side

Major arterial: 25

Other street: 15

See §17.22.050, Encroachment into Required Setbacks

Interior Side

8 on each side except that a minimum of 15 is required along each property line abutting a Residential or Commercial and Mixed-Use Zone

See §17.22.050, Encroachment into Required Setbacks

Rear

8; 15 abutting a Residential or Commercial and Mixed Use Zone

See §17.22.050, Encroachment into Required Setbacks

Alley

0

0

0

0

0

See §17.22.050, Encroachments into Required Setbacks

 

A.    Transitional Height Standards. Where an Employment Zone abuts a Residential Zone, the following height limitations apply.

1.     Maximum height within 50 feet of a Residential Zone boundary: 35 feet.

2.     Maximum height between 50 and 75 feet of a Residential Zone boundary: 50 feet.



FIGURE 17.10.030.A: TRANSITIONAL HEIGHT STANDARDS

(Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.10.040 Supplemental Regulations
Large-Scale Office and Industrial Development. All new office or industrial development containing 80,000 square feet or more of floor area shall provide the following:

A.    Open space areas equal to 10% of the site area, providing gathering space or opportunities for active or passive recreation. Open space areas shall include amenities that enhance the comfort, aesthetics, and usability of the space, including, but not limited to, benches, trees, shade structures, drinking fountains, or public art.

B.     Pedestrian walkways that connect all parts of the park and to any existing or planned pedestrian facilities in adjacent neighborhoods.

C.     Stormwater detention facilities incorporated into the site landscaping as a visual amenity. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

Chapter 17.11 PUBLIC AND SEMI-PUBLIC ZONES
17.11.010 Purpose and Applicability
The purposes of the Public and Semi-Public Zones are to:

A.    Provide land for development of public, quasi-public, and open space uses that provide services to the community and support existing and new residential, commercial, and industrial land uses;

B.     Provide areas for educational facilities, cultural and institutional uses, health services, parks and recreation, general government operations, utility and public service needs, and other similar and related supporting uses;

C.     Provide opportunities for outdoor recreation, and meet the recreational needs of City residents; and

D.    Reserve areas for passive recreation, open space, and habitat protection and enhancement.

Additional purposes of each Public and Semi-Public Zone:

Public/Quasi-Public (PQP). The PQP Zone is intended to provide a broad range of government, institutional, educational, and assembly uses. All public streets, roads, highways, and bodies of water are assumed to be zoned PQP. This zone provides for government-owned facilities, public and private schools, and other public and quasi-public uses. This zone implements the Public/Quasi-Public General Plan Land Use Designation.

Recreation and Parks (RP). The RP Zone is intended to provide lands of natural beauty or recreational features for public use. This zone provides for existing and major planned public parks. This zone implements the Recreation and Parks General Plan Land Use Designation.

Public Open Space (POS). The POS Zone is intended to preserve lands for such purposes such as open space, habitat protection, drainage/flood control, mitigation, and passive recreation. This zone provides for natural open space areas where public ownership, easements, or other entitlement provide a public purpose. This zone implements the Open Space General Plan Land Use Designation. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.11.020 Land Use Regulations
Table 17.11.020, Land Use Regulations—Public and Semi-Public Zones, sets the land use regulations for the Public and Semi-Public Zones. Land uses are defined in Chapter 17.50, Use Classifications. In cases where a specific land use or activity is not defined, the Director shall assign the land use or activity to a classification that is substantially similar in character. Land uses not listed in the table and not substantially like the uses below may be allowed pursuant to Conditional Use Permit approval. Section numbers in the righthand column refer to other sections of this title.

TABLE 17.11.020: LAND USE REGULATIONS—PUBLIC AND SEMI-PUBLIC ZONES

“P” = Permitted use

“M” = Minor Use Permit required

“C” = Conditional Use Permit required

“-” Use not allowed

Use Classification

PQP

RP

POS

Additional Regulations

Residential Uses

 

 

 

 

Residential Care Facilities

See subclassifications below

Small

P

-

-

 

Large

P

-

-

 

Supportive Housing

Transitional and supportive housing constitute a residential use and are subject only to those restrictions that apply to other residential uses of the same type in the same zone.

Transitional Housing

Public/Semi-Public Uses

 

 

 

 

Campground

-

P

-

 

Colleges and Trade Schools

C

-

-

 

Community Assembly

P

P

-

 

Cultural Institutions

P

P

-

 

Day Care Centers

P

P

-

 

Government Offices

P

P

-

 

Instructional Services

P

P

-

 

Park and Recreation Facilities

P

P

P

 

Public Safety Facilities

P

P

-

 

Schools

P

-

-

 

Commercial Uses

 

 

 

 

Commercial Entertainment and Recreation

See subclassifications below

Indoor Sports and Recreation

M

P

-

 

Outdoor Entertainment

-

P

-

 

Outdoor Sports and Recreation

P

P

-

 

Farmer’s Markets

P

P

-

See §17.30.110, Farmer’s Markets

Transportation, Communication, and Utility Uses

 

 

 

Communication Facilities

See subclassification below

Telecommunication

See §17.30.240, Wireless Telecommunication Facilities

Marinas

C

C

C

 

Other Uses

 

 

 

 

Accessory Uses and Structures

See §17.30.030, Accessory Uses and §17.22.020, Accessory Buildings and Structures

Nonconforming Use

See Chapter 17.26, Nonconforming Uses, Structures, and Lots

Outdoor Dining and Seating

See §17.30.160, Outdoor Dining and Seating

Outdoor Display and Sales

See §17.30.150, Outdoor Display and Sales

Recharging Stations

See §17.30.180, Recharging Stations

Solar Energy Systems

See §17.30.210, Solar Energy Systems

Temporary Uses

See §17.30.220, Temporary Uses

(Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.11.030 Development Standards
Table 17.11.030, Development Standards—Public and Semi-Public Zones, prescribes the development standards for the Public and Semi-Public Zones. Additional regulations are denoted in the righthand column. Section numbers in this table refer to other sections of this title.

TABLE 17.11.030: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS—PUBLIC AND SEMI-PUBLIC ZONES

Standard

PQP

RP

POS

Additional Regulations

Building Form and Location

 

 

 

 

Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR)

0.5

0.2

0.05

 

Maximum Height (feet)

45

30

20

See §17.22.070, Height and FAR Exceptions

Minimum Setbacks (feet)

 

 

 

 

Front

20

20

20

See §17.22.050, Encroachments into Required Setbacks

Street Side

15

15

15

See §17.22.050, Encroachments into Required Setbacks

Interior Side

5

5

5

See §17.22.050, Encroachments into Required Setbacks

Rear

5

5

5

See §17.22.050, Encroachments into Required Setbacks

(Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

Chapter 17.15 SPECIFIC PLAN ZONES
17.15.010 Purpose
The purpose of this chapter is to identify all of the adopted Specific Plans that apply in the City of West Sacramento and reference the regulations that apply. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.15.020 Applicability
Once adopted, a Specific Plan shall govern all use and development of properties within the bounds of that Specific Plan.

A.    Where a Specific Plan is silent regarding development standards, the provisions of this title shall govern. The Director shall have the authority to determine which provisions of this title apply where a Specific Plan is silent.

B.     When a use is not specifically listed as permitted in the Specific Plan, the Director shall assign the land use or activity to a classification that is substantially similar in character. Land uses not listed in the Specific Plan as permitted or not found to be substantially like a permitted use are prohibited.

C.     No discretionary entitlement applications or other permits may be approved, adopted, or amended within an area covered by a Specific Plan, unless found to be consistent with the adopted Specific Plan. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.15.030 Adopted Specific Plans
The following is a list of the City’s adopted Specific Plans. Each Specific Plan area is mapped on the official Zoning Map.

A.    Bridge District Specific Plan. See the Bridge District Specific Plan on file with the City of West Sacramento.

B.     Washington Specific Plan. See the Washington Specific Plan on file with the City of West Sacramento.

C.     Liberty Specific Plan. (Placeholder for the proposed Liberty Specific Plan.) (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

Chapter 17.16 GRAND GATEWAY (GG) OVERLAY ZONE
17.16.010 Purpose
The purpose of this chapter is to identify the applicability of the West Sacramento Grand Gateway Master Plan. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.16.020 Applicability
The West Sacramento Grand Gateway Master Planning Document applies to all use and development of properties within the boundaries of the Grand Gateway Master Planning area. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.16.030 West Sacramento Grand Gateway Master Plan
All development within the GG Overlay Zone shall be consistent with the goals, objectives, and design requirements of the West Sacramento Grand Gateway Master Plan. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

Chapter 17.17 SOUTHPORT FRAMEWORK PLAN (SFP) OVERLAY ZONE
17.17.010 Purpose
The purpose of this chapter is to identify the applicability of the Southport Framework Plan. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.17.020 Applicability
The Southport Framework Plan applies to all use and development of properties within the boundaries of the Southport Framework Plan area. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.17.030 Southport Framework Plan
All development within the SFP Overlay Zone shall be consistent with the requirements of the Southport Framework Plan. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

Chapter 17.18 PLANNED DEVELOPMENT (PD) OVERLAY ZONE
17.18.010 Purpose and Applicability
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a Planned Development (PD) Overlay Zone that provides for one or more properties to be developed under a plan that provides for better coordinated development and incorporates development standards crafted to respond to site conditions to:

A.    Promote the development of a cohesive and aesthetically pleasing urban structure;

B.     Provide for greater flexibility in the design of the developments than is otherwise possible through the strict application of zone regulations;

C.     Ensure compliance with the General Plan and provide various types of land use which can be combined in compatible relationships with each other as a part of a holistically planned development; and

D.    Promote innovation and creativity in building design and development concepts. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.18.020 Zoning Map Designation
A Planned Development Overlay Zone shall be noted on the Zoning Map by adding the designation “-PD” to the base zone. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.18.030 Land Use Regulations
New development in a PD Overlay Zone requires a valid Planned Development (PD) Permit if it does not conform to the development standards in the PD Overlay Zone. Any permitted or conditional use authorized by this title may be included in an approved PD Permit consistent with the General Plan designation(s) for the property. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.18.040 Development Standards
A.    Minimum Area. The minimum area of a PD Overlay Zone shall be one acre; however, the City Council may approve a smaller area if it finds that a PD would provide greater benefits to the general welfare of the West Sacramento residents and property owners than development under conventional zoning because of unique characteristics of the site or the proposed use.

B.     Residential Unit Density. Except where a density bonus is granted in compliance with Chapter 17.23, Affordable Housing, Density Bonuses, and Incentives, the total number of dwelling units in a PD Overlay Zone shall not exceed the maximum number permitted by the General Plan density for the total area of the planned development designated for residential use, excluding areas devoted to public and private streets.

C.     Performance Standards. The performance standards prescribed by Chapter 17.28, Performance Standards, apply.

D.    Other Development Standards. Other development standards shall be as prescribed by the PD Overlay Zone. Where the PD Overlay Zone is silent regarding particular development standards, the development standards of the applicable base zone shall apply. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.18.050 Procedures
A.    Review Authority. A PD Overlay Zone must be adopted by the City Council. A public hearing before the Planning Commission is required prior to City Council review; and the Planning Commission shall make a recommendation to the City Council.

B.     Review Procedures.

1.     Zoning Amendment. An application for a PD Overlay Zone shall be processed as an amendment to the Zoning Map, according to the procedures of Chapter 17.44, Amendments to the General Plan, Zoning Code, and Zoning Map, and shall include a PD Permit.

2.     PD Permit. The PD Permit shall be processed in the same manner as a Conditional Use Permit application, pursuant to Chapter 17.38, Use Permits.

3.     Tentative Subdivision Map. When a PD Permit requires the submission of a tentative subdivision map, this map and all supporting documents shall be prepared and submitted concurrently with the application of the PD.

C.     Initiation. An application for a PD Overlay Zone shall be initiated by a property owner or authorized agent, Community Development Director, Planning Commission, or the City Council. If the property is not under a single ownership, all owners must join the application, and a map showing the extent of ownership shall be submitted with the application.

D.    Application Contents. A qualified applicant shall apply for a PD Overlay Zone on a form prescribed by the Planning Division accompanied by the required fee. The Planning Division may require an applicant to submit additional information and supporting data as considered necessary to process the application. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.18.060 Required Findings
A PD Permit and/or PD Overlay Zoning Amendment shall only be approved if all of the following findings are made:

A.    The proposed development is consistent with the General Plan and any applicable specific plan, including the density and intensity limitations that apply;

B.     The subject site is physically suitable for the type and intensity of the land use being proposed;

C.     Adequate transportation facilities and public services exist or will be provided in accord with the conditions of development plan approval, to serve the proposed development; and the approval of the proposed development will not result in a reduction of traffic levels of service or public services so as to be a detriment to public health, safety, or welfare;

D.    The proposed development will not have a substantial adverse effect on surrounding land uses and will be compatible with the existing and planned land use character of the surrounding area;

E.     The development generally complies with applicable adopted design guidelines; and

F.     The proposed development is demonstratively superior to the development that could occur under the standards applicable to the underlying base zone, and will achieve superior community design, environmental preservation and/or substantial public benefit. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.18.070 Conditions
In approving a PD Overlay Zone and/or PD Permit, the Review Authority may impose reasonable conditions deemed necessary to:

A.    Ensure that the proposal conforms in all significant respects with the General Plan and with any other applicable plans or policies that the City has adopted;

B.     Achieve the general purposes of this title or the specific purpose of the zone in which the project is located;

C.     Achieve the findings listed above; or

D.    Mitigate any potentially significant impacts identified as a result of review conducted in compliance with the requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.18.080 Expiration and Extension
A.    Expiration.

1.     PD Permit. A PD Permit shall expire two years after the effective date unless actions specified in the conditions of approval have been taken, or a Building Permit has been issued and construction diligently pursued. An approved PD Permit may specify a development staging program exceeding two years.

2.     Tentative Map. Where a tentative map has been approved in conjunction with a PD Permit, the PD Permit shall expire upon the expiration of the tentative map.

3.     Phased Development. If the applicant intends to develop the project in phases, and the Review Authority approves phased development, the PD Permit shall remain in effect so long as not more than one year lapses between the end of one phase and the beginning of the next phase.

B.     Extension. The Director may approve extensions of time for PD Permits, including those approved by the Planning Commission or City Council, in accordance with the following:

1.     Such extensions shall be approved only when it is found that the circumstances under which the permits were granted have not substantially changed.

2.     Such extensions shall be approved for not more than two years. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.18.090 Amendments of Approved Plans
A.    Amended Plans. Amendments to a PD Overlay Zone or PD Permit may be requested by the applicant or its successors. Amendments to the approved plan shall be classified as major or minor amendments. Upon receipt of an amendment application, the Director shall determine if the proposed amendment constitutes a major or minor amendment.

B.     Major Amendments. Major Amendments to an approved PD Overlay Zone or PD Permit shall be considered by the City Council at a duly noticed public hearing. An amendment will be deemed major if it involves one or more of the following changes.

1.     A change in the boundary of the PD Overlay Zone;

2.     An increase or decrease in the number of dwelling units for the PD Overlay Zone that is greater than the maximum or less than the minimum stated in the PD Permit;

3.     An increase or decrease in the floor area for any non-residential land use that results in the floor area exceeding the minimum or maximum stated in the PD Permit;

4.     Any change in land use or density that is likely to negatively impact or burden public facilities and utilities infrastructure as determined by the Public Works Director;

5.     Any change in land use or density that is likely to negatively impact or burden circulation adjacent to the PD Overlay Zone or to the overall major street system, as determined by the Public Works Director; or

6.     Any other proposed change to the PD Permit or the conditions of approval that substantively alters one or more of its components as determined by the Director.

C.     Minor Amendments. Amendments not meeting one or more of the criteria listed in subsection B shall be considered minor if they are consistent with and would not change any original condition of approval. Minor amendments may be approved by the Director. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.18.100 Project Review
Plans for a project in a PD Overlay Zone shall be accepted for Planning and Building Permits or subdivisions only if they are consistent with an approved PD Permit and any conditions of approval or the PD Overlay development standards. No project may be approved and no Building Permit issued unless the project, alteration or use is consistent with an approved PD Permit or PD Overlay. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

Division III: Citywide Regulations
Chapter 17.22 GENERAL SITE REGULATIONS
17.22.010 Purpose and Applicability
The purpose of this chapter is to prescribe site regulations that apply, except where specifically stated, to development in all zones. These standards shall be used in conjunction with the standards for each zone established in Division II, Zone Regulations. In any case of conflict, the standards specific to the zone shall control. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.22.020 Accessory Buildings and Structures
A.    Applicability.

1.     Detached Structures. The provisions of this section apply to roofed structures, including, but not limited to, garages, carports, sheds, workshops, gazebos, and covered patios which are detached from and accessory to the main building on the site. These provisions also apply to open, unroofed structures such as play equipment, decks and trellises, that are over 18 inches in height and are detached from and accessory to the main building on the site.

2.     Attached Structures. The provisions of this section do not apply to accessory buildings or structures attached to the main building, which shall comply in all respects with the requirements of this title applicable to the main building. Structures with a common wall or roof with the main building shall be considered part of the main building. Allowed building projections into yards and required building separations are stated in Section 17.22.050, Encroachment into Required Setbacks.

B.     Relation to Existing Structures. A detached accessory building or structure may only be constructed on a lot on which there is a permitted main building to which the accessory building or structure is related.

C.     Development Standards. Accessory structures shall meet the development standards of the zone in which it is located except as follows:

1.     Interior Side and Rear Setbacks. Accessory buildings and structures shall be set back a minimum of 10 feet from any rear lot line and five feet from any interior side lot line except as follows.

a.     Accessory structures that do not contain conditioned space, do not exceed 12 feet in height, are 120 square feet or less, and are located a minimum of five feet behind the street facing façade of the primary structure on site may be located up to three feet from an interior side or rear property line.

2.     Additional Location Limitation, R-1, R-2, and R-2.5 Zones. In the R-1, R-2, and R-2.5 Zones, accessory structures shall be located in the rear half of the lot.

D.    Plumbing. Accessory buildings and structures may have plumbing for a washer, dryer, toilet, shower, and/or utility sink. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.22.030 Development on Lots Divided by Zone Boundaries
A.    Generally. Where a lot is divided by a zone boundary, the regulations applicable to each zone will be applied to the area within the zone, and no use, other than parking serving a principal use on the site, can be located in a zone in which it is not a permitted or conditionally permitted use.

B.     Exceptions. If more than 60% of a lot (as measured by lot area) is located in one zone, modifications to the provisions of this section may be granted through approval of a Conditional Use Permit. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.22.040 Development on Substandard Lots
Any lot or parcel of land that was legally created through a recorded deed may be used as a building site even when consisting of an area, width, or depth less than that required by zone regulations.

A.    Development Standards. Substandard lots shall be subject to the same development standards as a standard lot.

B.     Reductions Prohibited. No substandard lot shall be further reduced in area, width, or depth, unless such reduction is required as part of a public improvement. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.22.050 Encroachments into Required Setbacks
Building projections may encroach into required setbacks according to the standards of Table 17.22.050, Allowed Encroachments into Required Setbacks, subject to all applicable requirements of the building code. The “Limitations” column states any dimensional, area, or other limitations that apply to such projections.

 

TABLE 17.22.050: ALLOWED ENCROACHMENTS INTO REQUIRED SETBACKS

Projection

Front or Street Side Yard

Interior Side Yard

Rear Yard

Limitations

All projections

No projection may extend closer than 3 feet to an interior lot line or into a public utility easement. Where any allowance of this title conflicts with applicable building codes, the more restrictive shall apply.

Cornices, canopies, eaves, and similar architectural features

Chimneys

Bay windows

3 feet

3 feet

3 feet

 

Fire escapes required by law or public agency regulation

4.5 feet

3 feet

4.5 feet

 

Uncovered stairs, ramps, stoops, landings, decks, porches, balconies, and platforms

All elements 3 feet or less above ground elevation

6 feet

3 feet

6 feet

 

All elements more than 3 feet above ground elevation

4.5 feet

3 feet

4.5 feet

 

Covered porches and patios

May not encroach

May not encroach

10 feet

Must be unenclosed on 3 sides except for required vertical supports, insect screening, and kickboards not exceeding 1 foot in height measured from ground level.

Ramps and similar structures that provide access for persons with disabilities

Reasonable accommodation will be made, consistent with the provisions of Chapter 17.42, Reasonable Accommodation.

(Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.22.060 Fences, Walls, and Hedges
Fences, walls, dense hedges, and similar structures shall comply with the standards of this section.

A.    Maximum Height. Fences, walls, dense hedges, and similar structures are limited to a maximum height as follows:

1.     Residential Zones.

a.     Within Required Front Setbacks. Three feet. An additional foot of fencing is allowed provided that all fencing above three feet in height is at least 50% open.

b.     Within Required Street Side Setbacks.

i.      Within 10 Feet of the Property Line. Three feet. An additional foot of fencing is allowed provided that all fencing above three feet in height is at least 50% open.

ii.     Within Five Feet of a Separated Sidewalk. Three feet. An additional foot of fencing is allowed provided that all fencing above three feet in height is at least 50% open.

iii.    Other Areas of the Required Street Side Setback. Seven feet.

c.     Within Required Interior Side Setbacks. Seven feet.

d.     Within Required Rear Setbacks. Seven feet.

2.     Non-Residential Zones.

a.     Within 10 Feet of Any Street-Facing Property Line, or Within Five Feet of a Separated Sidewalk. Three feet. An additional foot of fencing is allowed provided that all fencing above three feet in height is at least 50% open.

b.     All Other Required Setback Areas. Seven feet.

3.     Decorative Features. One entry gateway, trellis, or other entry structure is permitted in the required front or street-facing setback of each lot, provided that the maximum height or width of the structure does not exceed 10 feet. Such decorative feature shall not have any solid obstruction that exceeds two feet in diameter between the height of three and 10 feet.

B.     Intersection Visibility. Notwithstanding other provisions of this section, fences, walls, and related structures shall comply with Section 17.22.160, Visibility at Intersections.

C.     Materials.

1.     Prohibition on Potentially Hazardous Fencing Materials. The use of barbed wire, razor wire, ultra-barrier, electrified, and other hazardous fencing is not permitted unless such fencing is required by any law or regulation of the City, the State of California, Federal Government, or other public agency. Public safety and critical infrastructure facilities are exempt from this standard.

a.     Exceptions.

i.      Barbed wire/razor wire fencing is prohibited unless used in the A-1, RRA, and RE Zones and used for security purposes in the M-1, M-2, and M-3 Zones. Public safety facilities, such as police stations and fire stations, are exempt.

ii.     Electrified fencing is prohibited unless used in the ML, M-1, M-2, and M-3 Zones or used in the A-1, RRA, and RE Zones for animal control. A Conditional Use Permit is required for use in the BP Zone and for ML Zoned property located east of Interstate 80.

iii.    Temporary portable electric fencing utilized for the containment of grazing animals shall be permitted subject to the conditions listed in Chapter 15.11, Electric and Barbed Wire Fences, of the municipal code.

2.     Limitation on Chain-Link Fencing—Non-Residential Zones. In non-residential zones, chain-link fencing shall not be visible from adjacent at-grade public streets, a State highway, or adjacent Residential Zones.

3.     Limitation on Concrete Block. Plain, concrete block is not permitted as a fencing material. Concrete block must be finished with stucco (or decorative split-faced block) and capped with a decorative cap.

D.    Location. Fencing shall not be located within any public utility easement without written approval from the City Engineer and all affected utility companies. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.22.070 Height and FAR Exceptions
A.    Height. The structures listed in Table 17.22.070, Allowed Projections Above Height Limits, may exceed the maximum permitted building height for the zone in which they are located, subject to the limitations stated and further provided that no portion of a structure more than the building height limit may contain habitable areas or advertising. Additional height above this limit may be approved with a Conditional Use Permit, pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.38, Use Permits.

B.     FAR. Increases above the maximum permitted FAR shall only be considered for hotels and hospitals, and only with approval of a use permit, unless otherwise specified for the property in an adopted specific plan. This can be considered when the applicant can demonstrate that the proposed development will: (1) generate low peak-hour traffic; and (2) not create a dominating visual prominence. In each case where an increase in the maximum permitted FAR has been allowed, all other development standards for the site must be met.

TABLE 17.22.070: ALLOWED PROJECTIONS ABOVE HEIGHT LIMITS

Structures Allowed Above the Height Limit

Maximum Vertical Projection Above the Height Limit

Maximum Coverage and Locational Limitation

Skylights

1 foot

None

Chimneys

8 feet

None

Decorative features including spires, cupolas, bell towers, domes, obelisks, and monuments

Rooftop open space features including sun decks, sunshade and windscreens, trellises, and landscaping

10 feet

Limited to a total of 20% of roof area, inclusive of all structures.

Must be set back from the exterior wall one foot for every foot of projection above the height limit.

Elevator and stair towers (for multi-unit residential and non-residential buildings only)

16 feet

Limited to a total of 10% of roof area.

Must be set back from the exterior wall one foot for every foot of projection above the height limit.

Mechanical equipment penthouses

10 feet

Limited to 60% of roof area.

Must be set back from the exterior wall one foot for every foot of projection above the height limit.

Mechanical equipment

5 feet

Must be set back from the exterior wall one foot for every foot of projection above the height limit and screened from view from adjacent at-grade public streets.

Fire escapes, catwalks, and open railings required by law

No restriction

None

Telecommunication facilities, antennas, microwave equipment, and radio towers

Subject to the provisions of §17.30.240, Wireless Telecommunication Facilities

(Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.22.080 Lighting and Illumination
A.    Applicability. The standards of this section apply to all new development and to exterior alterations and additions that involve replacement light fixtures or systems, except as provided below.

1.     Exceptions. The following outdoor lighting shall not be subject to the provisions of this section.

a.     Public and private street lighting.

b.     Athletic Field Lights. Athletic field lights used within a school campus or public or private park.

c.     Safety and Security Lighting. Safety and security lighting for public facilities.

d.     Construction and Emergency Lighting. All construction or emergency lighting fixtures provided they are temporary and are discontinued immediately upon completion of the construction work or abatement of the emergency.

e.     Seasonal Lighting. Seasonal lighting displays related to cultural or religious celebrations.

B.     Prohibitions. The following types of outdoor lighting are prohibited.

1.     Searchlights. The operation of searchlights for advertising purposes.

2.     Mercury Vapor. Mercury vapor lights.

3.     Other Light Types. Laser lights or any other lighting that flashes, blinks, scrolls, alternates, or moves (excluding bi-level lighting).

C.     General Requirements. Outdoor lighting shall be designed to be an integral part of the built environment, reflecting a balance for the lighting needs with the contextual ambient light level and surrounding nighttime characteristics of the community while still employing Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design (CPTED) principles. Lighting for commercial installations adjacent to or near residential uses shall be compatible with and not directly illuminate nearby residential uses.

1.     Maximum Height.

a.     Within 100 feet of a Residential Zone. 16 feet.

b.     Other Locations. 25 feet.

c.     Additional Height. The Planning Commission may allow additional height for activities, uses, or development with unique lighting needs; accentuating historic architectural features of a building; accentuating signage and/or landscape features; or for security purposes.



FIGURE 17.22.080.C: MAXIMUM HEIGHT, OUTDOOR LIGHTING

 

2.     Fixture Types. All luminaries shall meet the most recently adopted criteria of the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IESNA) for “cut off” or “full cut off” luminaries.

3.     Design of Fixtures. Fixtures shall be appropriate to the style and scale of the architecture. Fixtures on building shall be attached only to walls or eaves, and the top of the fixture shall not exceed the height of the parapet, roof, or eave of the roof.

4.     Timing Controls. All outdoor lighting in non-residential development shall be on a time clock or photo-sensor system and turned off during daylight hours and during hours when the building or, in the case of shopping centers, all buildings, are not in use and the lighting is not required for security.

5.     Light Trespass. All lights shall be directed, oriented, and shielded to prevent light trespass or glare onto adjacent properties. The light level at property lines shall not exceed 0.3 foot-candles.

D.    Supplemental Requirements.

1.     Multi-Unit Residential Buildings.

a.     Lighting in parking, garage, and carport areas shall be maintained with a minimum of one foot-candle of illumination at the ground level during the hours of darkness.

b.     Aisles, passageways, and recesses related to and within the building complex shall be illuminated with an intensity of at least one-quarter foot-candle at the ground level during the hours of darkness.

2.     Non-Residential Buildings. All exterior doors, during the hours of darkness, shall be illuminated with a minimum of one-half foot-candle of light. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.22.090 Open Space
Open space required by this Code shall be provided in accordance with the following.

A.    Configuration.

1.     Private open space typically consists of balconies, decks, patios, fenced yards, and other similar areas outside the residential unit.

2.     Common open space typically consists of landscaped areas, patios, swimming pools, barbeque areas, playgrounds, turf, or other such improvements as are appropriate to enhance the outdoor environment of the development; these can be located at the ground level, on parking podiums, or on rooftops, provided they are adequately landscaped.

B.     Minimum Dimensions.

1.     Private Open Space. Private open space located on the ground level (e.g., yards, decks, patios) shall have no dimension less than eight feet. Private open space located above ground level (e.g., balconies) shall have no dimension less than six feet.

2.     Common Open Space. Minimum length and width dimension of 15 feet.

C.     Usability. A surface shall be provided that allows convenient use for outdoor living and/or recreation. Such surface may be any practicable combination of lawn, garden, flagstone, wood planking, concrete, or other serviceable, dust-free surfacing. Slope shall not exceed 10%.

D.    Accessibility.

1.     Private Open Space. The space shall be accessible to only one living unit by a doorway to a habitable room or hallway.

2.     Common Open Space. The space shall be accessible to the living units on the lot. It shall be served by any stairway or other accessway qualifying as an egress facility from a habitable room. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.22.100 Outdoor Storage
Storage of goods, materials, machines, equipment, and inoperable vehicles or parts outside of a building for more than 72 hours shall conform to the standards of Table 17.22.100, Outdoor Storage Regulations.

 

TABLE 17.22.100: OUTDOOR STORAGE REGULATIONS

Zone

Permissibility of Outdoor Storage

AG, RE, and RRA

Permitted as an accessory use where:

• Occupies less than 200 square feet or 5% of the lot area, whichever is greater. The Director may allow additional area on properties dedicated to agricultural production for agriculture related outdoor storage;

• Located outside of all required setbacks, parking and circulation areas, and landscaped areas; and

• Screened consistent with the requirements of §17.22.130, Screening.

R-1, R-2, R-2.5, and R-3

Permitted as an accessory use where:

• Occupies no more than 200 square feet;

• Located outside of all required setbacks, parking and circulations areas, and required landscaped areas; and

• Screened consistent with the requirements of §17.22.130, Screening.

Commercial and Mixed-Use Zones, BP, RP, and POS

Not permitted (all storage must be located within an enclosed building).

M-L, M-1, M-2, M-3, and PQP

Permitted as an accessory use where:

• Located outside of all required setbacks, parking and circulation areas, and landscaped areas; and

• Screened consistent with the requirements of §17.22.130, Screening.

(Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.22.110 Parking and Storage of Commercial and Recreational Vehicles
The parking and storage of commercial and recreational vehicles on private property is subject to the following standards.

A.    Commercial Vehicles and Equipment. Commercial vehicles, including any self-propelled vehicle over 10,000 pounds gross vehicle rating and/or having more than two axles and possessing a commercial license plate, shall not be parked or stored in any Residential Zone or any street adjoining a Residential Zone except as follows.

1.     RE or RRA Zones. Commercial vehicles may be parked or stored in the RE or RRA Zones if kept fully within a garage or barn.

B.     Trailers and Equipment. Trailers or equipment used for commercial purposes shall be stored within an enclosed building.

C.     Recreational Vehicles.

1.     Location. Recreational vehicles parked on residential lots which were of record on or before August 23, 1984, must be parked at least five feet from the sidewalk, street right-of-way, or property line, whichever is farther. Recreation vehicles parked on residential lots created after August 23, 1984, may not be parked in a required setback adjacent to a public street.

2.     Paving and Surfacing.

a.     Total Area of Surfacing. No more than 350 square feet of paved or improved surfaces shall be used for the parking or storage of recreational vehicles in any Residential Zone.

b.     Surfacing for Parking in Front Yards. Recreational vehicles located within front yards shall be parked on a paved surface in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.27.090.G, Paving and Surfacing.

c.     Surfacing for Parking in Side or Rear Yard. Recreational vehicles located within side or rear yards shall be parked on a paved or improved surface, which may include pavement or turfstones. All surfaces shall be kept clear of weeds, debris, mud, and vehicle fluids that contaminate soil or groundwater.

3.     Secondary Driveway. A secondary driveway for recreational vehicles may be allowed on corner lots outside of the vision triangle of the intersection, with the approval of an encroachment permit from the Community Development Department. Paving strips may be used on the driveway.

4.     Registration. The recreational vehicle shall have a current and valid registration displayed.

5.     Dwelling Use Prohibited. No recreational vehicle shall be used for dwelling purposes on any site except as approved.

6.     Fluid Collection Systems. Drip pans or other fluid collection systems shall be used on any recreational vehicle that shows evidence of leaky fluids. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.22.120 Refuse and Recycling Areas
A.    General Requirements.

1.     In accordance with the California Solid Waste Reuse and Recycling Access Act of 1991 (Public Resources Code Sections 42900 through 42911), any project for which an application for a Building Permit is submitted after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title, shall include adequate, accessible areas for collecting and loading refuse and recyclable materials. These regulations apply to refuse and recycling areas not accessible to the public, and which are used exclusively by the tenants/owners of the development site.

2.     In accordance with the California Waste Management Act of 1989 (Public Resources Code Sections 40050 through 40063) and the City of West Sacramento Municipal Code Chapter 8.08, areas for recycling shall be adequate in capacity, number and distribution to serve the development where the project occurs. These areas shall be located within, or as close as possible to, planned or existing exterior collection areas/enclosures.

B.     Applicability. The provisions of this section apply to all development except as follows:

1.     Any project for which a Building Permit is not required from the City Building Department;

2.     All commercial and multi-unit activity that requires only an over the counter permit;

3.     All permits not related to the interior improvement of the building excluding new structures; and

4.     Single-unit dwellings and other uses which participate in the City’s curbside recycling program.

C.     Size and Location. Refuse, including organic waste and fats, oils, and grease, and recycling collection areas shall be sized and located as provided below. Additional storage area and alternative designs may be required based on the types and quantities of materials to be generated by the proposed land use and the mode of collection. Additional design requirements may be applied for the purposes of preventing stormwater pollution discharges.

1.     Size and Number. Refuse and recycling collection areas shall be adequate in capacity, number, and distribution to accommodate all trash, garbage, recyclables, green waste, organic waste, and any other waste until such items are picked up by the City or its contracted collector.

2.     Location.

a.     Refuse and recycling collection areas shall be located outside required yard and setback, parking or landscaped areas, or any other area required by the Municipal Code to be constructed or maintained unencumbered according to fire codes and other applicable building and public safety laws.

b.     Enclosures shall be located a minimum of 10 feet from any structure, 25 feet from any public street, 15 feet from the edge of pavement of a private street and, in commercial areas, 25 feet from any residential zoned property line.

c.     Collection areas shall be no more than 250 feet from each living unit within a residential development.

D.    Storm Drain Inlets. Storm drain inlets shall not be placed in the driving path of the collection vehicle. Drains installed in the exterior collection area, or beneath containers, must be connected to a grease removal device prior to discharging to sanitary sewer and the collection area shall be protected from the rain by a roof over the collection area. Storm drain inlets shall not be installed inside of the enclosure, or within the drainage area of the exterior collection areas.

E.     Security and Function Design Measures.

1.     Enclosure Required. Exterior collection areas must be within an enclosure that meets the following standards.

a.     Minimum Height. Five feet.

b.     Design. The enclosure shall be designed to architecturally integrate with the adjacent building structure(s).

c.     Access. A pedestrian access and separate access for primary collection shall be provided.

d.     Enclosure Materials. Exterior collection areas must be within an enclosure constructed of solid concrete or masonry wall.

i.      Concrete curbs, bollard, or wheel stops shall be installed or constructed inside the enclosure to prevent bins from damaging the enclosure.

2.     Enclosure Gates. The primary collection access point must be screened with a gate a minimum of five feet in height, made of steel or approved equivalent and detached from masonry, which is locked continuously except on collection days.

a.     Enclosure gates must have a four-inch clearance off the finished pad or apron and surrounding curbs.

b.     Gates in the opened position shall not infringe on the traffic aisles and open to at least 135 degrees when secured open.

c.     Hardware should be of enough strength to accommodate repetitive swinging.

d.     Gated opening for ingress/egress of bins must be a minimum of 16 feet wide with no posts in the middle, place gate posts outside this span to avoid reducing the span.

e.     Gates must always remain closed except when being services by waste hauler.

f.      Gate doors shall be provided a means to secure the doors both opened and closed, e.g., cane bolt with sleeve and slide latch between doors and sleeve in pavement. The bolts should be a minimum one-half inch in diameter and the sleeves for both should be a minimum of one inch or double the size of the bolt to allow flexibility.

3.     Protection from Bins and Vehicles. To prevent damage to the enclosure from bins or vehicles, the enclosure shall have bollards, painted to match adjacent wall (façade) color inside the enclosure, or interior concrete curbing, a minimum of six-inch-high and six-inch-deep, or wheel stops set a minimum of six inches from each wall.

4.     Covers. The refuse and recyclable materials in exterior collection areas shall be protected from the rain by a roof over the collection area or by use of covered receptacles/containers within the collection area. Lids must always remain closed except when loading or unloading.

F.     Screening. An exterior collection area shall be fully screened from public view by an eight-foot-wide planter around the perimeter of the collection area walls/fence, except for the access point(s). Landscaping within this planter shall be consistent with the West Sacramento Landscape Development Guidelines.

1.     Existing development proposing less than 50% increase in the gross floor area shall not be required to provide this landscaping.

2.     The Zoning Administrator may waive the requirement, or reduce the required size, or require a landscaped area of equivalent square footage be installed in a different location on the property or require that existing landscape area(s) be brought up to current standards, including compliance with the City’s Water Efficient Landscaping Ordinance (Chapter 13.04, Article XII).

G.    Access Requirements. The storage area for refuse and recyclable materials must be accessible to pedestrians (both residents and/or employees) of the development site and to refuse and recycling haulers. Vehicle access requirements are as follows:

1.     Driveways or travel aisles leading to exterior collection areas or enclosures shall be a minimum of 16 feet in width and paved in accordance with this title’s paving requirements.

2.     Where driveways do not extend from street to street, a turnaround area for collection vehicles shall be provided. Minimum turning radius for collection vehicles at 26/46.

3.     Driveways or travel aisles shall provide unobstructed paved access for collection vehicles and provide a minimum of 15 feet vertical clearance. In loading areas, minimum overhead vertical clearance shall be 25 feet for loading operations.

4.     A concrete apron or pad, having a minimum size of 10 feet wide by 20 feet long, shall be constructed in front of each exterior collection area or enclosure or at the point of pick-up by the collection vehicle. The purpose of this pad is to prevent damage to the surrounding asphalt paving. The pad shall have a level surface (no slope) and shall be paved with concrete.

a.     The Zoning Administrator may waive the requirement for, and/or size of, the concrete apron or pad provided the property owner can demonstrate that the existing asphalt located at the access and servicing areas of the refuse and recycling enclosure has withstood on-going, regular use without appreciable degradation. The property owner may also be required to enter into a private road agreement with the City as a condition to providing service.

H.    Signage.

1.     Signs shall be posted on each container for recyclable material, identifying which material shall be disposed of in that container.

2.     One sign identifying each outdoor refuse and recycling area is required. Each sign shall not exceed four square feet and shall be posted on the exterior of the area adjacent to the access point. The sign shall also notify the public that unauthorized collection and/or scavenging is prohibited.

I.      Exceptions. The Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to approve exceptions, or consider modified design standards, to the requirements of this section, for new development projects and projects involving the expansion or retrofit of an existing development. The property owner/applicant must first prove that he/she cannot meet the requirements for the refuse and recycling collections areas as set forth in this section and any other applicable section.

1.     Reasons for Exceptions. Exceptions may be approved for reasons, including, but not limited to, the following:

a.     The requirement to provide adequate space for refuse and recyclable materials storage and collection would necessitate the conversion or removal of required parking spaces or required landscaping, or would conflict with some other essential site improvement required by the City;

b.     The nature of the proposed development justifies the provision of less recyclable materials storage and collection space than mandated by this chapter; or

c.     Construction of the full enclosure with the landscaping buffer would reduce the vehicular access aisle to less than acceptable width. Cost alone is not a valid reason for granting an exception.

2.     Required Findings. Exceptions from any provision of this section may be approved if the following findings can be made:

a.     That the exception from these requirements will not be detrimental to public health, safety, or welfare nor result in a nuisance; and

b.     That the project will provide adequate capacity, number and distribution of collection areas to serve the new or existing development.

J.      Maintenance. Maintenance of each enclosure area and any bins and containers shall be the responsibility of the property owner. The property owner shall be responsible for keeping the area clean and free of litter, rodents and insects. Enclosures that are damaged to the point of non-use will result in a service interruption if the hauler cannot access the containers and shall be repaired within 90 days.

K.    Regular Collection. The property owner is responsible for arranging the regular collection or pick-up of refuse and recyclable and/or organic materials stored in the container area. Materials shall not be allowed to accumulate such that a visual or public health or safety nuisance is created.

L.     Unauthorized Collection Prohibited. Unless otherwise provided by contract, recyclable materials which have been segregated from other waste materials and placed at the designated collection and storage location, shall not be removed by anyone other than the authorized recycling agent/hauler. Violation of this provision shall be punishable as a misdemeanor. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.22.130 Screening
A.    Screening of Mechanical and Electrical Equipment. All exterior mechanical and electrical equipment shall be screened or incorporated into the design of buildings so as not to be visible from adjacent at-grade public rights-of-way and/or adjacent Residential Zones. Equipment to be screened includes, but is not limited to, all roof-mounted equipment, air conditioners, heaters, utility meters, cable equipment, telephone entry boxes, backflow devices, irrigation control valves, electrical transformers, pull boxes, and all ducting for air conditioning, heating, and blower systems. Screening materials shall be consistent with the exterior colors and materials of the building. Exceptions may be granted by the Zoning Administrator where screening is infeasible due to health and safety, structural limitations, or utility requirements.

B.     Outdoor Storage Areas. Outdoor storage areas shall be screened from view from any adjacent public street or freeway; existing or planned residential area; or publicly accessible open space area with a solid masonry wall a minimum of six feet in height.

1.     Screening walls shall be high enough to sufficiently screen stored material. Fences and walls shall not exceed the maximum allowable fence heights unless allowed pursuant to approval of a modification.



FIGURE 17.22.130.B: SCREENING OF OUTDOOR STORAGE AREAS

 

C.     Other Outdoor Activity Areas. Where the Zoning Administrator finds that an outdoor use without screening would have a detrimental effect, the outdoor use shall be screened from view from any public street or freeway; existing or planned residential area; or publicly accessible open space area.

D.    Maintenance. Screening walls shall be maintained in good repair, including painting, if required, and shall be kept free of litter and advertising. Graffiti shall be removed within two days of notice of its placement. Where hedges are used as screening, trimming or pruning shall be employed as necessary to maintain the required and the maximum allowed height. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.22.140 Swimming Pools and Spas
Swimming pools, spas, and any body of water having a depth of more than 18 inches and related equipment shall comply with the following standards:

A.    Water-Containing Portions of Swimming Pools and Spas. The outside wall of the water-containing portion of any swimming pool or spa shall be located as follows:

1.     Front Setback. The outside wall of the water-containing portion of any swimming pool or spa shall be located on the rear half of the lot as measured from the front property line.

2.     Street Side Setback. The outside wall of the water-containing portion of any swimming pool or spa shall be located a minimum of 10 feet from the street side property line. Where the lot is enclosed by a masonry subdivision perimeter wall, the street side setback is five feet.

3.     Rear and Interior Side Setbacks. The outside wall of the water-containing portion of any swimming pool or spa shall be located a minimum of five feet from the interior side and rear property line.

4.     Dwelling Unit Setback. The outside wall of the water-containing portion of any swimming pool or spa shall be located a minimum of five feet from the exterior wall of any dwelling unit.

B.     Filter, Heating, and Maintenance Systems. All filter, heating, and maintenance systems and equipment shall not be located within any required setback adjacent to a public street, or within three feet of an interior side or rear property line, or within 10 feet of the living area of any dwelling unit on an adjacent parcel unless located completely within a soundproof enclosure. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.22.150 Underground Utilities
All electrical, telephone, cable television, and similar distribution lines providing direct service to new development shall be installed underground within the site. This requirement may be waived by the Zoning Administrator upon determining that underground installation is infeasible. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.22.160 Visibility at Intersections
Vegetation and structures located on a property at any corner from intersecting streets may not exceed a height of three feet within the vision triangle formed by drawing imaginary lines between points 30 feet from where the curb lines of the street intersection quadrant meet. Any vegetation or structures obstructing the view of the intersection may be removed pursuant to Section 10.20.050 of Title 10, Vehicles and Traffic, of the Municipal Code, as may be amended over time.



FIGURE 17.22.160: VISIBILITY AT INTERSECTIONS

(Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

Chapter 17.23 AFFORDABLE HOUSING, DENSITY BONUSES, AND INCENTIVES
17.23.010 Purpose
This chapter is adopted in accordance with Section 65915 et seq., of the California Government Code. The purpose of this chapter is to establish a density increase and incentive program to provide both density increases and other incentives for owner-occupied and rental housing developments to encourage the creation of housing affordable to moderate, low, and very low income households, and to encourage the creation of housing for senior citizens. As used in this chapter, density bonus units are those units designated for senior citizens, or very low, low, or moderate income households that qualified the housing project for award of a density bonus or other incentives. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.23.020 Applicable Zones
This chapter shall be applicable to all zones that allow residential uses. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.23.030 Qualifications
All proposed housing developments that qualify under California Government Code Section 65915 for a density increase and other incentives, and any qualified land transfer under California Government Code Section 65915 shall be eligible to apply for a density bonus (including incentives and/or concessions) consistent with the requirements, provisions and obligations set forth in California Government Code Section 65915, as may be amended. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.23.040 Density Increase and Other Incentives
The City of West Sacramento shall grant qualifying housing developments and qualifying land transfers a density bonus, the amount of which shall be as specified in California Government Code Section 65915 et seq., and incentives or concessions also as described in California Government Code Section 65915 et seq. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.23.050 Application
A.    An application for a density increase or other incentives under this chapter for a housing development shall be submitted in writing to the planning division of the City of West Sacramento to be processed concurrently with all other entitlements of the proposed housing development. The application for a housing development shall contain information sufficient to fully evaluate the request under the requirements of this chapter, and in connection with the project for which the request is made, including, but not limited to, the following:

1.     A brief description of the proposed housing development;

2.     The total number of housing units proposed in the development project, including unit sizes and number of bedrooms;

3.     The total number of units proposed to be granted through the density increase and incentive program over and above the otherwise maximum density for the project site;

4.     The total number of units to be made affordable to or reserved for sale, or rental to, very low-, low- or moderate-income households, or senior citizens, or other qualifying residents;

5.     The zoning, General Plan designations and assessor’s parcel number(s) of the project site;

6.     A vicinity map and preliminary site plan, drawn to scale, including building footprints, driveway(s) and parking layout; and

7.     A list of any concession(s) or incentive(s) being requested to facilitate the development of the project, and a description of why the concession(s) or incentive(s) is needed.

B.     The application shall be considered by the Planning Commission and/or the City Council at the same time each considers the project for which the request is being made. If the project is not to be otherwise considered by the Planning Commission or the City Council, the request being made under this chapter shall be considered by the Community Development Director or designee, separately. The request shall be approved if the applicant complies with the provisions of California Government Code Section 65915 et seq. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.23.060 Retention
Consistent with the provisions of California Government Code Section 65915 et seq., prior to a density increase or other incentives being approved for a project, the City of West Sacramento and the applicant shall agree to an appropriate method of assuring the continued availability of the density bonus units. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.23.070 Denial of Affordable Housing Projects
If at least 20% of a housing development’s units are sold or rented to low-income households, and the balance of the units are sold or rented to either low- or moderate-income households, it shall not be disapproved or conditioned in a manner which renders the project infeasible for development for the use of low- and moderate-income households unless the decision-making body finds, based upon substantial evidence, one of the following, pursuant to California Government Code Section 65589.5:

A.    The project is not needed for the City to meet its share of the regional need of low- and/or moderate-income housing as outlined in the adopted Housing Element to the General Plan; or

B.     The project as proposed would have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health and safety, and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact without rendering the project unaffordable to low- and/or moderate-income households; or

C.     Denial of the project or imposition of conditions is required in order to comply with specific State or Federal law, and there is no feasible method to comply without rendering the project unaffordable to low- and/or moderate-income households; or

D.    Approval of the project would increase the concentration of low-income households in a neighborhood that already has a disproportionately high number of low-income households and there is no feasible method of approving the development at a different site, including sites identified in the adopted Housing Element, without rendering the development unaffordable to low and/or moderate income households; or

E.     The project is proposed on land zoned for resource preservation which is surrounded on at least two sides by land being used for agricultural or resource preservation purposes, or which does not have adequate water or wastewater facilities to serve the project; or

F.     The project is inconsistent with the land use designation as outlined in the adopted General Plan or in any General Plan element as it existed on the date the application for the project was deemed complete. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

Chapter 17.24 CHILDCARE DEVELOPMENT FEE ALTERNATIVES
17.24.010 Purpose
The purpose of this chapter is to offer alternatives to paying child care development fees as required in Chapter 12.44, Childcare Development Fees and Alternatives, of the municipal code to encourage the development of a range of childcare facilities to fulfill the child care needs of residents and the business community. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.24.020 Applicability
The provisions of this chapter are applicable to developers of residential and non-residential developments who desire an alternative to paying a child care development fee as required in Chapter 12.44, Childcare Development Fees and Alternatives, to satisfy the child care needs of a particular development. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.24.030 Childcare Development Fee Alternatives
The following alternatives are available in lieu of paying a child care development fee as required in Chapter 12.44, Childcare Development Fees and Alternatives. The selected alternative or combination of alternatives must be equivalent in value to that which would have been paid as a childcare development fee and is subject to approval by the City Manager.

A.    Provision of on-site or off-site childcare facilities located in areas where the health and safety of the children, parents and day care providers will not be threatened or jeopardized.

1.     To the extent possible, on-site or off-site facilities shall be integrated with other facilities. Coordinated use of recreation or common areas within developments, schools or park facilities is encouraged.

2.     On-site or off-site childcare facilities may be provided in consortium with other developments.

B.     Donation of land for the development of a childcare facility.

C.     Financial assistance to either public or private entities for establishing new childcare facilities or for the expansion of existing childcare facilities.

D.    Other options approved by the City Manager. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.24.040 Incentives
At the City’s sole discretion, the City may grant one or more of the following incentives to developers for constructing childcare facilities.

A.    Exemption of floor area dedicated to on-site childcare facilities inform the calculation of a project’s floor area ratio.

B.     Transportation management plan (TMP) credits where sufficient documentation demonstrates that the provision of an on-site childcare facility will contribute towards increasing the average vehicle ridership (AVR) required for the work site.

C.     Priority processing of applications for planning permits for childcare facilities.

D.    Other incentives approved by the City Manager where it is demonstrated that the proposed alternative furthers the efforts of pre-school education in addition to meeting childcare needs. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

Chapter 17.25 LANDSCAPING
17.25.010 Purpose
The purpose of this chapter is to:

A.    Improve the appearance of the community by requiring permanently maintained landscaping;

B.     Aid in energy conservation by providing shade from the sun and shelter from the wind;

C.     Soften the appearance of parking lots and other development and minimize or eliminate conflicts between potentially incompatible uses through landscaping;

D.    Promote conservation and efficient use of water; and

E.     Provide opportunities for carbon sequestration. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.25.020 Applicability
These standards shall apply to all new development and improvement of existing uses in the City, including any construction, expansion or improvement on private property which requires the issuance of a Building Permit or other approval by the City, except business licenses. This chapter shall not apply to the following:

A.    Single-family developments of four or fewer units/lots.

B.     Properties zoned POS (Public Open Space).

C.     Properties designated by the City for riverfront parkway corridors. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.25.030 Requirements
In addition to the landscaping standards set forth in this chapter, landscaping shall be installed consistent with the following:

A.    Landscape Development Guidelines;

B.     Development Engineering Post Construction Standards Plan;

C.     Chapter 8.24, Tree Preservation, of the municipal code; and

D.    Chapter 13.04, Article XII, Water Efficient Landscaping, of the municipal code. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.25.040 Maximum Amount of Required Landscaping
This chapter shall not be applied so as to result in the requirement to landscape more than the following percent of lot area of a development site.

A.    BP, C, CH, MU-NC, MU-C and PQP Zones. 25%.

B.     M-L, M-1, M-2, and M-3 Zones. 20%.

C.     CBD and WF Zones. 20%. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

Chapter 17.26 NONCONFORMING USES, STRUCTURES, AND LOTS
17.26.010 Purpose
This chapter is intended to permit continuation of uses and continued occupancy and maintenance of structures that were legally established but do not comply with all of the standards and requirements of this title in a manner that does not conflict with the General Plan. To that end, this chapter establishes the circumstances under which a nonconforming use or structure may be continued or changed and provides for the removal of nonconforming uses and structures when their continuation conflicts with the General Plan and public health, safety, and general welfare. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.26.020 Applicability
The provisions of this chapter apply to structures, land, and uses that have become nonconforming by adoption of this title as well as structures, land, and uses that become nonconforming due to subsequent amendments to its text or to the Zoning Map. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.26.030 Nonconformities, Generally
Any lawfully established use or structure that is in existence on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title or any subsequent amendment thereto but does not comply with the standards and requirements of this title shall be considered nonconforming.

A.    A nonconformity may result from any inconsistency with the requirements of this title including, but not limited to, use, location, density, floor area, height, setback, performance standards, or the lack of an approved Use Permit or other required authorization.

B.     A parcel of land may be considering nonconforming if it was previously used and/or developed without required site improvements, including, but not limited to, paving, screening, landscaping, lighting, drainage, etc. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.26.040 Right to Continue
Any use or structure that was lawfully established prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title or of any subsequent amendments to its text or to the Zoning Map may only be continued and maintained provided there is no alteration, enlargement, addition, or other change to any building or structure or use therein; or no substitution, expansion, or other change including an increase in occupant load or any enlargement of the area, space, or volume occupied by or devoted to such use, except as otherwise provided in this chapter.

A.    The right to continue a nonconforming use or structure shall attach to the land and shall not be affected by a change in ownership, tenancy, or management.

B.     The right to continue a nonconforming use or structure shall not apply to uses or structures determined by the Planning Commission or City Council as described in this chapter to be a public nuisance arising from conditions that constitute a threat to public health, safety or general welfare.

C.     The right to continue a nonconforming use or re-occupy a nonconforming structure shall terminate if the nonconforming use has been abandoned or the nonconforming structure has been vacated for the relevant period described in Section 17.26.110, Abandonment of Nonconforming Uses. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.26.050 Nonconforming Site Improvements
In conjunction with the expansion of existing buildings or the construction of new buildings on a partially developed site, nonconforming property improvements shall be brought into compliance on the following basis:

A.    10% or greater increase in floor area:

1.     Screening of outdoor storage areas consistent with Section 17.22.130, Screening. New fencing must observe required setbacks from the street,

2.     Installation or existing presence of landscaping equal to five percent of the parcel area. This landscaping shall be installed along street and building frontages wherever possible;

B.     20% or greater increase in floor area:

1.     Installation of street canopy landscaping as described in the landscape development guidelines,

2.     Screening and landscaping as defined in subsection A of this section;

C.     30% or greater increase in floor area:

1.     Paving of existing required auto parking lot areas and installation of full parking lot canopy landscaping as described in the landscape development guidelines,

2.     Screening and landscaping as defined in subsections A and B of this section,

3.     Provision of recycling areas in accordance with Section 17.22.120, Refuse and Recycling Areas;

D.    50% or greater increase in floor area:

1.     Full compliance with all site improvement standards is required.

All additions done in a five-year period beginning after the date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this title shall be combined for the purposes of determining the need for compliance with this section;

E.     The Director may, upon request by the property owner, consider substitution of the required landscaping on one portion of a site to another on a square foot per square foot basis where the overall change does not result in any loss of: (1) street landscaping; or (2) net square footage;

F.     Building additions of 500 square feet or less are exempted from the provisions of this section. All additions done in a five-year period beginning after the date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be combined for the purposes of determining the need for compliance with this section. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.26.060 Changes to and/or Substitutions of Nonconforming Uses
Nonconforming uses shall not be expanded, modified, or substituted for another nonconforming use except as provided below.

A.    Expansion. Nonconforming uses shall not expand in intensity and/or physical footprint.

B.     Absence of Permit. Any use that is nonconforming solely by reason of the absence of a Use Permit may be changed to a conforming use by obtaining the appropriate Use Permit pursuant to the requirements in Chapter 17.38, Use Permits.

C.     Substitutions. The Zoning Administrator may allow substitution of a nonconforming use with another nonconforming use pursuant to the following.

1.     Limitation on Use. The allowance for a substitution is limited to the use and its operations and activities as specifically described in the approval of the substitution.

2.     Duration. The allowance for the new nonconforming use shall expire five years from the date of approval.

3.     Public Notice Required. Public notice pursuant to Section 17.35.060, Public Notice, shall be provided.

4.     Public Hearing. A public hearing shall be held if requested by the applicant or other interested person(s) in writing and received by the Zoning Administrator within 10 days of the mailed notice.

5.     Required Findings. To allow substitution of a nonconforming use with another nonconforming use, the following findings must be made:

a.     The existing nonconforming use was legally established and has not ceased to operate, whether with the intent to abandon the use or not, for a continuous period of one year, or six months for any property fronting West Capitol Avenue or within the Central Business District;

b.     The proposed new use will cease to operate and vacate the site no later than five years from the date of approval;

c.     Alterations, enlargements, additions, improvements, or other changes to any building or structure do not exceed 10% of the replacement value of the building or structure;

d.     The operation of the proposed new use will comply with the standards included in Chapter 17.28, Performance Standards;

e.     The proposed new use will not result in an average daily trip increase of more than five percent of the current use based on the Institute of Traffic Engineers (ITE) trip generation rates;

f.      The proposed new use would not be detrimental to public health, safety, or welfare;

g.     The proposed new use would not preclude or interfere with implementation of the General Plan or any applicable adopted specific, area, or community plan;

h.     The proposed new use will not depress the value of nearby properties or create conditions that would impede their redevelopment or use in compliance with the General Plan;

i.      The proposed new use will be no less compatible with the purposes of the district and surrounding uses that comply with the requirements of this title than the nonconforming use it replaces; and

j.      The proposed new use will not be detrimental to the health, safety, peace, comfort, or general welfare of persons residing or working in the surrounding area or be detrimental or injurious to property and improvements of adjacent properties, the surrounding area, or the neighborhood because of noise, odors, dust, glare, vibrations, or other effects.

D.    Conditions. The Zoning Administrator may impose reasonable conditions deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the required findings. The Zoning Administrator may also require reasonable guarantees and evidence that such conditions are being, or will be, complied with. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.26.070 Elimination of Nonconforming Uses and Structures
A.    Elimination of Nonconforming Uses and Structures.

1.     Nonconforming Uses Not Occupying a Structure or Occupying a Structure with Valuation Less Than $2,500. The following nonconforming uses shall be discontinued and removed from their sites within three year(s) from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title:

a.     A nonconforming use which does not occupy a structure; or

b.     A nonconforming use occupying a structure having an appraised valuation of less than $2,500.

2.     Other Nonconforming Uses. The City Council may require other nonconforming uses to be discontinued and removed from their sites within a period determined pursuant to the process set forth in Section 17.26.080, Establishment of Amortization Periods.

3.     Elimination of Nonconforming Structures. Nonconforming structures may continue except that the City Council may establish amortization periods for specific structures pursuant to Section 17.26.080, Establishment of Amortization Periods.

B.     Time for Elimination When Use or Structure Becomes Nonconforming. Whenever a use or structure becomes nonconforming, the period of time prescribed in this chapter for the elimination of the use or the removal of the structure is computed from the effective date of the change that results in the nonconforming status of the use or structure.

C.     Burden of Proof. The burden of proof as to the nonconforming status of any use or structure shall rest with the property owner, tenant, and/or resident. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.26.080 Establishment of Amortization Periods
Where a period during which a nonconforming use or structure is to be discontinued and removed from their site is to be established, such period shall be established as follows.

A.    The Zoning Administrator shall submit the nonconforming use or structure and a recommended amortization period, based on the criteria in subsection C.1, to the Planning Commission for review;

B.     The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing, noticed pursuant to Chapter 17.35, Common Procedures, to consider the recommended amortization period. Following the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall make a recommendation on the proposed amortization period to the City Council.

C.     After receiving the recommendation from the Planning Commission, the City Council shall hold a public hearing, noticed pursuant to Chapter 17.35, Common Procedures, to consider the recommended amortization period.

1.     The City Council may establish a maximum time for which the nonconforming use shall be permitted to continue after considering the following in relation to the use or structure:

a.     The amount of investment or original cost of the use or structure;

b.     The present actual or depreciated value of the use or structure;

c.     The remaining useful life of the use or structure;

d.     The remaining term of the lease;

e.     The date or dates of construction;

f.      Amortization of the business or structure for tax purposes;

g.     The salvage value;

h.     The threat to the public health, safety, and welfare posed by the continuance of the nonconforming use; and

i.      Other factors as appropriate.

2.     The time period established by the City Council shall be no less than three years in length. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.26.090 Maintenance of and Additions and Enlargements to Nonconforming Structures
Nonconforming structures may be continued and maintained in compliance with the following provisions.

A.    Maintenance and Repairs. Structural and non-structural maintenance, repair, and interior alterations to a nonconforming structure are permitted if the changes and improvements do not enlarge the structure, change the building footprint, or increase building height or roof pitch. This excludes any improvements required to meet accessibility requirements.

B.     Additions. Additions to and/or enlargements of nonconforming structures are allowed if the addition or enlargement complies with all applicable laws and requirements of this title, the use of the addition/enlarged area of the property is authorized by this title, and there is no increase in the discrepancy between existing conditions and the requirements of this title, except as provided below:

1.     Nonconforming Setbacks, Residential Zones. In Residential Zones, a nonconforming setback may be maintained and extended, and shall not be considered an increase in the discrepancy, provided that:

a.     A new encroachment into any other required setback is not created;

b.     The height of the portion of the structure that is within the required setback is not increased; and

c.     Any residential additions above the first floor shall conform to the setbacks in effect at the time the application for the addition is submitted. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.26.100 Repair and Replacement of Damaged or Destroyed Nonconforming Structures
A nonconforming structure that is damaged or partially destroyed by fire, explosion, earthquake, or natural disaster that was not caused by an act or deliberate omission of a property owner, their agent, or person acting on their behalf or in concert with them, may be restored or rebuilt subject to the following provisions.

A.    Restoration When Damage is 50% or Less of Value. If the cost of repair or reconstruction is less than or equal to 50% of the appraised value of the structure, replacement of the damaged portions of the structure is allowed by right provided that the replaced portions are the same size, extent, and configuration as previously existed. The determination of the appraised value shall be made by a professional appraiser selected by the City, whose fee shall be paid by the building or property owner.

B.     Restoration When Damage Exceeds 50% of Value. If the cost of repair or reconstruction exceeds 50% of the appraised value of the structure, as determined pursuant to subsection A above, the land and building shall be subject to the requirements of this title, except as provided below:

1.     Non-Residential Structures. Any nonconforming use must permanently cease. The Zoning Administrator may approve a Minor Use Permit for the structure to be rebuilt to the same size, extent, and configuration as previously existed provided that the use of the structure is permitted or conditionally permitted in the zone. In such cases any expansion or change to the previous use must conform to the requirements of this chapter.

2.     Residential Structures. Any nonconforming residential structure may be reconstructed, restored, or rebuilt up to the size and number of dwelling units prior to the damage and the nonconforming use, if any, may be resumed subject to a Zoning Clearance in the case of single-unit dwellings or Zoning Administrator approval in the case of other residential uses, unless the review authority finds that the reconstruction, restoration, or rebuilding will be detrimental or injurious to the health, safety, or general welfare of persons residing or working in the neighborhood.

C.     Timing. Building permits must be obtained within two years of the date of the damage or destruction and construction shall be completed within one year of issuance unless another time period is specified through Zoning Administrator consideration. Building permits must be maintained valid through the completion of the project. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.26.110 Abandonment of Nonconforming Uses
If the nonconforming use ceases to operate, whether with the intent to abandon the use or not, for a continuous period of one year, or six months for any property having any frontage on West Capitol Avenue or within the Central Business District, it shall be considered abandoned and shall not be resumed, reestablished, reopened, or replaced by any other nonconforming use, except as provided in this section. It is the responsibility of the applicant to provide evidence demonstrating to the satisfaction of the Zoning Administrator that the use was legally established and has not been abandoned.

A.    Abandonment. The time period set forth above shall commence when the use ceases to operate, whether with the intent to abandon the use or not, and any one of the following occurs:

1.     The site is vacated;

2.     The business license expires or is revoked;

3.     Utilities are terminated; or

4.     The applicable lease is terminated.

B.     Extension of Abandonment Period. The Zoning Administrator may approve an additional one-year time period during which the use will not be considered abandoned; provided, that the Zoning Administrator finds that economic conditions warrant the additional time. If such additional time period is approved, the total period during which the use will not be considered abandoned shall not exceed two years from the date the use ceased to operate. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.26.120 Abatement
The provisions of this chapter are in addition to existing State law authority to declare and abate a public nuisance pursuant to California law and other applicable provisions of the municipal code. If a legal nonconforming structure or use is found to constitute a public nuisance, appropriate action may be taken by the City pursuant to the municipal code and Chapter 17.46, Enforcement. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

Chapter 17.27 PARKING AND LOADING
17.27.010 Purpose
The purposes of this chapter are to:

A.    Require parking spaces and loading spaces for all land uses that are sufficient in number, size, and arrangement;

B.     Minimize the negative environmental and urban design impacts of parking lots, driveways, and drive aisles within parking lots;

C.     Ensure the provision of adequate off-street bicycle parking;

D.    Establish standards and regulations for safe and well-designed parking, unloading, and vehicle circulation areas that minimize conflicts within parking lots and, where appropriate, create buffers from surrounding land uses;

E.     Offer flexible means of minimizing the amount of area devoted to parking by allowing reductions in the number of required spaces in transit-served locations, shared parking facilities, and other situations expected to have lower vehicle parking demand;

F.     Encourage modal shift; and

G.    Reduce urban run-off and heat island effect. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.27.020 Applicability
A.    New Buildings and Land Uses. On-site parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with this chapter at the time any main building or structure is erected or any new land use is established.

B.     Existing Non-Residential Buildings.

1.     When a change in use, expansion of use, or expansion of floor area creates an increase of 30% or more in the number of required parking or loading spaces, additional parking and loading shall be provided for such addition, enlargement, or change in use when that change would result in more than 10 new parking spaces being required.

2.     Existing parking and loading not in excess of the minimum requirements shall be maintained. Parking and loading in excess of minimum requirements may be removed.

3.     A change in tenancy or ownership is not considered a change in use unless the new occupant is in a different use classification than the former occupant.

4.     If the number of existing parking and loading spaces is greater than the requirements for a proposed use, the number of excess parking spaces may be counted toward meeting the requirements for any change, expansion, or major alteration.

C.     Existing Residential Buildings. Parking in accordance with this chapter shall be provided where additional dwelling units are created through the alteration of an existing building or construction of an additional structure or structures.

D.    When Constructed. Parking and loading facilities required by this chapter shall be constructed or installed prior to final inspection or the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy for the uses that they serve. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.27.030 General Provisions
A.    Existing Parking and Loading to Be Maintained. No existing parking and loading area serving any use may be reduced in amount or changed in design or location below the requirements for such use, unless equivalent substitute facilities are provided.

B.     Nonconforming Parking and Loading. An existing use of land or structure shall not be deemed to be nonconforming solely because of a lack of parking and/or loading facilities required by this chapter, if facilities used for parking and/or loading as of the date of adoption of this title are not reduced in number to less than what this chapter requires.

C.     Accessibility. Parking and loading areas shall be accessible for its intended purpose during all hours of operation.

D.    Stacked Parking. Stacked or valet parking is allowed if an attendant is present or an automated system is in place to move vehicles. If stacked parking managed by an attendant is used for required parking spaces, an acceptable form of guarantee must be filed with the Zoning Administrator ensuring that an attendant will be present while the parking lot is in operation.

E.     Assigned Parking. Lots developed with multiple uses and a shared parking area shall not assign parking spaces to individual tenant spaces or uses, except that parking spaces for residential uses in a mixed-use development shall be assigned to residential occupants.

F.     Unbundling Parking from Residential Uses. The following rules apply to the sale or rental of parking spaces accessory to attached single unit and multi-unit development of four units or more in the Bridge District Specific Plan, Washington Specific Plan, and Central Business District Zone unless waived by the Zoning Administrator as infeasible:

1.     All off-street spaces shall be leased or sold separately from the rental or purchase fees for dwelling units for the life of the dwelling units, such that potential renters or buyers have the option of renting or buying a residential unit at a price lower than would be the case if there were a single price for both the residential unit and the parking space.

2.     In cases where there are fewer parking spaces than dwelling units, the parking spaces shall be offered first to the potential owners or renters of three-bedroom or more units, second to owners or renters of two-bedroom units, and then to owners and renters of other units. Spaces shall be offered to tenants first. Non-tenants may lease with a provision for 30 days to terminate the lease.

3.     Renters or buyers of on-site affordable units shall have an equal opportunity to rent or buy a parking space on the same terms and conditions as offered to renters or buyers of other dwelling units. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.27.040 Required Parking Spaces
Each land use is subject to the following minimum and maximum parking space requirements unless otherwise provided in another section of this title.

A.    Minimum Number of Spaces Required. Each land use shall be provided at least the number of parking spaces stated in Table 17.27.040, Required Number of Parking Spaces. The parking requirement for any use not listed in Table 17.27.040 shall be determined by the Zoning Administrator based upon the requirements for the most similar comparable use, the characteristics of the proposed use, and any other relevant data regarding parking demand.

TABLE 17.27.040: REQUIRED NUMBER OF PARKING SPACES

Land Use Classification

Required Parking Spaces

Residential Use Classifications

As specified below

Residential Housing Types

• 1 per studio or 1-bedroom unit

• 1.25 per 2-bedroom unit

• 1.5 per unit with 3 or more bedrooms

Plus 1 guest space per every 10 units

For units subject to an affordable housing agreement, the number of required parking spaces shall be reduced by 25%

Caretaker Unit

1 per unit

Group Residential

1 per employee, plus 1 per bedroom or 1 per every 2 beds, whichever is greater

Residential Care Facilities

 

Small

None beyond the parking required for the residential housing type

Large

1 per every 3 beds

Residential Facility, Assisted Living

1 per every 3 beds

Single-Room Occupancy

0.5 per unit

Supportive Housing

None beyond the parking required for the residential housing type

Transitional Housing

None beyond the parking required for the residential housing type

Public and Semi-Public Use Classifications

1 per 400 square feet of floor area, except as specified below

Campground

1 per site

Hospitals and Clinics

 

Hospitals

1 per every 3 beds

Skilled Nursing Facilities

1 per every 3 beds

Park and Recreation Facilities

To be determined by the Zoning Administrator based on use, facilities, and proximity

Parking Lots and Structures

None required

Schools

To be determined by the Zoning Administrator based on use, facilities, and proximity

Commercial Use Classifications

1 per 400 square feet of floor area, except as specified below

Animal Care, Sales, and Services

 

Boarding/Kennels

1 per employee, plus a loading/unloading area for animals

Commercial Entertainment and Recreation

 

Cinema/Theaters

1 per 40 square feet of seating area

Outdoor Entertainment and Outdoor Recreation

1 per 1,000 square feet of lot area

Eating and Drinking Establishments

CBD, MU-C, WF, Washington Specific Plan, and Bridge District Specific Plan Zones: 1 per 400 square feet of floor area

Other Zones: 1/200 square feet of floor area

Hotels and Motels

CBD, MU-C, WF, Washington Specific Plan, and Bridge District Specific Plan Zones: 0.5 per guest room

Other Zones: 1 per guest room

Nurseries and Garden Center

1 per 750 square feet of floor area

Retail Sales

 

Building Materials, Sales, and Services

1 per 750 square feet of floor area

Industrial Use Classifications

1 per 1,000 square feet of floor area, except as specified below

General Industrial

1 per 2,000 square feet of floor area

Warehousing and Storage

 

Indoor Warehousing, Storage, and Wholesaling and Distribution

1 per 2,000 square feet of floor area

Outdoor Storage

1 per 10,000 square feet of lot area

Personal Storage

2 plus 1 per 1,000 square feet of storage unit area

Transportation, Communication, and Utility Use Classifications

1 per 400 square feet of office, except as specified below

Marina

1 per 2 boat slips

 

1.     Calculation of Required Spaces

a.     Parking Ratios.

i.      Floor Area. Where an on-site parking or loading requirement is stated as a ratio of parking spaces to floor area, the floor area is assumed to be gross floor area, unless otherwise stated.

ii.     Employees. Where an on-site parking or loading requirement is stated as a ratio of parking spaces to employees, the number of employees shall be based on the largest shift that occurs in a typical week.

iii.    Bedrooms. Where a parking requirement is stated as a ratio of parking spaces to bedrooms, any rooms having the potential of being a bedroom and meeting the standards of the building code as a sleeping room shall be counted as a bedroom.

iv.    Students. Where a parking or loading requirement is stated as a ratio of parking spaces to students (including children in day care), the number is assumed to be the number of students at the State-certified capacity or at building code occupancy where no State certification is required.

b.     Sites with Multiple Uses. If more than one use is located on a site, the number of required parking and loading spaces shall be equal to the sum of the requirements calculated separately for each use, unless a reduction is approved pursuant to Section 17.27.050, Parking Reductions.

B.     Maximum Number of Spaces Allowed. To support walking, transit, and other forms of non-automobile transportation in urban infill areas and to eliminate the incentive to build as much parking as possible, the number of parking spaces to be provided is limited. In the CBD, MU-C, MU-NC, WF, Washington Specific Plan, and Bridge District Specific Plan Zones, on-site parking shall not exceed 2.6 spaces per 1,000 square feet or 150% of the number of parking spaces required pursuant to Table 17.27.040, Required Number of Parking Spaces, whichever is greater. This limitation may be waived or modified pursuant to Chapter 17.40, Modifications, based on the following findings:

1.     Special conditions exist that will increase parking demand at the site. Conditions include but are not limited to, the nature of the proposed operation; lack of transit service or other transportation alternatives; or transportation characteristics of persons residing, working, or visiting the site;

2.     The use will not be adequately served by the maximum allowed number of parking spaces; and

3.     Parking demand generated by the project will exceed the maximum allowed number of parking spaces and have a significant impact on the supply of on-street parking in the surrounding area. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.27.050 Parking Reductions
The number of parking spaces required by Section 17.27.040, Required Parking Spaces, may be reduced as follows if the Director finds any or all of the following criteria. Parking reductions are cumulative; all applicable parking reductions may be applied in determining the number of required parking spaces.

A.    Ground Floor Uses, CBD, MU-C, MU-NC, Washington Specific Plan, and Bridge District Specific Plan Zones. The first 5,000 square feet of a ground floor nonresidential use in CBD, MU-C, MU-NC, Washington Specific Plan, and Bridge District Specific Plan Zones is exempt from parking requirements.

B.     Motorcycle Parking. Motorcycle parking may substitute for up to five percent of the required number of parking spaces. Each motorcycle space must be at least four feet wide and seven feet deep, and can accommodate two-wheeled motorized vehicles, including scooters, mopeds, and similar vehicles.

C.     Sites with Multiple Uses. Where a shared parking facility serving more than one use will be provided, the total number of required parking spaces may be reduced by 25% with Zoning Administrator approval if the below findings are made. In order to evaluate a proposed project’s compliance with the below criteria, submittal of a parking demand study that substantiates the basis for granting a reduced number of parking spaces may be required.

1.     The peak hours of use will not overlap or coincide to the degree that peak demand for parking spaces from all uses will be greater than the total supply of spaces;

2.     The proposed shared parking provided will be adequate to serve each use;

3.     Parking spaces in the shared parking facility will not be reserved for individual tenants, owners or their visitors without approval of an overall parking management plan; and

4.     A shared parking agreement will be recorded.

D.    Urban Infill. The required number of parking spaces shall be reduced by 50% of the normally required number of spaces for projects that are located within the Bridge District, Washington Specific Plan and Central Business District Zone.

E.     Car Sharing Programs. Required parking spaces may be substituted with designated carshare vehicle parking spaces, and the required number of parking spaces may be reduced, pursuant to the following.

1.     Carshare Parking Designation. A maximum of 20% of the required parking spaces may be designated as carshare vehicle parking spaces.

2.     Reduction Allowed.

a.     Parking Areas with 50 or Fewer Parking Spaces. A five percent reduction in the required parking shall be allowed where five percent of the required spaces are designated as carshare vehicle parking spaces.

b.     Parking Areas with 51 or More Parking Spaces. A 10% reduction in the required parking shall be allowed where 10% of the required spaces are designated as carshare vehicle parking spaces.

3.     Accessibility. Car sharing spaces shall be made available to a car share organization for purposes of providing car share services for service subscribers. In addition to conforming to the requirements of Section 17.27.090, Parking Area Design Standards, the parking area shall be designed to be accessible to local and non-local car share subscribers 24 hours a day, seven days a week.

a.     Exception. Car share parking spaces may be occupied by non-car share vehicles, if it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Director that no car share organization can make use of the parking spaces. These spaces shall not be separately leasable and shall be made available on a first come, first serve basis.

4.     Deed Restriction. Prior to issuance of a Building Permit, a deed restriction shall be recorded identifying the number and location of the car share parking spaces. The location of the car share spaces shall be subject to approval by the Zoning Administrator.

F.     Other Parking Reductions. Required parking for any use may be reduced through approval of a Minor Use Permit as follows.

1.     Criteria for Approval. A Minor Use Permit for a parking reduction may be approved if the Zoning Administrator finds that special conditions exist that will reduce parking demand at the site. Conditions include, but are not limited to, the nature of the proposed operation; proximity to frequent transit service; transportation characteristics of persons residing, working, or visiting the site; or because the applicant has undertaken a transportation demand management program.

2.     Parking Demand Study. In order to evaluate a proposed project’s compliance with the above criteria, submittal of a parking demand study that substantiates the basis for granting a parking reduction may be required. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.27.060 Location of Required Parking
A.    Parking shall not be located within a required front or street-facing yard setback. However, driveways on residential lots count towards required residential parking.

B.     Required parking shall be located on the same lot as the use it serves, except as allowed in subsection (B)(1)(a).

1.     Off-Site Parking Allowances. Required parking may be located off site provided that the following conditions are met.

a.     Location.

i.      CBD, MU-C, MU-NC, WF, and the Bridge District and Washington Specific Plan Zones. Any off-site parking facility must be located within 1,350 feet, along a pedestrian route, of the principal entrance containing the use for which the parking is required.

ii.     Zones Other Than the CBD, MU-C, MU-NC, WF, or the Bridge District and Washington Specific Plan Zones. Any off-site parking facility must be located within 500 feet, along a pedestrian route, of the principal entrance containing the use for which the parking is required.

b.     Evidence of Access and Right to Use. The applicant shall provide evidence from the owner or manager of the off-site parking facility that customers, clients, employees, and other users of the subject use have access to and use of the off-site parking facility. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.27.070 Bicycle Parking
A.    Short-Term Bicycle Parking. Short-term secure bicycle parking shall be provided to serve shoppers, customers, messengers, guests, and other visitors to a site who generally stay for a short time.

1.     Parking Spaces Required. For the following uses, the number of short-term secure bicycle parking spaces shall be at least five percent of the requirements in Section 17.27.040, Required Parking Spaces, with a minimum of four secure bicycle parking spaces provided per establishment.

a.     Multi-unit residential, group residential, and single-room occupancy.

b.     All public/semi-public uses.

c.     All commercial uses, except automobile/vehicle sales and services, short-term rentals, and mobile vendors.

2.     Location.

a.     Short-term secure bicycle parking shall be located outside of pedestrian walkways, and within 100 feet of a main entrance to the building it serves.

b.     Short-term secure bicycle parking shall be located outside of the public right-of-way except as allowed through an encroachment permit.

c.     Where the secure bicycle parking area is not visible from the main entrance of the buildings, signs located at the main entrance of the building shall identify the location of bicycle parking.

3.     Anchoring and Security. For each short-term bicycle parking space required, a stationary, securely-anchored object shall be provided to which a bicycle frame and one wheel (two points of contact) can be secured with a high-security U-shaped shackle lock if both wheels are left on the bicycle. One such object may serve multiple bicycle parking spaces.

4.     Size and Accessibility. Each short-term bicycle parking space shall be a minimum of two feet in width and six feet in length and shall be accessible without moving other bicycles. Two feet of clearance shall be provided between bicycle parking spaces and adjacent walls, poles, landscaping, street furniture, drive aisles, and pedestrian walkways. Five feet of clearance shall be provided from vehicle parking spaces.



FIGURE 17.27.070.A: SHORT-TERM BICYCLE PARKING

 

B.     Long-Term Bicycle Parking. Long-term bicycle parking shall be provided to serve employees, students, residents, commuters, and others who generally stay at a site for four hours or longer.

1.     Parking Spaces Required.

a.     Multi-Unit Residential, Group Residential, and Single-Room Occupancy. A minimum of one long-term bicycle parking space shall be provided per every five dwelling units.

b.     Parking Structures. Long-term bicycle parking shall be provided at a minimum ratio of one bicycle parking space per 25 vehicle parking spaces.

c.     Other Uses. Any establishment with 25 or more full-time equivalent employees shall provide long-term bicycle parking at a minimum ratio of one bicycle parking space per 25 vehicle parking spaces.

2.     Location. Long-term bicycle parking must be located on the same lot as the use it serves and near the facility entrance. In parking structures, long-term bicycle parking must be located near an entrance to the facility. Where the bicycle parking area is not visible from the entrance of the building, signs located at the entrance or in an entry lobby of the building shall identify the location of bicycle parking.

3.     Covered Spaces. 100% of required long-term bicycle parking for multi-unit residential development shall be covered. A minimum of 50% of long-term bicycle parking required for other land uses shall be covered. Covered bicycle parking can be provided inside buildings, garages, bike lockers, or under roof overhangs, or awnings.

4.     Anchoring and Security. Long-term bicycle parking must be in:

a.     An enclosed bicycle locker;

b.     A fenced, covered, locked, or guarded bicycle storage area;

c.     A rack or stand inside a building that is within view of an attendant or security guard, visible from employee work areas, or within a secure/restricted bicycle storage room; or

d.     Other secure areas approved by the Director.

5.     Size and Accessibility. Each long-term bicycle parking space shall be a minimum of two feet in width and six feet in length and shall be accessible without moving other bicycles. Two feet of clearance shall be provided between bicycle parking spaces and adjacent walls, poles, landscaping, street furniture, drive aisles, and pedestrian walkways. Five feet of clearance shall be provided from vehicle parking spaces. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.27.080 Loading
All uses requiring the receipt or distribution by vehicles or trucks of material or merchandise shall provide off-street loading and unloading areas to handle the volume of truck traffic and loading requirements.

A.    Residential Uses. Residential uses with 10 or more units on a site shall provide a minimum of one passenger loading/unloading space near each common entrance. The Director may approve a modification to this requirement pursuant to Chapter 17.40, Modifications, if the Director finds that adequate loading space exists due to characteristics of the project site and nature of the use.

B.     Commercial and Industrial Buildings.

1.     Number of Loading Spaces Required. At a minimum, one loading space shall be provided for all commercial and industrial buildings in excess of 10,000 square feet plus one additional space for every additional 20,000 square feet of floor area.

a.     Multi-Tenant Buildings. The gross floor area of the entire building shall be used in determining spaces for multi-tenant buildings. A common loading area may be required, if each tenant space is not provided with a loading area. Drive-in roll-up doors for multi-tenant industrial projects may be substituted for required loading areas.

b.     Reduction to Number of Loading Spaces Required. The Zoning Administrator may waive the loading space upon finding that the applicant has satisfactorily demonstrated that, due to the specific nature of the use and building, such loading space will not be necessary.

c.     Additional Loading Spaces Required. Additional loading spaces may be required to ensure that trucks will not be loaded, unloaded, or stored on public streets. Such requirement shall be based on the anticipated frequency of truck deliveries.

2.     Location. Loading zones and docks shall be located to the rear of properties and no truck entrance door, loading zone, or dock-serving commercial vehicles shall be permitted to face a residential area within 500 feet as measured to the nearest residential property line.

a.     Exceptions. The location requirement may be modified or waived where the review authority finds that:

i.      The intended use of the property or the location of or shape of the site and/or existing development warrant a variance;

ii.     That street-facing loading areas will exhibit architectural treatment, or will be enhanced with landscaping, in such a way as to minimize visual and noise impacts; and

iii.    There are specific features of the site and design of the building such that strict application of the orientation requirement is impractical.

3.     Size and Dimensions. Each on-site loading space required by this section shall not be less than 10 feet wide, 35 feet long, and 14 feet high. The minimum size requirement may be modified if the Zoning Administrator finds that the applicant has satisfactorily demonstrated that due to the nature of the proposed use, such size will not be needed.

4.     Screening. All loading zones and truck parking areas shall be screened from view by a minimum of an eight-foot high hedge, vine-covered fence, or wall and landscaping in accordance with the Landscape Development Guidelines of the City of West Sacramento. Screen walls shall be designed with comparable building materials to the primary structure on the property excluding metal. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.27.090 Parking Area Design Standards
All parking areas except those used exclusively for stacked or valet parking shall be designed and developed consistent with the following standards. Parking areas used exclusively for stacked or valet parking are subject only to subsections G through K. Stacked or valet parking areas which will allow parking sometimes without attendants must be striped in conformance with the layout requirements of this section.

A.    Tandem Parking. Tandem parking may be permitted to satisfy parking requirements in accordance with the following.

1.     No more than two vehicles shall be placed one behind the other.

2.     Both spaces shall be assigned to a single dwelling unit or non-residential establishment.

3.     Tandem parking to meet required parking for non-residential uses may be used for employee parking; the maximum number of tandem parking spaces shall not exceed 50% of the total number of spaces.

4.     Tandem parking to meet required parking for multi-unit residential development shall be located within an enclosed structure; the maximum number of tandem parking spaces shall not exceed 50% of the total number of spaces.

5.     Tandem parking shall not be used to meet the guest parking requirement.

B.     Parking Access.

1.     Shared Access. Non-residential projects are encouraged to provide shared vehicle and pedestrian access to adjacent non-residential properties for convenience, safety, and efficient circulation. A joint access agreement guaranteeing the continued availability of the shared access between the properties approved by the Director shall be recorded in the County Recorder’s office, in a form satisfactory to the City Attorney.

2.     Forward Entry. Parking facilities of four or more spaces shall be provided with suitable maneuvering room so that all vehicles accessing the facility may enter an abutting street in a forward direction.

3.     Driveway Length. Driveways providing direct access from a public street to a parking facility, garage, or carport shall be at least 20 feet in depth.

4.     Driveway Width. The minimum width of a driveway is as follows:

a.     One-Way Driveways. One-way driveways shall be a minimum of 10 feet in width.

b.     Two-Way Driveways. Two-way driveways shall be a minimum of 20 feet in width.

C.     Size and Dimensions of Parking Spaces and Maneuvering Aisles. Parking spaces and maneuvering aisles shall meet the minimum size and dimensions established in Table 17.27.090.C.1, Parking Space Minimum Dimensions. Screening walls, roof support posts, columns, or other structural members shall not intrude into the required dimensions for parking spaces. Maneuvering aisles shall meet the minimum size and dimensions established in Table 17.27.090.C.2, Maneuvering Aisle Minimum Dimensions.

TABLE 17.27.090.C.1: PARKING SPACE MINIMUM DIMENSIONS

Type of Parking Space

Width (feet)

Length (feet)

Standard

9

18

Compact

8

16

Parallel

10

24

Accessible

Compliant with the California Building Code

 

TABLE 17.27.090.C.2: MANEUVERING AISLE MINIMUM DIMENSIONS

Angle of Parking

Width (feet)

One-Way

Two-Way

Parallel

12

25

0-30 degrees

12

25

31-45 degrees

14

25

46-60 degrees

16

25

61-90 degrees

25

25

 



FIGURE 17.27.090.C: DIMENSIONS OF PARKING SPACES AND MANEUVERING AISLES

 

D.    Electric Vehicle Charging Stations.

1.     Where Allowed. Electric vehicle charging stations may be provided in any area designed for the parking or loading of vehicles.

2.     Where Required. In new or renovated parking areas with five or more parking spaces, a minimum of one electric vehicle charging station shall be provided for every five parking spaces.

E.     Striping and Marking.

1.     Space Outline. All parking spaces shall be clearly outlined with double striping three inches in width, in durable white paint designed for that purpose.

2.     Maneuvering Areas. All aisles, approach lanes, and turning areas shall be clearly marked with directional arrows and lines as necessary to provide for safe movement.

3.     Compact Spaces. All compact spaces shall be clearly marked as such.

F.     Bumpers, Curbs, and Wheel Stops. A permanent curb, bumper, wheel stop, or similar device at least six inches high and thick shall be installed to protect buildings and landscaping from vehicular damage. If such protection is provided by a wheel stop, the stopping edge shall be placed no closer than two feet from the edges of the required sidewalks, planter or landscaped areas and from any building. The two feet beyond the wheel stop may be paved, landscaped with ground cover, or used as additional sidewalk width. No walkway used for a wheel stop may be less than seven feet wide.

G.    Paving and Surfacing. All parking spaces, driveways, maneuvering aisles, and other areas dedicated to parking shall be surfaced with a concrete, asphalt, masonry, turfstones, or another comparable durable and dustless surface, in accordance with Engineering Division specifications. All parking areas shall be graded and drained as to dispose of all surface water accumulated within the area. Site-specific pavement designs for alternative durable and dustless surfaces may be submitted to the Engineering Division for review.

H.    Perimeter Curbing. Parking areas designed to accommodate 10 or more vehicles shall provide a six-inch-wide and six-inch-high concrete curb along the outer edge of the parking facility pavement, except where said pavement abuts a fence or wall. Curbs separating landscaped areas from parking areas shall be designed to allow stormwater runoff to pass through.

I.      Heat Island Reduction. A heat island is the increase in ambient temperature that occurs over large paved areas compared to natural landscape. In order to reduce ambient surface temperatures in parking areas, at least 50% of the areas not landscaped shall be shaded, of light-colored materials with a solar reflectance index of at least 29, or a combination of shading and light-colored materials.

1.     Shade may be provided by canopies, shade structures, trees, or other equivalent mechanisms. If shade is provided by trees, the amount of required shading is to be reached within 15 years.

2.     Trees shall be selected from a list provided by the Community Development Department.

J.      Lighting. Parking lot lighting shall be required for areas designed to accommodate five or more vehicles, providing a minimum of one-half foot-candle and a maximum of three foot-candles of light during the hours of use from one-half hour before dusk until one-half hour after dawn.

1.     All lighting used to illuminate an off-street parking or loading area shall be designed to direct light and glare away from any adjoining lots, residential areas, and public streets.

2.     Lighting design shall be coordinated with the landscape plan to ensure that vegetation will not substantially impair the intended illumination.

3.     Bi-level lighting shall be employed where feasible and desirable.

K.    Landscaping. Parking areas shall be landscaped in accordance with the Landscape Development Guidelines of the City of West Sacramento and/or applicable planned development standards, specific plans, or design guidelines.

L.     Circulation and Safety.

1.     Visibility. Visibility shall be ensured for pedestrians, bicyclists, and motorists entering individual parking spaces, circulating within a parking facility, and entering or leaving a parking facility.

2.     Public Service Vehicles. Parking lots shall be designed so that sanitation, emergency, and other public service vehicles can provide service without backing up unreasonable distances or making other dangerous or hazardous turning movements.

3.     Pedestrian Circulation. Separate vehicular and pedestrian circulation systems shall be provided where possible. Multi-unit residential developments of five or more units must provide pedestrian access that is separate and distinct from driveways. Parking areas for commercial and mixed-use developments that are 80 feet or more in depth and/or include 25 or more parking spaces must have distinct and dedicated pedestrian access from the commercial use to parking areas and public sidewalks, according to the following standards:

a.     Connection to Public Sidewalk. An on-site walkway shall connect the main building entry to a public sidewalk on each street frontage. Such walkway shall be the shortest practical distance between the main building entry and sidewalk, generally no more than 125% of the straight-line distance.

b.     Materials and Width. Walkways shall provide at least five feet of unobstructed width and be hard-surfaced.

c.     Identification. Pedestrian walkways shall be clearly differentiated from driveways, parking aisles, and parking and loading spaces using elevation changes, different paving and surfacing materials, and other methods.

d.     Separation. Where a pedestrian walkway is parallel and adjacent to an auto travel lane, it must be raised and separated from the auto travel lane by a raised curb at least four inches high, bollards, or other physical barriers.



FIGURE 17.27.090.L.3.d: PEDESTRIAN CIRCULATION

 

M.    Alternative Parking Area Designs. Applicants may submit alternative parking area designs to the appropriate review authority if they can demonstrate that variations in the requirements of this section are warranted to achieve environmental design and green building objectives, including, but not limited to, achieving certification under the LEED Green Building Rating System or equivalent, an alternative parking area design may be approved.

N.    Maintenance. Parking lots, including landscaped areas, driveways, and loading areas, shall be maintained free of refuse, debris, or other accumulated matter and shall always be kept in good repair. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

Chapter 17.28 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
17.28.010 Purpose
The purposes of this chapter are to:

A.    Establish permissible limits and permit objective measurement of nuisances, hazards, and objectionable conditions;

B.     Ensure that all uses will provide necessary control measures to protect the community from nuisances, hazards, and objectionable conditions; and

C.     Protect industry from arbitrary exclusion from areas of the City. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.28.020 Applicability
The standards of this chapter shall apply to all uses and properties existing in the City at the time of adoption of this title.

The Planning Commission may approve a maximum five-year extension for compliance for existing uses with a contract and schedule for full compliance. The extension shall be based on the degree of expenditure needed to achieve full compliance compared to the total value of the improvements related to the use and the degree of hazard or impact to the adjoining properties and the community from the existing noncompliance with the standards. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.28.030 General Standard
Land and buildings shall not be used or occupied in a manner creating any dangerous, injurious, or noxious fire, explosive, or other hazard that would adversely affect the surrounding area. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.28.040 Measurement of Impacts
Measurements necessary for determining compliance with the performance standards of this chapter shall be taken at the property line of the establishment or use that is the source of a potentially objectionable condition, hazard, or nuisance. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.28.050 Air Contaminants
Uses, activities, and processes shall not operate in a manner that emits excessive dust, odor, fumes, smoke, or particulate matter, unless authorized under Federal, State, or local law. Sources of air emissions shall comply with all rules established by the Environmental Protection Agency (Code of Federal Regulations, Title 40), the California Air Resources Board, and the Yolo-Solano Air Quality Management District (YSAQMD). The City shall consult with YSAQMD to determine which uses shall be equipped with emission-control devices or measures to preclude fugitive dust and particulate emissions from the site. Such devices or measures shall be approved by YSAQMD prior to issuance of a Building Permit or other approval authorizing construction activities. All devices shall be maintained by the owner. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.28.060 Electromagnetic Interference
Uses, activities, and processes shall not cause electromagnetic interference with normal radio and television reception, or with the function of other electronic equipment beyond the lot line of the site in which it is situated. All uses, activities, and processes shall comply with the applicable Federal Communications Commission regulations. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.28.070 Fire and Explosive Hazards
Uses, activities, and processes involving the use of, or storage of, flammable and explosive materials, shall be provided with adequate safety devices against the hazard of fire and explosion. No use shall store or process flammable or explosive materials more than the quantities exempted by the building code, unless a permit has been granted by the Fire Department. All incineration is prohibited with the exception substances such as, but not limited to, chemicals, insecticides, hospital materials and waste products, required by law to be disposed of by burning, and those instances wherein the Fire Department deems it a practical necessity. Firefighting and fire suppression equipment and devices standard in industry shall be approved by the Fire Department. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.28.080 Glare
Uses, activities, and processes shall not be operated such that significant, direct glare, incidental to the operation of the use, is visible beyond the boundaries of the property where the use is located. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.28.090 Hazardous and Extremely Hazardous Materials
Uses, activities, and processes involving hazardous and extremely hazardous materials shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 8.18, Hazardous Materials, of the municipal code, fire and building codes, regulations of the California Department of Toxic Substances Control, and regulations of the County Environmental Health Agency. Hazardous materials shall include carcinogens and liquids and solids which are unstable at ambient temperatures. Projects utilizing hazardous and extremely hazardous materials shall comply with the following:

A.    Hazardous Material Permit Required. Uses, activities, and processes storing hazardous and extremely hazardous materials shall obtain a Hazardous Material Permit from the Fire Department pursuant to Chapter 8.18, Hazardous Materials of Title 8, Health and Safety, of the municipal code.

B.     Hazardous Material Management Plan. Projects using hazardous and extremely hazardous materials shall provide a Hazardous Material Management Plan for the review and approval by the Hazardous Materials Division, the Hazardous Materials Committee, and the Fire Department prior to final building inspection. Hazardous Material Management Plans shall demonstrate that adequate safety precautions have been taken to ensure the proper handling of hazardous and extremely hazardous materials, including, but not limited to, the following:

1.     Proper on-site management and containment;

2.     Transportation and spill reduction during transport;

3.     Properly-designed and outfitted disposal facilities;

4.     Prevention of spills and sewer contamination;

5.     Source reductions and recovery; and

6.     Compliance with Chapter 8.18, Hazardous Materials of Title 8, Health and Safety, of the municipal code.

C.     Conditional Use Permit Required. If upon the review of the Hazardous Materials Management Plan, the Hazardous Materials Division or Hazardous Materials Committee determines that the hazardous and extremely hazardous materials pose a significant public health risk beyond the property line, the applicant shall be required to obtain a Conditional Use Permit approved by the Planning Commission.

D.    Hazardous Material Signage. All buildings or structures containing hazardous and extremely hazardous materials shall be labeled on all doorways and entrances with easy-to-read signs. Signs shall provide emergency response teams with information on the hazardous contents of the building or structure and proper containment procedures. Signage shall conform to standards established by the Fire Department. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.28.100 Heat and Humidity
Uses, activities, and processes shall not produce any emissions of heat or humidity that cause distress, physical discomfort, or injury to a reasonable person, or interfere with the ability to perform work tasks or conduct other customary activities. In no case shall heat emitted by a use cause a temperature increase of more than five degrees Fahrenheit on another property. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.28.110 Noise
A.    Acoustic Study. An acoustic study shall be required for any proposed project which could create or be subject to a noise that exceeds the levels contained in Tables S-7.1 through S-7.4 in the General Plan.

B.     Noise Attenuation Measures. Any project subject to the acoustic study requirements of subsection A, Acoustic Study, may be required as a condition of approval to incorporate noise attenuation measures deemed necessary to ensure that noise standards are not exceeded.

1.     New noise-sensitive uses (e.g., schools, hospitals, churches, and residences) shall incorporate noise attenuation measures to achieve and maintain an interior noise level of 45 dBA.

2.     Noise attenuation measures identified in an acoustic study shall be incorporated into the project to reduce noise impacts to satisfactory levels.

3.     Emphasis shall be placed upon site planning and project design measures. The use of noise barriers shall be considered and may be required only after all feasible design-related noise measures have been incorporated into the project. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.28.120 Radioactivity
Uses, activities, and processes shall not generate or emit any fissionable or radioactive materials into the atmosphere, a sewage system or onto the ground. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.28.130 Waste
A.    Discharge. Liquids and solids of any kind shall not be discharged, either directly or indirectly, into a public or private body of water, sewage system, watercourse, or into the ground, except in compliance with Title 13, Public Services, of the municipal code, applicable regulations of the Central Valley Regional Water Quality Control Board.

B.     Containment. Waste shall be handled and stored to prevent nuisances, health, safety, and fire hazards, and to facilitate recycling. Material, including, but not limited to, paper products, plastic, dirt, sand, lime, seed, bran, chaff, wood refuse, and other readily transportable compounds, shall be contained in a way it cannot be tracked or carried by wind off site. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.28.140 Vibration
No vibration shall be produced that is transmitted through the ground and is discernible without the aid of instruments by a reasonable person at the lot lines of the site. Vibrations from temporary construction, demolition, and vehicles that enter and leave the subject parcel (e.g., construction equipment, trains, trucks, etc.) are exempt from this standard. Where vibration dampeners are proposed, project applications shall include an engineered study establishing the effectiveness of the dampeners based on actual conditions. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

Chapter 17.29 SIGNS
17.29.010 Purpose
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety, and welfare through a comprehensive system of reasonable, effective, consistent, content-neutral, and nondiscriminatory sign standards and requirements. More specifically, this chapter is intended to:

A.    Balance public and private objectives by allowing adequate avenues for both commercial and non-commercial messages;

B.     Encourage signs as an effective channel of communication while preventing visual clutter that will detract from the aesthetic character of the City;

C.     Protect and improve the local economy and quality of life by preserving and enhancing the appearance of the streetscape;

D.    Maintain and enhance the City’s appearance by regulating the location, number, type, quality of materials, size, illumination, and maintenance of signs;

E.     Restrict signs that may create a nuisance to nearby properties, violate privacy, or create hazards or unreasonable distractions for pedestrians or drivers;

F.     Provide clear and unambiguous sign standards that enable fair and consistent enforcement; and

G.    Ensure that the constitutionally guaranteed right of free speech is protected. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.29.020 Definitions
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:

A.    Animated Sign. A sign with messages that visually change, or images that move or appear to move, flash on or off, wink or blink with varying light intensity, show motion or create the illusion of motion, or revolve to create an illusion of being on or off.

B.     Awning Sign. A sign placed on an awning.



FIGURE 17.29.020.B: AWNING SIGN

 

C.     Balloon. Any air- or gas-filled device used for the purposes of signage or advertising.

D.    Billboard. A sign used for general advertising for hire, that is, some or all of the display area is customarily used to display the messages of advertisers or sponsors other than the owner of the sign.

E.     Canopy Sign. A sign attached to a fixed overhead shelter used as a roof, which may or may not be attached to a building.



FIGURE 17.29.020.E: CANOPY SIGN

 

F.     Commercial Message. A message on a sign, or portion of a sign, that promotes, informs, or proposes an economic transaction, primarily concerns the economic interests of the sign sponsor and/or audience, or is intended to further discussion in the marketplace of goods and services.

G.    Copy. Also called “sign copy.” The visually communicative elements mounted on a sign.

H.    Damaged Sign. Any sign with cracked or broken panels, peeling paint, missing letters, or any sign that has been partially destroyed by any cause.

I.      Directional Sign. A sign that directs or guides pedestrian or vehicular traffic and which is non-advertising in nature (e.g., handicapped parking, one-way, exit, and entrance).

J.      Electronic Copy. A sign having the capability of presenting variable message displays by projecting an electronically controlled pattern, and which can be programmed to periodically change the message display.

K.    Flag. Any fabric or banner containing distinctive colors, patterns, or design that displays the symbol(s) of a nation, state, local government, company, organization, belief system, idea, or other meaning.

L.     Freestanding Sign. A sign supported by structures or supports that are placed on or anchored in the ground, and which are structurally independent from any building.



FIGURE 17.29.020.L: FREESTANDING SIGNS

 

M.    Freeway Information Sign. A multi-tenant sign advertising freeway-oriented businesses near a freeway interchange.

N.    General Advertising for Hire. The advertising or promoting of other businesses, establishments or causes using methods of advertising, typically for a fee or other consideration, in contrast to self-promotion or on-site advertising.

O.    Government Sign. A governmental sign for control of traffic and other regulatory purposes, including street signs, danger signs, railroad crossing signs, and signs of public service companies indicating danger and aids to service or safety.

P.     Graffiti. Marks, such as inscriptions, drawings, or designs, which are placed, scratched, etched, painted, or sprayed on public or private property without the owner’s consent.

Q.    High-Rise Building Identification Sign. A sign on a building of at least four stories indicating the name of the building or residential development.

R.     Illuminated Sign. A sign with an artificial source of light incorporated internally or externally for illuminating the sign.

S.     Inflatable Sign. A form of inflatable device (e.g., shaped as an animal, blimp, or other object) that is displayed, printed, or painted on the surface of an inflatable background, and is primarily installed outside a building to attract attention to or to advertise a business, a business location, a service, a product, or an event.

T.     Internally Illuminated Sign. A sign that is illuminated by a light source that is contained inside the sign where the message area is luminous, including cabinet signs and channel-letter signs.

U.    Master Sign Program. A coordinated sign plan which includes details of all signs (not including exempt or temporary signs) which are or will be placed on a site.

V.    Memorial Sign. An informational non-commercial sign, memorializing a person, event, structure, or site.

W.    Mobile Billboard. Any vehicle, or wheeled conveyance which carries, conveys, pulls, displays, or transports any sign or billboard for the primary purpose of advertising a commercial or noncommercial message, or other general advertising for hire.



FIGURE 17.29.020.W: MOBILE BILLBOARD

 

X.    Moving Sign. A sign or any portion thereof that rotates, moves, or appears to move in some manner by mechanical, electrical, natural, or other means.

Y.    Non-Commercial Message. A message or image on a sign that directs public attention to or advocates an idea or issue of public interest or concern that does not serve to advertise or promote any business, product, activity, service, interest, or entertainment.

Z.     Nonconforming Sign. A sign lawfully erected and legally existing on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Code, but which does not conform to the provisions of this Code.

AA.  Outdoor Advertising Structure. Any structure of any kind or character erected or maintained for outdoor advertising purposes, upon which any outdoor advertising sign may be placed, located on a site other than the site on which the advertised use is located or on which the advertised product is produced.

BB.  Pennant. A device made of flexible materials (e.g., cloth, paper, or plastic) that may or may not contain copy, and which is installed for attracting attention.

CC.  Permanent Sign. A sign that is intended to be and is so constructed as to be of a lasting and enduring condition, remaining unchanged in character, condition (beyond normal wear) and position, and in a permanent manner affixed to the ground, wall, or building.

DD.  Portable Sign. A moveable sign that rests on the ground and is not designed to be permanently attached to a building or permanently anchored to the ground, including, but not limited to, A-frame and H-frame signs are allowed subject to the following standards.



FIGURE 17.29.020.DD: PORTABLE SIGN, A-FRAME SIGN

 

EE.   Projecting Sign. A single- or double-faced sign that is perpendicular to the face of a building and projects more than 15 inches from the face.



FIGURE 17.29.020.EE: PROJECTING SIGN

 

FF.   Roof Sign. Any sign located on a roof of a building or having its major structural supports attached to a roof that extend above the roofline or parapet.



FIGURE 17.29.020.FF: ROOF SIGN

 

GG.  Sign. Any identification, description, illustration, or device illuminated or non-illuminated, which is visible to the public from any exterior public right-of-way, and directs attention to a product, service, place, activity, person, institution, business or solicitation, including any permanently installed or situated merchandise; or any emblem, painting, banner, pennant, or placard designed to advertise, identify, or convey information. A display, device, or thing need not contain lettering to be a sign.

HH.  Sign Area. The area contained within a single continuous perimeter enclosing all parts of such sign copy, excluding any structural elements outside the limits of the sign required to support the sign.

II.     Sign Face. An exterior display surface of a sign, including non-structural trim, exclusive of the supporting structure. The area of a sign which is available for mounting and public display of the visually communicative image.

JJ.    Traffic Sign. A sign for traffic direction, warning, and roadway identification.

KK.  Wall Sign. A sign affixed to and wholly supported by a building in such a manner that its exposed face is approximately parallel to the plane of such building.



FIGURE 17.29.020.KK: WALL SIGN

 

LL.   Window Sign. A temporary or permanent sign with a single face of copy that is painted or installed on a glass window or door, or located within 12 inches from inside the window, in a manner that it can be viewed from the exterior of a structure.



FIGURE 17.29.020.LL: WINDOW SIGN

(Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.29.030 Applicability
A.    The provisions of this chapter apply to all signs in all zones, constructed or physically altered on or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title, unless otherwise specified.

1.     The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to prohibit a person from holding a sign while picketing or protesting on public property that has been determined to be a traditional or designated public forum, so long as the person holding the sign does not block ingress and egress from buildings; create a safety hazard by impeding travel on sidewalks, bike lanes, or vehicle lanes; or violate any other reasonable time, place, and manner restrictions adopted by the City.

2.     The provisions of this chapter shall not require alteration of the display of any registered mark, trademark, service mark, trade name, or corporate name that may be associated with or incorporated into a registered mark, where such alteration would require the registered mark to be displayed in a manner differing from the mark as exhibited in the certificate of registration issued by the United States Patent and Trademark Office. It is the responsibility of the applicant to establish that a proposed sign includes a registered mark.

B.     Regulatory Interpretations. The provisions of this chapter shall be applied in a content-neutral manner. Non-communicative aspects of all signs, not related to the content of the sign, shall comply with the provisions of this chapter. “Non-communicative aspects” include the time, place, manner, location, size, height, illumination, spacing, and orientation of signs. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.29.040 Exemptions
The following signs are exempt from the permit requirements of this chapter, and do not count toward the maximum sign area limitation for a site, provided that they conform to the specified standards.

A.    Address Signs. Required address identification signs that are in conformance with the Building Code.

B.     Commercial Displays on Vehicles. Displays on vehicles related to the goods or services provided by the vehicle owner or operator and public transit/public carrier graphics on properly licensed buses, taxicabs, and similar vehicles for hire that legally pass through the City.

C.     Directional Signs. Directional and/or informational signs not more than eight square feet in area or four feet in height for the direction or convenience of the public such as outlining/assisting vehicle and pedestrian circulation within a site, egress, ingress, and any public facilities such as restrooms, telephones, walkways, and other similar features.

D.    Flags. Flags that do not display a commercial message and are erected and located in accordance with the following standards:

1.     Maximum Allowable Sign Area. The maximum allowable sign area for an individual flag is 32 square feet.

2.     Maximum Sign Height. The maximum flagpole height is 30 feet.

3.     Location of Sign. Flagpoles shall not be located within any required setback.

4.     Maximum Number of Signs. No more than two flags per lot in Residential Zones, no more than three flags per lot in all other zones.

E.     Government Signs. Official notices issued by a court, public body, or office and posted in the performance of a public duty; notices posted by a utility or other quasi-public agency; signs erected by a governmental body to direct or regulate pedestrian or vehicular traffic; non-commercial bus stop signs erected by a public transit agency, or other signs required or authorized by law.

F.     Historic Plaques and Commemorative Signs. Historic plaques, memorial signs or tablets, or commemorative signs indicating names of buildings and dates of building erection, either attached to or cut into the surfaces of buildings, with a maximum allowable sign area of four square feet per sign.

G.    Interior Signs. Signs that are in the interior areas of a building or site not visible from the public right-of-way, and at least three feet from a window, door, or other exterior wall opening.

H.    Manufacturer’s Mark. Manufacturer’s marks, including signs on items such as vending machines, gas pumps, and ice containers with a maximum allowable sign area of four square feet per sign.

I.      Mobile Vendor Signs. Signs fixed to mobile vending vehicles that identify or advertise the name, product, or service provided by the vendor. Each mobile vending vehicle is limited to a maximum sign area of eight square feet.

J.      Nameplate. One nameplate for each tenant or occupancy not to exceed two square feet in area indicating the name of the occupant or tenant. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.29.050 Prohibitions
Unless otherwise permitted by a specific provision of this chapter, the following sign types are prohibited:

A.    Animated or Moving Signs. Animated, flashing, blinking, reflecting, revolving, or other similar sign with visibly moving or rotating parts or visible mechanical movement of any kind, unless expressly permitted by another section of this chapter.

B.     Balloons, Inflatable Signs, Streamers, Pennants and Other Attention-Getting Devices. Balloons, inflatable signs, streamers, pennants, and other attention-getting devices, made of light-weight fabric or similar material, designed to rotate or move with the wind, that direct, promote, or that are otherwise designed to attract attention.

C.     Cabinet or Can Signs. Internally illuminated cabinet and can signs.

D.    Fence Signs. Signs attached or painted on fences or freestanding walls that are not part of a building.

E.     General Advertising. Temporary signs that publicize or promote other businesses or causes using methods of advertising (in contrast to self-promotion, on-site sales, or on-site advertising). General advertising is also known as advertising for hire.

F.     Mobile Billboards. Any sign carried or conveyed by a vehicle for the primary purpose of general advertising for hire. This prohibition eliminates mobile billboard advertising within the City to reduce traffic congestion, promote the safe movement of vehicular traffic, to reduce air pollution, and improve the aesthetic appearance of the City. This prohibition does not apply to displays on vehicles related to the goods or services provided by the vehicle owner or operator and public transit/public carrier graphics on properly licensed buses, taxicabs, and similar vehicles for hire that legally pass through the City.

G.    Roof Signs.

1.     Attached signs that extend above the roofline or parapet (whichever is higher) of a building with a flat roof.

2.     Attached signs that extend above the deck line of a mansard or false-mansard roof.

3.     Signs on rooftop structures, such as penthouse walls or mechanical enclosures.

H.    Search Lights and Klieg Lights. Search and Klieg lights when used as attention-attracting devices for commercial uses.

I.      Signs Located in the Public Right-of-Way or on Public Property. Other than official government signs or warning signs required by law, no inanimate sign can be placed in or project into the public right-of-way or on public property unless authorized by an encroachment permit.

J.      Signs Affixed to Trees. Signs affixed to or cut into trees or other living vegetation shall be prohibited.

K.    Signs on Terrain. Signs cut, burned, marked, or displayed in any manner on a street, sidewalk, cliff, hillside, or other terrain feature shall be prohibited.

L.     Signs Creating Traffic or Pedestrian Safety Hazards. Signs placed, located, or displayed in such a manner as to constitute a traffic or pedestrian safety hazard shall be prohibited.

1.     Signs that obstruct use of any door, window, or fire escape.

2.     Signs that impede normal pedestrian use of public sidewalks. A minimum unobstructed width of four feet must always be maintained.

3.     Signs that constitute a traffic hazard or obstruct the view of traffic, any authorized traffic sign, or signal device.

4.     Signs that create confusion or conflict with any authorized traffic sign or signal device due to color, location, wording, or use of specific phrases, symbols, or characters.

M.    Signs Producing Noise or Emissions. Signs producing visible smoke, vapor, particles, odor, noise, or sounds that can be heard at the property line shall be prohibited. This prohibition excludes menu boards with voice units at drive-through facilities.

N.    Signs for Prohibited Uses. A sign displaying a commercial message promoting a business that is a prohibited use and has not been established as a legal nonconforming use.

O.    Unauthorized Signs. Signs shall not be placed on private or public property without the permission of the property owner. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.29.060 Sign Measurement
A.    Measuring Sign Area. Building painting, striping, and supporting structures are not included in sign area. The sign area is the total area contained within the smallest rectangular perimeter encompassing the sign, structures, and any background embellishments. The sign area for individual channel letter signs is the area contained by the smallest rectangular perimeter that will encompass each word. The area of an individual sign shall be calculated as follows:



FIGURE 17.29.060.A: MEASURING SIGN AREA

 

1.     Single-Faced Signs. The sign area is the area of the sign face.

2.     Double-Faced Signs. Where two faces of a double-faced sign are located two feet or less from one another at all points or located at an interior angle of 45 degrees or less from one another, the sign area of double-faced signs is computed as the area of one face. Where the two faces are not equal in size, the larger sign face will be used. Where two faces of a double-faced sign are located more than two feet or greater than 45 degrees from one another, both sign faces are counted toward sign area.



FIGURE 17.29.060.A.2: MEASURING DOUBLE-FACED SIGNS

 

3.     Multi-Faced Signs. On a three-faced sign, where at least one interior angle is 45 degrees or less, the area of two faces (the largest and smallest face) must be summed to determine sign area. In all other situations involving a sign with three or more sides, sign area will be calculated as the sum of all faces.



FIGURE 17.29.060.A.3: MEASURING MULTI-FACED SIGNS

 

4.     Three-Dimensional Signs. Three-dimensional signs include those that consist of, or have attached to them, one or more three dimensional objects such as balls, cubes, clusters, sculpture, or statue-like trademarks. The sign area is the sum of all areas using the four vertical sides of the smallest rectangular prism that will encompass the sign.



FIGURE 17.29.060.A.4: MEASURING THREE-DIMENSIONAL SIGNS

 

B.     Measuring Sign Height. The height of a sign is the vertical distance from the uppermost point used to measure sign area to the existing grade immediately below the sign.

1.     Freestanding Signs. The height of freestanding signs, including freeway information signs, shall be measured as the vertical distance from grade at the edge of the right-of-way along which a sign is placed, to the highest point of the sign, including any structural or architectural component of the sign. When the grade at the edge of the right-of-way is higher than the site on which the sign is placed, that portion of the sign below the grade at the edge of the right-of-way shall not be included in determining the sign’s overall height.



FIGURE 17.29.060.B: MEASURING SIGN HEIGHT

C.     Measuring Sign Clearance. Sign clearance shall be measured as the smallest vertical distance between finished grade and the lowest point of the sign, including any framework or background embellishments.



FIGURE 17.29.060.C: MEASURING SIGN CLEARANCE

 

D.    Building Frontage. Building frontage shall be measured as the widest lineal dimension, parallel to the ground, of a continuous frontage. A building’s frontage is considered continuous if projections or recesses in a building wall do not exceed 10 feet in any direction. For buildings with two or more frontages, the length of the frontage and allowable sign area shall be calculated separately for each building frontage.



FIGURE 17.29.060.D: BUILDING FRONTAGE

 

E.     Street Frontage. The length of street frontage is measured along the property line adjacent to the public right-of-way. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.29.070 General Provisions
A.    Applicable Codes. In addition to complying with the provisions of this section, all signs must be constructed in accordance with the Uniform Building code, the Uniform Sign Code, the Electrical Code, and all other applicable laws, rules, regulations, and policies.

B.     Changes to Copy of Approved Signs. Changes to the copy of approved signs that were legally established and have not been modified to become illegal are exempt from permitting pursuant to this title. Changes to copy do not include changes to the type or level of illumination of an approved sign.

C.     Noncommercial Signs. Non-commercial signs are allowed wherever commercial signage is permitted and are subject to the same standards and total maximum allowances per site or building of each sign type specified in this chapter. For purposes of this chapter, all non-commercial speech messages will be deemed to be “on-site,” regardless of location.

D.    Message Substitution. A non-commercial message of any type may be substituted, in whole or in part, for any duly permitted commercial message, any non-commercial message may be substituted for any non-commercial message, and any on-site commercial message may be substituted for any on-site commercial message.

1.     No Additional Approval Required. Such substitution of message may be made without any additional approval, permitting, registration, or notice to the City. This provision prevents any inadvertent favoring of commercial speech over non-commercial speech or favoring any non-commercial message over any other non-commercial message.

2.     Limitations. This provision does not allow the following:

a.     Create the right to increase the total amount of signage for a parcel, lot, or land use;

b.     Affect the requirement that a sign structure or mounting device be properly permitted;

c.     Allow a change in the physical structure of a sign or its mounting device; or

d.     Authorize the substitution of an off-site commercial message in place of an on-site commercial message or in place of a non-commercial message.

E.     Sign Materials. All signs shall be made of sturdy, durable materials.

1.     Paper, Cardboard, and Similar Materials. Paper, cardboard, and similar materials subject to rapid deterioration shall be limited to temporary signs.

2.     Fabric. Fabric materials shall be limited to awnings, canopies, flags, and temporary signs.

F.     Changeable Copy.

1.     Manual Changeable Copy. Manually changeable copy shall represent no more than 50% of the sign area.

2.     Automatic Changeable Copy and Electronic Message Center Signs. Electronic Message Center (EMC) signs and automatic changeable copy in which copy can be changed or altered by electric, electro-mechanical, electronic, or any other artificial energy means, are allowed subject to the following standards.

a.     Permit Required. All automatic changeable copy and electronic message center signs require Minor Use Permit approval, except service and gas station price signs and time and temperature signs.

b.     Display Duration. The display shall change no more frequently than once every eight seconds and must have an unlighted interval between copy displays of 0.3 second or more.

c.     Static Message. Displays shall contain static messages only, and shall not have movement, or the appearance or optical illusion of movement, of any part of the sign structure, design, or pictorial segment of the sign, including the movement or appearance of movement of any illumination, or the flashing, scintillating or varying of light intensity.

d.     Light Intensity. 0.3 foot-candles over ambient lighting conditions when measured at a distance equal to the square root of 100 times the area of the sign in square feet. All electronic copy must be equipped with a sensor or other device that automatically determines the ambient illumination and programmed to automatically dim according to ambient light conditions, or that can be adjusted to comply with the 0.3 foot-candle measurements.

e.     Automatic Controls. All electronic message displays shall be equipped with automatic controls to allow for adjustment of brightness based on ambient lighting conditions.

G.    Illumination. Illuminated signs shall be designed according to the following standards:

1.     Illuminated channel letter signs and neon signs are allowed.

2.     Lighting fixtures used to illuminate an outdoor sign shall be mounted on top of the sign structure, unless approved with a Master Sign Permit.

H.    Encroachment. Signs mounted on private property may project into or above public property or the public right-of-way only with approval of an encroachment permit. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.29.080 Signage Allowances by Zone
This section establishes the types of signs and, where applicable, the total aggregate sign area, allowed per zone.

A.    Agricultural Zone. Non-residential uses that are the primary use on a site in the Agricultural Zone are allowed the following types of signs with a total aggregate sign area of one foot per eight feet of street frontage and subject to Section 17.29.090, Signage Standards for Specific Sign Types.

1.     Freestanding signs (Section 17.29.090.B, Freestanding Signs)

2.     Wall signs (Section 17.29.090.E, Wall Signs)

B.     Residential Zones.

1.     Residential Developments. Residential developments of two or more units or lots are allowed the following types of signs with a total aggregate sign area of one square foot per two dwelling units and subject to Section 17.29.090, Signage Standards for Specific Sign Types.

a.     Freestanding signs (Section 17.29.090.B, Freestanding Signs)

b.     Wall signs (Section 17.29.090.E, Wall Signs)

2.     Non-Residential Uses. Non-residential uses that are the primary use on a site in a Residential Zone are allowed following types of signs with a total aggregate sign area of one foot per eight feet of street frontage and subject to Section 17.29.090, Signage Standards for Specific Sign Types.

a.     Awning and canopy signs (Section 17.29.090.A, Awning and Canopy Signs)

b.     Freestanding signs (Section 17.29.090.B, Freestanding Signs)

c.     Projecting and shingle signs (Section 17.29.090.D, Projecting and Shingle Signs)

d.     Wall signs (Section 17.29.090.E, Wall Signs)

e.     Window signs (Section 17.29.090.F, Window Signs)

C.     Commercial and Mixed-Use Zones. The following types of signs are allowed in Commercial and Mixed-Use Zones subject to Section 17.29.090, Signage Standards for Specific Sign Types.

1.     Awning and canopy signs (Section 17.29.090.A, Awning and Canopy Signs)

2.     Freestanding signs (Section 17.29.090.B, Freestanding Signs)

3.     High-rise building identification signs (Section 17.29.090.C, High-Rise Building Identification Signs)

4.     Projecting and shingle signs (Section 17.29.090.D, Projecting and Shingle Signs)

5.     Wall signs (Section 17.29.090.E, Wall Signs)

6.     Window signs (Section 17.29.090.F, Window Signs)

D.    Employment Zones. The following types of signs are allowed in Employment Zones subject to Section 17.29.090, Signage Standards for Specific Sign Types.

1.     Awning and canopy signs (Section 17.29.090.A, Awning and Canopy Signs)

2.     Freestanding signs (Section 17.29.090.B, Freestanding Signs)

3.     High-rise building identification signs (Section 17.29.090.C, High-Rise Building Identification Signs)

4.     Wall signs (Section 17.29.090.E, Wall Signs)

5.     Window signs (Section 17.29.090.F, Window Signs)

E.     Public and Semi-Public Zones. The following types of signs are allowed in Public and Semi-Public Zones subject to Section 17.29.090, Signage Standards for Specific Sign Types.

1.     Freestanding signs (Section 17.29.090.B, Freestanding Signs)

2.     Wall signs (Section 17.29.090.E, Wall Signs). (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.29.090 Signage Standards for Specific Sign Types
This section establishes standards for specific sign types that apply to all zones where such signs are allowed.

A.    Awning and Canopy Signs. Signs painted or printed on awnings, canopies, arcades, or similar attachments or structures are subject to the following standards.

1.     Maximum Allowable Sign Area. Awning and canopy signs shall have a maximum allowable sign area of 10 square feet, or 25% of the total awning area, whichever is less.

2.     Maximum Sign Height. Awning and canopy signs shall have a maximum height of 14 feet.

3.     Minimum Sign Clearance. Awning and canopy signs shall have a minimum sign clearance of eight feet.

4.     Maximum Number of Signs. Awning and canopy signs shall be limited to one per each establishment with an entrance or offering services under the awning or canopy.

5.     Illumination. Awning and canopy signs shall not be illuminated.



FIGURE 17.29.090.A: AWNING AND CANOPY SIGNS

 

B.     Freestanding Signs. Freestanding signs are subject to the following standards.

1.     Maximum Allowable Sign Area.

a.     Agricultural and Residential Zones. Six square feet.

b.     All Other Zones. Freestanding signs shall have a maximum allowable sign area of one-half square foot per linear foot of street property line, up to 200 square feet.

2.     Maximum Sign Height.

a.     Agricultural and Residential Zones. Six feet.

b.     Commercial and Commercial Highway Zones. Freestanding signs in the Commercial and Commercial Highway Zones, except for freeway information signs, shall have a maximum height of 12 feet.

c.     Mixed-Use Zones. Freestanding signs in the CBD, WF, MU-NC, and MU-C zones, shall have a maximum height of 8 feet.

d.     Employment and Public and Semi-Public Zones. Eight feet.

3.     Support Structure. The width of the support structure of freestanding signs shall be least one-third of the width of the sign face. The support structure shall be made of materials present on the façade of the building of the related business.

4.     Location of Sign. All freestanding signs shall meet visibility requirements pursuant to Section 17.22.160, Visibility at Intersections.

a.     Commercial and Mixed-Use Zones. Freestanding signs in the Commercial and Mixed-Use Zones shall be set back at least five feet from any street-facing property line, and at least 20 feet from any Residential Zone boundary.

b.     Employment Zones. Freestanding signs in the Employment Zones shall be set back at least five feet from any street-facing property line, and at least 20 feet from any Residential boundary.

c.     All Other Zones. Freestanding signs in all other zones shall be set back at least one foot for every foot of sign height.

C.     High-Rise Building Identification Signs. High-rise building identification signs are allowed on buildings of at least four stories, subject to the following standards.

1.     Maximum Allowable Sign Area. High-rise building identification signs shall have a maximum allowable sign area of one square foot per linear foot of building frontage.

2.     Location of Sign. High-rise building identification signs shall be located on the upper-most story of the building.

3.     Maximum Number of Signs. High-rise building identification signs shall be limited to one per building frontage.



FIGURE 17.29.090.C: HIGH-RISE BUILDING IDENTIFICATION SIGNS

 

D.    Projecting and Shingle Signs. Signs that project horizontally from the exterior wall of a building or are suspended beneath a marquee, covered walkway, canopy, or awning, are subject to the following standards.

1.     Maximum Allowable Sign Area.

a.     Agricultural and Residential Zones. Six square feet.

b.     All Other Zones. Nine square feet.

2.     Maximum Sign Height. 15 feet.

3.     Minimum Sign Clearance. Eight feet.

4.     Maximum Number of Signs. One for each building frontage or tenant space.

5.     Projection Allowed.

a.     Projecting Sign. A projecting sign cannot extend more than four feet from the building to which it is attached and must be designed and located so as to cause no harm to street trees. Signs projecting into the public right-of-way are subject to an encroachment permit.

b.     Shingle Sign. A shingle sign cannot extend further than the outer edge of the marquee, covered walkway, canopy, or awning from which it is suspended.

6.     Illumination. Projecting and shingle signs shall not be illuminated.



FIGURE 17.29.090.D: PROJECTING AND SHINGLE SIGNS

 

E.     Wall Signs. Wall signs include any sign attached to, erected against or painted upon the wall of a building or structure. Wall signs are subject to the following standards.

1.     Maximum Allowable Sign Area. In all cases, wall sign copy shall not occupy more than 20% of the total area of the wall to which the sign is attached.

a.     Agricultural and Residential Zones. 20 square feet.

b.     All Other Zones. One square foot per linear foot of street property line building frontage, up to 200 square feet.

2.     Location of Sign.

a.     Wall signs shall not be placed higher than the second story of a building.

b.     Wall signs shall not cover or interrupt major architectural features, including such features as doors, windows, or tile embellishments.

c.     Wall signs shall not extend higher than the building wall upon which they are attached.

3.     Maximum Number of Signs. One per building frontage or tenant space.

4.     Attachment. Wall signs may be attached according to the following standards:

a.     Attached flat against or pinned away from a building wall, but not extending or protruding more than 15 inches from the wall; or

b.     Attached to the façade of a building or on a sloping roof (mansard roof), but not extending above the upper edge of the façade or the sloping roof.



FIGURE 17.29.090.E: WALL SIGNS

 

F.     Window Signs. Signs painted on or otherwise adhered directly onto a window and signs that block a window in any way are subject to the following standards.

1.     Maximum Allowable Sign Area. 25% of the window area.

2.     Maximum Sign Height. Window signs shall not be placed on windows higher than the second story.



FIGURE 17.29.090.F: WINDOW SIGNS

(Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.29.100 Freeway Information Signs
A.    Conditional Use Permit Required. Freeway information signs are allowed subject to a Conditional Use Permit approval.

B.     Maximum Allowable Sign Area. Freeway information signs shall have a maximum allowable sign area of 600 square feet. Any individual business identified by the freeway information sign shall have a maximum sign area of 100 square feet. Any individual parcel shall be limited to 50% of the sign area.

C.     Maximum Sign Height. Freeway information signs shall have a maximum height of 65 feet.

D.    Location of Sign. Freeway information signs shall be located within 1,000 feet of the start of the off-ramp to which they apply.

E.     Maximum Number of Signs. Freeway information signs shall be limited to one per side of a freeway interchange.

F.     Content of Sign. Freeway information signs shall identify the following:

1.     Name of the City in which the businesses are located;

2.     Name of the off-ramp to which they apply; and

3.     Names of five or more businesses or centers directly served by the off-ramp. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.29.110 Sign Permit Required
A.    Sign Permit Required. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it is unlawful for any person to affix, place, erect, suspend, attach, construct, structurally or electrically alter (not including a face change of sign copy), move, or display any temporary or permanent sign within the City without first obtaining a sign permit from the Director. No sign permit is required for exempt signs or normal maintenance of a previously approved sign, unless a structural or electrical change is made.

B.     Application. Application for a permit shall be made upon forms provided by the Planning Division and accompanied by the required fee and application materials showing the following:

1.     Site plan showing the location and dimensions of existing structures and the relationship of the proposed sign to the existing structures;

2.     Location, dimension, and design of all existing signs; and

3.     Location, dimension, and design of proposed sign.

C.     Review and Decision.

1.     Upon acceptance of a sign application, the Director shall review the request for compliance with the standards and requirements of this chapter, and with any standards established in a Master Sign Program pursuant to Section 17.29.120, Master Sign Program.

2.     The Director’s decision shall clearly state any conditions of approval or reasons for disapproval and applicable appeal provisions.

D.    Agreement Required. No sign permit shall be issued, and no sign erected, unless the City and the sign owner have entered into a written agreement ensuring that the sign is erected and maintained in compliance with this chapter. The sign owner shall be solely responsible for all costs associated with construction, maintenance, and the ultimate removal of the sign. The agreement and the sign permit shall be revocable at any time for failure to comply with this chapter or the terms of the agreement, or if the City determines that the sign interferes with the public’s safe use of the right-of-way.

E.     Permit Number Identification. A tag issued by the City indicating the sign permit number shall be affixed to the sign to be readily visible by City staff. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.29.120 Master Sign Program
A.    Purpose. The purpose of a Master Sign Program is to provide a method for an applicant to integrate the design and placement of signs within a project with the overall development design to achieve a more unified appearance.

B.     Applicability. A Master Sign Program shall be required for:

1.     Projects with four or more non-residential tenants; and

2.     Projects where five or more signs are proposed for a single building or site.

C.     Application. A Master Sign Program application shall contain all written and graphic information needed to fully describe the proposed sign program, including the proposed location and dimension of each sign, as well as proposed color schemes, font types, materials, methods of attachment or support, and methods of illumination. A Master Sign Program application shall also include calculation of maximum allowable sign area, and total proposed sign area, for the site.

D.    Modifications to Sign Standards. A Master Sign Program may provide for modifications from the standards of this chapter.

E.     Review Authority. All Master Sign Programs are subject to review and approval of the Review Authority for the project with which the signs are associated. A Master Sign Program may be submitted separately or as part of the permit application for the project.

F.     Required Findings. The Review Authority must make all of the following findings in order to approve a Master Sign Program, in addition to the other applicable regulations in this section. The inability to make one or more of the findings is grounds for denial of an application.

1.     The proposed signs are compatible in style and character with any building to which the signs are to be attached, any surrounding structures and any adjoining signage on the site;

2.     Future tenants will be provided with adequate opportunities to construct, erect, or maintain a sign for identification; and

3.     Directional signage and building addressing are adequate for pedestrian and vehicular circulation and emergency vehicle access.

G.    Lessees to Be Informed of Master Sign Program. Lessees within developments subject to the requirements of an approved Master Sign Program shall be made aware of the Master Sign Program in their lease. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.29.130 Nonconforming Signs
A.    Continuance and Maintenance. Reasonable and routine maintenance and repairs may be performed on signs that are nonconforming provided there is no expansion of any nonconformity.

B.     Abandonment of Nonconforming Sign. Whenever a nonconforming sign has been abandoned, or the use of the property has been discontinued for a continuous period of 90 days, the nonconforming sign must be removed.

C.     Restoration of a Damaged Sign. A nonconforming sign may be restored if it meets either of the following criteria:

1.     A sign with damage that does not exceed 50% of the total sign area, including hardware and attachments, provided that the repairs start within 60 days of the date of damage and are diligently pursued to completion.

2.     A sign that is a danger to the public or is unsafe as determined by the Building Official. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.29.140 Sign Maintenance
Each sign displayed within the City, including exempt signs, shall be maintained to comply with the following standards:

A.    Graffiti on a sign shall be removed within two days of notice of its placement on such sign.

B.     The display upon any sign area of a sign shall be maintained in good condition, without rips, tears, and similar damage.

C.     All parts, portions, units and materials composing a sign, together with the frame, background, surface, support or enclosure therefore shall be maintained in a safe condition, painted, and adequately protected from weathering with all braces, bolts and structural parts and supporting frames and fastenings reasonably free from deterioration, rot, rust, and loosening so that they do not create a hazard to persons or property or constitute a nuisance.

D.    Any sign or sign structure that is sagging, leaning, fallen, decayed, broken, deteriorated, or other dilapidated condition shall be promptly repaired, to the satisfaction of the City, or removed.

E.     Whenever any sign, by virtue of its physical nature and condition, poses an immediate and serious threat to the public safety, the sign may be removed by City personnel, or its physical deficiency cured, to the extent necessary to protect the public safety. The cost of such removal or repair shall be assessed against the sign owner.

F.     An on-premises sign identifying an activity, business, service or product shall be removed within 30 days following the actual discontinuance of the activity, business, service or product. If the sign is not so removed, the Director may have the sign removed in accordance with the public nuisance abatement provisions of this title. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.29.150 Enforcement
Signs that do not conform to the provisions of this chapter and are erected after its effective date without obtaining required permits thereby are declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. All violations of this chapter shall be subject to enforcement remedies, penalties, and abatement as provided by Chapter 17.46, Enforcement, and Title 19, Nuisance Abatement Code, of the municipal code. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

Chapter 17.30 STANDARDS FOR SPECIFIC USES AND ACTIVITIES
17.30.010 Purpose
The purpose of this chapter is to establish standards for specific uses and activities that are permitted or conditionally permitted in several or all zones. These provisions are supplemental standards and requirements to minimize the impacts of these uses and activities on surrounding properties and to protect the health, safety, and welfare of their occupants and of the public. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.30.020 Applicability
Each land use and activity covered by this chapter shall comply with the requirements of the section applicable to the specific use or activity, in addition to any applicable standard this title requires in the zone where the use or activity is proposed and all other applicable provisions of this title.

A.    The uses that are subject to the standards in this chapter shall be located only where allowed by base, specific plan, and overlay zone use regulations.

B.     The uses that are subject to the standards in this chapter are allowed only when authorized by the planning permit required by zone regulations, such as a Conditional Use Permit, except where this chapter establishes a different planning permit requirement for a specific use. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.30.030 Accessory Uses
An accessory use shall be secondary to a primary use and shall be allowed only in conjunction with a principal use or building to which it relates under the same regulations as the main use in any zone. These regulations are found in the land use regulation tables in Division II, Zone Regulations, and may be subject to specific standards found in this chapter or within each zone, as specified in the tables. Accessory uses and structures are also subject to the development and site regulations found in Chapter 17.22, General Site Regulations. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.30.040 Accessory Dwelling Units
Accessory dwelling units shall comply with all provisions of the base, overlay, or specific plan zone, except as modified by this section.

A.    Residential Density. Even if requirements such as floor area ratio, proportionality (i.e. 50% threshold) to the existing or proposed primary dwelling unit’s floor area, or other zoning standards cannot be met, the city must still allow an 850 square foot unit with setbacks of four feet from side and rear property lines, and up to the maximum building height permitted by the underlying zoning district.

B.     Primary Dwelling Unit Required. The lot shall contain an existing detached single-unit dwelling at the time an application for an accessory dwelling unit is submitted, or the application for the accessory dwelling unit may be made in conjunction with the development of the primary dwelling. For ADUs in multifamily dwellings see subsection C below.

C.     Number of Units. No more than one accessory dwelling unit and one junior accessory unit shall be permitted on any one lot. If the lot has an existing multifamily unit building then multiple ADUs are allowed in portions of existing multifamily dwelling structures that are not used as livable space, including, but not limited to, storage rooms, boiler rooms, passageways, attics, basements, or garages. Two detached ADUs can be added on a lot that has an existing multifamily dwelling.

D.    Floor Area. The allowable square footage is 850 square feet for a one-bedroom ADU and 1,000 for an ADU over one bedroom. Lots larger than one acre can continue to have an ADU up to 1,200 square feet. The Junior ADU maximum square footage is 500 square feet.

E.     Setbacks. Accessory dwelling units shall be setback four feet from the side and rear property lines except as provided below:

1.     Garage Conversions. No setback shall be required for an existing, legally permitted garage that is converted to an accessory dwelling unit. However, no addition may be constructed to the converted garage that increases the encroachment into the setback.

2.     Accessory Dwelling Unit Constructed Above a Garage. If an accessory dwelling unit is constructed above a garage, a setback of no more than four feet from the interior lot lines shall be required for the accessory dwelling unit.

F.     Design and Materials. The exterior design and materials of the accessory dwelling unit shall be visually compatible with the primary dwelling regarding the roof, building walls, doors, windows, horizontal/vertical expression, and architectural detail.

G.    Utilities. Accessory dwelling units shall be metered separately from the primary dwelling for gas, electricity, communications, water, and sewer service except for accessory dwelling units constructed entirely within existing structures pursuant to subsection I, Special Provisions for Accessory Dwelling Units Constructed Entirely Within Existing Structures.

H.    Required Parking. In addition to the required parking for the primary dwelling, an accessory dwelling unit shall be provided pursuant to Chapter 17.27, Parking and Loading.

1.     Parking Configuration. The automobile parking for the accessory dwelling unit may be provided in setback areas and through tandem parking unless the Public Works Director finds that parking in setback areas or tandem parking is not feasible based upon the topographical conditions of the specific site or region or fire and life safety conditions.

2.     Parking Exceptions for Certain Accessory Dwelling Units. Automobile parking is not required for an accessory dwelling unit in any of the following instances:

a.     The accessory dwelling unit is located within one-half mile of public transit.

b.     The accessory dwelling unit is located within an architecturally and historically significant historic district.

c.     The accessory dwelling unit is contained entirely within the permitted floor area of the existing primary residence or an existing accessory structure.

d.     When on-street parking permits are required but not offered to the occupant(s) of the accessory dwelling unit.

e.     When there is a car share vehicle located within one block of the accessory dwelling unit.

f.      When a garage, carport, or covered parking structure is demolished in conjunction with the construction of an accessory dwelling unit or converted to an accessory dwelling unit.

I.      Special Provisions for Accessory Dwelling Units Constructed Entirely Within Existing Structures. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, The city shall ministerially approve an application for a building permit to create an accessory dwelling unit and shall not require the applicant to install a new or separate utility connection directly between the accessory dwelling unit and the utility or impose a related connection fee or capacity charge if all of the following requirements are satisfied.

1.     The lot is located with a Residential Zone on a lot that otherwise would not qualify for more than one dwelling unit.

2.     The construction will result in no more than one primary residence and one accessory dwelling unit, and one junior accessory dwelling unit on the lot.

3.     The proposed accessory dwelling unit will be contained entirely within the permitted floor area of the existing primary residence or an existing accessory structure on the same lot as the primary residence.

4.     The proposed accessory dwelling unit will have exterior access that is independent from the existing primary residence.

5.     The interior setbacks of all structures on the lot are sufficient for fire safety.

For purposes of this subsection to be considered, an existing primary residence or an existing accessory structure, the structure must be a legally permitted structure that conforms to current zoning or is legal nonconforming as to current zoning. Accessory dwelling units constructed pursuant to this subsection shall not be required to provide fire sprinklers if they are not required for the primary residence. (Ord. 20-4 § 2; Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.30.050 Adult Entertainment Uses
Adult entertainment uses shall be located, developed and operated in compliance with following standards:

A.    Location. Adult entertainment uses shall be located a minimum of 600 feet from a Residential Zone and any TK-12 school, preschool, library, publicly-owned park, playground, church, synagogue or other place of worship to which the public is invited or permitted to attend.

B.     Hours of Operation. Hours of operation may be designated by the Planning Commission as condition to the issuance of a Use Permit if the Planning Commission finds, based on substantial evidence presented to it, that there is a need for regulation of hours due to a specifically identified significant problem linked to the adult entertainment use. When regulating the hours of operation of an adult entertainment use, the Planning Commission shall, whenever possible, designate hours which are consistent with the hours of operation of nearby businesses which are similar in nature. If shorter hours than those of nearby businesses of a similar nature are imposed, the Planning Commission shall:

1.     Identify in writing the need for such shorter hours;

2.     Make a specific finding, that a less restrictive condition or requirement would not alleviate the problems imposed by the longer hours of operation of such use; and

3.     Set forth the period of time after which the permit holder could seek review of the Planning Commission’s designation of the hours of operation of the use.

C.     Nonconforming Uses. Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, adult entertainment uses which were in existence prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title and made nonconforming by reason of the provisions of this section are subject to the following regulations:

1.     The use shall not be enlarged, increased or extended to occupy a greater area.

2.     Upon the damage of the building, or portion of the building, in which the adult entertainment use exists to the extent of more than 50% of the building’s assessed value, the use shall be considered terminated and may not be resumed.

3.     If such use is discontinued for a continuous period of more than 90 days for any reason, the use shall be considered terminated and may not be re-established.

4.     The use shall be terminated within 180 days from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title. A variance from this provision may be obtained if the use continues to be in noncompliance with the requirements of this section, upon the finding that the use is obligated by written lease entered into before October 18, 1989, for a period exceeding one year from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title, or that the activity involves investment of money in a leasehold or improvements such that a longer period is necessary to prevent undue financial hardship.

a.     For this subsection, an option to renew a lease shall not be evidence that a use is obligated by a written lease for a period beyond the current term of the lease.

5.     Nonconforming adult entertainment uses shall, within 30 days from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title, comply with all other applicable provisions of this title. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.30.060 Animal Keeping
Animal keeping is allowed as an accessory use to a primary residential use. Animals may be kept in compliance with Title 6, Animals, of the municipal code, and the following standards:

A.    Domestic Animals.

1.     Small Domestic Animals. Small domestic animals, including dogs, cats, potbellied pigs, hen chickens, and all animals recognized by regulation promulgated by the California Department of Fish and Wildlife as domestic animals except large domestic animals, may be kept in accordance with the following:

a.     Maximum Number. The following limits do not apply to small animals primarily kept in indoor enclosures such as fish, hamsters, and birds.

i.      Parcels One-Half Acre or Less in Size. Up to four adult small domestic animals per unit may be kept on parcels of up to one-half acre in size, in addition to no more than four hen chickens.

ii.     Parcels Greater than One-Half Acre in Size. Eight adult small domestic animals per acre.

b.     Nonconforming Small Domestic Animal Keeping. Residents having more than four adult small domestic animals at the time of the effective date of ordinance codified in this title may continue to keep them provided that the animals:

i.      Are licensed in compliance with Title 6, Animals, of the municipal code;

ii.     Are kept in a safe and sanitary environment; and

iii.    Do not generate nuisance complaints that require abatement.

2.     Large Domestic Animals. Large domestic animals including horses, burros and mules (family Equidae), domestic swine (family Suidae, excluding potbellied pigs), domestic cattle, sheep and goats (family Bovidae), and American Bison, may be kept in accordance with the following:

a.     Minimum Lot Size. One acre.

b.     Maximum Number.

i.      Beef cows, two years and over, one per acre;

ii.     Calves four to eight months, three for the first acre and one for each additional one-third acre;

iii.    Weaner calves eight or nine months, not exceeding 450 pounds, two for the first acre and one for each additional one-half acre;

iv.    Yearling steers and heifers more than 450 pounds, one per acre;

v.     All other cattle, one per acre;

vi.    Horses, burros or mules, one per acre;

vii.   Sheep or goats, five for the first acre and one for each additional one-fifth acre;

viii.  Lambs, weaning to one year, five for the first acre and one for each additional one-fifth acre;

 

ix.    Pigs, five for the first acre and one for each additional one-fifth acre; or

x.     Fowl, 40 for the first acre and 10 for each additional one-fourth acre.

3.     Fencing and Enclosure Regulations.

a.     Fencing.

i.      Fenced Area Required. All animals, except small domestic animals kept indoors, shall be kept in an area which is fenced to prevent the animals from roaming.

ii.     Fenced Area Location. The fenced area shall be wholly located within the rear yard of the residence where the animals are kept.

b.     Enclosure.

i.      Enclosure Required. Within the fenced area, an enclosure or shed shall be provided of sufficient size to provide cover for the animals kept on the parcel. An enclosure is not required for cats or dogs.

ii.     Enclosure Location. No part of the animal enclosure shall be located within 25 feet of any neighboring dwelling, within a required side or front setback, or within 300 feet of a community assembly facility, school or institution licensed by the State for the care or treatment of humans.

c.     Animal fecal matter more than which can be safely and sanitarily utilized on the premises shall be removed and shall not be allowed to accumulate.

B.     Bees.

1.     Number of Hives.

a.     AG and RE Zones. No limit on number of hives.

b.     Other Zones. Maximum of two hives per parcel unless otherwise approved with a Minor Use Permit.

2.     Hive Location.

a.     Hives shall be located at least five feet from all property lines.

b.     Hive entrances shall face away from or parallel to the nearest property line(s).

c.     Hives must either be screened so that the bees must fly over a six-foot barrier, which may be vegetative, before leaving the property, or be placed at least eight feet above the adjacent ground level.

3.     Hive Management.

a.     Hives shall be continually managed to provide adequate living space for their resident bees to prevent swarming.

b.     Hives shall be requeened at least once every two years to prevent swarming.

c.     A water source for bees shall be provided at all times on the property where the bees are kept to discourage bee visitation at swimming pools, hose bibs and other water sources on adjacent public or private property.

d.     Hive maintenance materials or equipment must be stored in a sealed container or placed within a building or other bee-proof enclosure.

4.     Nuisance. Bees or hives shall be considered a public nuisance and subject to Chapter 17.46, Enforcement, when any of the following occurs:

a.     Colonies of bees exhibit defensive or objectionable behavior or interfere with the normal use of neighboring properties.

b.     Colonies of bees swarm.

c.     Bees or hives do not conform to this title.

d.     Hives become abandoned by resident bees or by the owner.

C.     Wild, Dangerous, Exotic and Prohibited Animals. The keeping of roosters, peacocks, geese, and any animal which requires a permit from the Department of Fish and Wildlife pursuant to Section 2118 of the Fish and Game Code is prohibited. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.30.070 Automobile/Vehicle Sales and Services
Automobile/vehicle sales and service establishments shall be located, developed and operated in compliance with following standards:

A.    Application Review. All automobile/vehicle sales and services establishments that require Use Permit approval are subject to the following requirements.

1.     Findings for Approval. The review authority shall only approve a Use Permit upon making the following findings:

a.     The project is designed so that form and scale are harmonious and consistent with the character of the specific site, the adjacent uses and structures, and the surrounding neighborhood.

b.     The site design, including the location and number of driveways, will promote safe and efficient on-site and off-site traffic circulation.

c.     Service bay openings are designed to minimize the visual intrusion on surrounding streets and properties.

d.     Lighting is designed to be low-profile, indirect or diffused and to avoid adverse impacts on surrounding uses.

e.     The washing facility, if proposed, will not have an adverse impact on water supply and quality.

2.     Conditions of Approval. Conditions of approval may include limitations on operational characteristics of the use; restrictions on outdoor storage and display, location of pump islands, canopies and service bay openings; and/or requirements for buffering, screening, lighting, planting areas, or other site elements, to avoid adverse impacts on adjacent lots or the surrounding area.

B.     Automobile/Vehicle Sales and Leasing. Automotive servicing or repair is permitted as an accessory use for automobile/vehicle sales and leasing establishments that offer maintenance and servicing of the type of vehicles sold on site.

C.     Automobile/Vehicle Service and Repair, Major and Minor. In addition to other applicable standards of this section, major and minor automobile/vehicle service and repair uses, as well as any other uses, such as auto dealerships or service stations, that perform auto servicing as an accessory activity, are subject to the following standards:

1.     Noise. All body and fender work or similar noise-generating activity shall be conducted within an enclosed masonry or similar building with sound-attenuating construction to absorb noise. Air compressors and other service equipment shall be located inside a building.

2.     Work Areas. All work shall be conducted within an enclosed building except: pumping motor vehicle fluids, checking and supplementing various fluids, and mechanical inspection and adjustments not involving any disassembly.

3.     Vehicle Storage. Vehicles being worked on or awaiting service or pick-up shall be stored within an enclosed building or in a parking lot on the property that is screened in compliance with Section 17.22.130, Screening. Unattended vehicles may not be parked or stored on the sidewalk adjoining the property, in the street, or in any portion of the public right-of-way within the City.

4.     Litter. The premises shall always be kept in an orderly condition. No used or discarded automotive parts or equipment or permanently disabled, junked, or wrecked vehicles may be stored outside a building.

D.    Automobile/Vehicle Washing. In addition to other applicable standards of this section, automobile/vehicle washing facilities are subject to the following standards:

1.     Washing Facilities. No building or structure shall be located within 30 feet of any public street or within 20 feet of any interior property line of a Residential Zone. Vehicle lanes for car wash openings shall be screened from public streets to a height of 40 inches. Screening devices shall consist of walls and/or berms with supplemental plant materials.

2.     Hours of Operation. Automobile/vehicle washing facilities are limited to 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m., seven days a week. When abutting a Residential Zone, the hours of operation shall be between 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m., seven days a week. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.30.080 Cannabis
Cannabis uses shall be located, developed and operated in compliance with following standards. Violations of this section shall constitute a public nuisance and may be enforced pursuant to the provisions of Title 19, Nuisance Abatement Code, of the municipal code.

A.    Cannabis Retail. Cannabis retailers, microbusinesses and dispensaries are regulated pursuant to Chapter 5.28, Cannabis Retail, of the municipal code.

B.     Cultivation. The following regulations shall apply to the cultivation of cannabis within the City.

1.     Indoor Cultivation in Residential Zones. The indoor cultivation of cannabis shall only be conducted within a detached, fully enclosed, and secure structure, or within a residential structure conforming to the following minimum standards:

a.     Any detached structure, regardless of square footage, constructed or altered for the cultivation of cannabis must comply with State and local building codes in effect at the time.

b.     Indoor grow lights shall not exceed 1,200 watts each and shall comply with the California Building, Electrical and Fire Codes as adopted by the City. Gas products (including, without limitation, CO2, butane, propane, and natural gas), or generators shall not be used within any detached structure used for the cultivation of cannabis.

c.     Any detached, fully enclosed and secure structure, or residential structure used for the cultivation of cannabis must have a ventilation and filtration system installed that shall prevent cannabis plant odors from exiting the interior of the structure and that shall comply with the California Building Code Section 402.3, Mechanical Ventilation, as now existing or as amended.

d.     A detached, fully enclosed, and secure structure used for the cultivation of cannabis shall be located in the rear yard area of a legal parcel or premises, maintain a minimum 10-foot setback from any rear and/or interior property line. In the case of a corner lot, the structure shall maintain the street side setback required in that zone. Detached structures used for cultivating cannabis are not eligible for zero lot line agreements. The structure must be enclosed and secured by a fence at least six feet in height.

e.     Cannabis cultivation for sale is prohibited.

f.      Cannabis cultivation may occur in both a detached structure and inside a residence on the same legal parcel so long as the total number of plants does not exceed that which is allowed under State of California law.

g.     Cannabis cultivation areas, whether in a detached building or inside a residence, shall not be accessible to persons under 18 years of age.

2.     Personal Manufacturing of Cannabis Prohibited. It is unlawful and a public nuisance for any person to cause, or allow, or participate in the manufacturing or compounding of cannabis or cannabis products for personal use by extraction methods within their residence or on their residential property.

3.     Cannabis Indoor Commercial Cultivation Facilities. Cannabis indoor commercial cultivation facilities are subject to the following standards.

a.     Approval of a Development Agreement by the City Council prior to operation.

b.     Approval of a Conditional Use Permit pursuant to Chapter 17.38, Use Permits.

c.     Public safety and security plan reviewed and approved by the City prior to operation.

d.     No exterior signage other than the building address.

e.     The facility shall have a ventilation and filtration system installed that shall prevent cannabis plant odors from exiting the interior of the structure and that shall comply with the California Building Code Section 402.3, Mechanical Ventilation, as now existing or as amended.

f.      Outdoor Cultivation. It is unlawful and a public nuisance for any person to cause, or allow, or participate in the outdoor cultivation of cannabis plants within any zone in the City.

C.     Cannabis Laboratory Materials Testing Facility. Cannabis laboratory testing facilities are subject to the following standards.

1.     Approval of a Development Agreement by the City Council prior to operation.

2.     Approval of a Conditional Use Permit pursuant to Chapter 17.38, Use Permits.

3.     Public safety and security plan reviewed and approved by the City prior to operation.

4.     No exterior signage other than the building address.

5.     The facility shall have a ventilation and filtration system installed that shall prevent cannabis plant odors from exiting the interior of the structure and that shall comply with the California Building Code Section 402.3, Mechanical Ventilation, as now existing or as amended.

D.    Cannabis Manufacturing Facility. Cannabis manufacturing facilities are subject to the following minimum standards.

1.     Approval of a Development Agreement by the City Council prior to operation.

2.     Approval of a Conditional Use Permit pursuant to Chapter 17.38, Use Permits.

3.     Public safety and security plan reviewed and approved by the City prior to operation.

4.     No exterior signage other than the building address.

5.     The facility shall have a ventilation and filtration system installed that shall prevent cannabis plant odors from exiting the interior of the structure and that shall comply with the California Building Code Section 402.3, Mechanical Ventilation, as now existing or as amended.

E.     Wholesale Cannabis Logistics, Distribution, and Transportation Facility. Wholesale cannabis logistics, distribution and transportation facilities are subject to the following minimum standards.

1.     Approval of a Development Agreement by the City Council prior to operation.

2.     Approval of a Conditional Use Permit pursuant to Chapter 17.38, Use Permits.

3.     Public safety and security plan reviewed and approved by the City prior to operation.

4.     No exterior signage other than the building address. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.30.090 Drive-Through Facility
Drive-in or drive-through facilities shall be located, developed and operated in compliance with the following standards:

A.    Conditional Use Permit Required. Drive-in and drive-through facilities may be allowed in non-residential zones pursuant to Conditional Use Permit approval.

B.     Circulation Plan. A pedestrian and vehicular circulation plan shall be submitted for approval by the Review Authority. Such plan shall indicate how drive-through, pedestrian, and vehicular circulation will be designed to allow safe, unimpeded movement of vehicles at street access points and within the travel aisles and parking space areas and provide for pedestrian safety. The plan shall also indicate how vehicles will circulate to and through the drive-through or use drive-up facilities in manner that will not impede traffic flow on any public right-of-way.

C.     Drive Aisles. Drive-through aisles shall be inwardly focused within the site and located away from adjoining streets and adjoining properties, wherever feasible. Drive aisles shall be developed in accordance with the following except where modified by the Review Authority.

1.     A minimum 15-foot interior radius at curves and a minimum 12-foot width is required.

2.     A minimum queuing line of 100 feet shall be provided. The queuing line shall not block any parking space or portion of travel lane.

3.     Drive-in and drive-through entrances and exits shall be at least 100 feet from an intersection of public rights-of-way, measured at the closest intersecting curbs, and at least 25 feet from the nearest curb cut on an adjacent property.

4.     Entrances to an aisle and the direction of flow shall be clearly designated by signs and/or pavement markings or raised curbs outside of the public right-of-way.

5.     Drive-through aisles shall be screened with a combination of decorative walls and landscape to a minimum height of 20 inches to prevent headlight glare and direct visibility of vehicles from adjacent streets and parking lots.

D.    Pedestrian Walkways. Pedestrian walkways shall not intersect drive-through aisles, unless no alternative exists. In such cases, pedestrian walkways shall have clear visibility, emphasized by enhanced paving or markings. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.30.100 Emergency Shelters and Daytime Services Facilities
Emergency shelters shall be located, developed, and operated in compliance with the following standards:

A.    Development Standards.

1.     All Facilities. The following standards apply to all emergency shelters.

a.     Emergency shelters shall be located a minimum of 300 feet apart from one another. Programs may have multiple buildings on the same parcel.

b.     On-site personnel shall be provided during hours of operation when clients are present.

c.     A staffed reception area shall be located near the entry to the facility.

d.     Facilities shall provide secure areas for personal property.

2.     Overnight Service Facilities. In addition to the standards in subsection A above, which apply to all emergency shelter facilities, facilities that provide overnight service are also subject to the following standards.

a.     Parking. Parking shall be provided in the ratio of one space for every five adult beds, plus an additional space designated exclusively for the manager. All parking shall be off street and on site.

b.     Hours of Operation.

i.      The facility shall operate with clients only permitted on site and admitted to the facility beginning at 4:00 p.m. for dinner service, check-in, and case management, and continuing to 7:00 a.m.

ii.     A curfew no later than 10:00 p.m. shall be established and strictly enforced. Clients shall not be admitted after the curfew, with exceptions allowed for client work schedules, special event attendance, and after hour admittance of clients by community organizations or public officials.

c.     Screening. Any outdoor storage, including, but not limited to, items brought on-site by clients for overnight stays, shall be screened from public view by a minimum six-foot tall decorative wall or fence. Pets and shopping carts are not permitted on site.

d.     Lighting. Exterior lighting shall be provided for the entire outdoor and parking area of the property. Lighting shall reflect away from residential areas and public streets.

e.     Waiting Area.

i.      For facilities with on-site client intake, an enclosed or screened waiting area must be provided within the premises for clients and prospective clients to ensure that public sidewalks or private walkways are not used as queuing or waiting area.

ii.     A minimum of 200 square feet shall be provided for the waiting area, unless the Director determines that additional waiting space is required to meet the needs of the anticipated client load.

B.     Shelter Management Plan. The operator of an emergency shelter or daytime service facility shall submit a management plan for approval by the Director. At minimum, the management plan shall include the following provisions:

1.     A minimum of one staff member shall be awake and on duty, plus one additional staff or volunteer, on-premises when the facility is open. Facility staff shall be trained in operating procedures and safety plans. The facility shall not employ persons who are required to register as a sex registrant under Penal Code Section 290.

2.     Service providers shall maintain up-to-date information and referral sheets to give clients and other persons who cannot be served by the establishment.

3.     Service providers will maintain information on individuals utilizing the facility and will ensure that the maximum stay at the facility shall not exceed 180 days in a 365-day period.

4.     Service providers shall continuously monitor waiting areas to inform prospective clients whether they can be served within a reasonable time. If they cannot be served by the provider because of time or resource constraints, staff shall make information available to the client of alternative programs and locations where they may seek similar service.

5.     Service providers will educate on-site staff to provide adequate knowledge and skills to assist clients in obtaining permanent shelter and income, including referrals to outside assistance agencies.

6.     Service providers shall provide for the timely removal of litter attributable to clients on the property and adjacent property under the control of the service provider.

7.     Service providers will provide the City with the contact information for an individual with the authority to address operational issues.

8.     Service providers shall establish standards for responding to emergencies and incidents expelling clients from the facility. Re-admittance policies for clients who have previously been expelled from the facility shall also be established.

9.     Alcohol and illegal drug use is prohibited on-site. Service providers shall expel clients from the facility if found to be using alcohol or illegal drugs on site.

10.   Service providers shall implement conditions and measures to maintain the quiet, safety and cleanliness of the premises and the vicinity of the use.

11.   Other requirements as appropriate to ensure that the facility does not create a nuisance, including, without limitation, compliance with the provisions of Title 19, Nuisance Abatement Code, of the municipal code.

12.   Service providers shall ensure that all graffiti on the premises is promptly removed.

13.   Service providers shall establish affirmative measures to discourage loitering at the facility.

C.     Compliance with Other Applicable Standards. Emergency shelter facilities shall comply with all other laws, rules, and regulations that apply including building and fire codes. The facility shall be subject to City inspections prior to the commencement of operation. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.30.110 Farmer’s Markets
Farmer’s markets shall be located, developed, and operated in compliance with the following standards:

A.    Management Plan. A management plan shall be prepared and provided to the Director. The management plan shall include the following:

1.     Identification of a market manager or managers, who shall be present during all hours of operation.

2.     A set of operating rules addressing the governance structure of the market; the method of assigning booths and registering vendors; hours of operation; maintenance; security; refuse collection; and parking.

B.     Hours of Operation. Market activities may be conducted between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. with specific hours and duration to be approved by the City. Set-up of market operations cannot begin more than two hours prior to the operational hours of the market and take-down shall be completed within two hours of the close of the market.

C.     Waste Disposal. Adequate composting, recycling, and trash containers shall be provided during hours of operation and removed from site for appropriate disposal. The site shall be cleaned at the end of each day of operations, including the removal of all stalls and debris. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.30.120 Home Occupations
Home occupations shall be located, developed, and operated in compliance with the following standards:

A.    Applicability. This section applies to home occupations in any residential unit in the City regardless of the zoning designation. It does not apply to family day care, which is regulated separately.

B.     General Standards. All home occupations shall be located and operated consistent with the following standards unless otherwise allowed by State law:

1.     Residential Appearance. The residential appearance of the unit within which the home occupation is conducted shall be maintained, and no exterior indication of a home occupation is permitted.

2.     Location. All home occupation activities shall be conducted entirely within the residential unit, or within a garage that is attached to, and reserved for, the residential unit. When conducted within a garage, the doors thereof shall be closed, and the area occupied shall not preclude the use of required parking spaces for parking.

3.     Floor Area Limitation. No more than 25% of the floor area of the dwelling unit may be used in the conduct of the home occupation.

4.     Employees. No employees or independent contractors other than residents of the dwelling shall be permitted to work at the location of a home occupation except as otherwise allowed for cottage food operations.

5.     On-Site Client Contact. No customer or client visits are permitted except for personal instruction services (e.g., musical instruction or training, art lessons, academic tutoring) which may have up to two students at one time.

6.     Direct Sales Prohibition. Home occupations involving the display or sale of products or merchandise are not permitted from the site except by mail, telephone, internet, or other mode of electronic communication or except as otherwise allowed for cottage food operations.

7.     Storage. There can be no exterior storage of materials, supplies, and/or equipment for the home occupation.

8.     Hazardous Materials. Activities conducted and equipment or materials used shall not change the fire safety or occupancy classifications of the premises, nor use utilities different from those normally provided for residential use. There shall be no storage or use of toxic or hazardous materials other than the types and quantities customarily found in connection with a dwelling unit.

9.     Nuisances. A home occupation shall be conducted such that no offensive or objectionable noise, dust, vibration, smell, smoke, heat, humidity, glare, refuse, radiation, electrical disturbance, interference with the transmission of communications, interference with radio or television reception, or other hazard or nuisance is perceptible at or beyond any lot line of the unit or structure within which the home occupation is conducted, or outside the dwelling unit if conducted in other than a detached single-unit dwelling.

10.   Traffic and Parking Generation. Home occupations shall not generate a volume of pedestrian, automobile, or truck traffic that is inconsistent with the normal level of traffic in the vicinity or on the street on which the dwelling is located or which creates the need for additional parking spaces or involve deliveries to or from the premises in excess of that which is customary for a dwelling unit.

11.   Commercial Vehicles. The use of commercial vehicles for the delivery of materials or equipment to or from the premises is expressly prohibited.

C.     Prohibited Home Occupations. The following specific businesses are not permitted as home occupations:

1.     Automobile/vehicle sales and services;

2.     Animal care, sales, and services;

3.     Cannabis retail;

4.     Eating and drinking establishments;

5.     Hotels and motels;

6.     Hospitals and clinics;

7.     Firearm sales, including firearms brokers;

8.     Personal services; and

9.     Retail sales. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.30.130 Manufactured Home Parks
Manufactured home parks shall be located, developed, and operated in compliance with the following standards, in addition to the requirements of Title 25, Housing and Community Development, of the California Code of Regulations:

A.    Minimum Site Area. The minimum site area for a manufactured home park shall be five acres.

B.     Minimum Number of Homes. The minimum number of manufactured homes within a manufactured home park site shall be 50.

C.     Minimum Setbacks. All manufactured home parks within a manufactured home park development shall be set back from perimeter property lines consistent with the required setbacks of the underlying base zone.

D.    Landscaping. Landscaping pursuant to Chapter 17.25, Landscaping, shall be provided.

E.     Fencing and Perimeter Walls. A manufactured home park shall be enclosed by a solid decorative masonry wall seven feet in height, erected and maintained in the following areas:

1.     Along the property side of the street landscape setback, as defined by the Landscape Development Guidelines;

2.     Along all interior property lines, except the area within the required street side setback and any area used for pedestrian or vehicle access; and

3.     Along all property lines adjoining another private property.

F.     Internal Roadways. A manufactured home park shall be designed such that access to public roads is provided to the satisfaction of the Public Works and Fire Departments.

1.     Minimum Width. All roadways shall have a required minimum width of 22 feet, from curb to curb.

2.     Paving. All access roads, defined here as all roadways between points of ingress and/or egress to and from the manufactured home park to public roads, shall be paved.

3.     Design. Roadways shall be designed so that each living unit lot shall front upon a roadway within the development and provide convenient and reasonable traffic circulation. All circulation roads within a manufactured home park shall comply with the following standards:

a.     Roads shall be suitable for service vehicles;

b.     Roads shall be graded so there will be no depressions in which surface water will accumulate and remain;

c.     Roads shall be sloped to provide proper storm drainage run-off by means of surface or subsurface drainage facility; and

d.     Roads shall be maintained to avoid excess dust.

4.     On-Street Parking.

a.     Manufactured home parks constructed prior to September 15, 1961.

i.      Parking shall be prohibited on one-way, one-lane roadways less than 22 feet in width.

ii.     Parking Permitted on One Side of Roadway. Where parking is permitted on one side of the roadway, the roadway shall have a required minimum width of 22 feet.

iii.    Parking Permitted on Both Sides of Roadway. Where parking is permitted on both sides of the roadway, the roadway shall have a required minimum width of 30 feet.

b.     Manufactured home parks constructed on or after September 15, 1961.

i.      One-Way, One-Lane Roadways.

(A)   Parking shall be prohibited on one-way, one-lane roadways less than 22 feet in width.

(B)   Parking Permitted on One Side of Roadway. Where parking is permitted on one side of the roadway, the roadway shall be a minimum of 22 feet in width.

(C)   Parking Permitted on Both Sides of Roadway. Where parking is permitted on both sides of the roadway, the roadway shall be at least 30 feet in width.

ii.     Two-Way, Two-Lane Roadways.

(A)   Parking shall be prohibited on two-lane, two-way roadways less than 32 feet in width.

(B)   Parking Permitted on One Side of Roadway. Where parking is permitted on one side of the roadway, the roadway shall be a minimum of 32 feet in width.

(C)   Parking Permitted on Both Sides of Roadway. Where parking is permitted on both sides of the roadway, the roadway shall be at least 40 feet in width.

G.    Improvement of Existing Manufactured Home Parks. Upon the receipt of an application for the enlargement or extension of a manufactured home park in existence on April 22, 1987, the Planning Commission may modify the requirements of this section to the extent otherwise consistent with applicable law; provided that doing so will result in an overall improvement in the design or standards of the existing park. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.30.140 Mobile Vending
Mobile vending shall be located, developed, and operated in compliance with the following standards:

A.    Location. Mobile vendors may only operate in non-residential zones. Mobile vendor vehicles shall not be permitted as a permanent or proprietary location on any property within the City. Vehicles shall not be left unattended at any time, or be left on site when inactive, or stored overnight.

B.     Number. Maximum one mobile vendor per day per lot.

C.     Duration. Maximum four hours per day per lot. No lot may have a mobile vendor on site for more than 90 days total in any 12-month period.

D.    Allowed Products. Operations are limited to the sales of food and beverages for immediate consumption.

E.     Vehicle and Parking Requirements.

1.     Allowed Vehicles. Operations shall only be conducted from a motor vehicle, or vehicle with a trailer consistent with State law and County Health Department approvals. Other types of food vending from a temporary structure such as a push cart, standalone trailer, or kiosk are not allowed under this title.

2.     Required Parking. No dedicated parking spaces shall be required for a mobile vendor that meets the standards of this section.

3.     Displaced Parking. Mobile vendors may displace up to three required non-residential parking spaces for a maximum of four hours per day per parking lot, provided that no more than 10% of the total number of parking spaces on site are displaced. Required parking spaces for an existing non-residential use may be displaced if the existing non-residential use is not open during the event.

4.     Paving. Mobile vendor vehicles shall only be stopped or parked on surface paved with concrete, asphalt, or another surface approved by the Director.

F.     Obstructions. Mobile vendor location and operations, including customers, seating, and equipment, shall not obstruct the right-of-way, sight distances, or otherwise create hazards for vehicle or pedestrian traffic. The location shall comply with applicable accessibility requirements and the Americans with Disabilities Act.

G.    Nuisance. Mobile vendors shall be responsible for keeping the area clean of any litter or debris and shall provide trash receptacles for customer use on site. No vendor shall ring bells, play chimes, play an amplified musical system, or make any other notice to attract attention to its business while operating within City limits. The use of prohibited or unpermitted signs for mobile food vendors is not allowed.

H.    Modifications. Modifications to the standards of this section may be approved pursuant to Chapter 17.40, Modifications. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.30.150 Outdoor Display and Sales
Outdoor display and sales shall be located, developed, and operated in compliance with the following standards:

A.    Temporary Outdoor Display and Sales. The temporary outdoor display and sale of merchandise shall comply with Section 17.30.220, Temporary Uses, and Chapter 17.39, Temporary Use Permits.

B.     Produce Displays. The outdoor display of fresh produce associated with an existing food and beverage retail sales establishment on the same site is allowed, subject to the following standards:

1.     The display shall not disrupt the normal function of the site or its circulation and shall not encroach upon parking spaces, driveways, pedestrian walkways, or required landscaped areas.

2.     All produce shall be removed or enclosed at the close of each business day.

C.     Permanent or Ongoing Outdoor Display and Sales. The permanent or ongoing outdoor display of merchandise, except for vehicle sales and leasing requires Minor Use Permit approval and shall comply with the following standards:

1.     Relationship to Main Use. The outdoor display and sales area shall be directly related to a business occupying a primary structure on the subject parcel.

2.     Allowable Merchandise. Only merchandise sold at the business is permitted to be displayed outdoors.

3.     Location. The displayed merchandise shall occupy a fixed, specifically approved and defined location and shall not disrupt the normal function of the site or its circulation and shall not encroach upon parking spaces, driveways, pedestrian walkways, or required landscaped areas.

D.    Outdoor Vending Machines Prohibited. Outdoor vending machines other than those for the sale of newspapers is prohibited. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.30.160 Outdoor Dining and Seating
Outdoor dining and seating shall be located, developed, and operated in compliance with the following standards:

A.    Applicability. The standards of this section apply to outdoor dining and seating located on private property. Outdoor dining and seating located in the public right-of-way is subject to an encroachment permit issued by the Development Engineering Division.

B.     Accessory Use. Outdoor dining and seating shall be conducted as an accessory use to a legally established eating and drinking establishment that is located on the same lot or an adjacent lot.

C.     Hours of Operation. The hours of operation are limited to the hours of operation of the associated eating and drinking establishment.

D.    Pedestrian Pathway. A four-foot unobstructed pedestrian pathway shall be required. If there is more than a four-foot-wide pathway provided, outdoor dining may be located outside of the required four feet.

E.     Maintenance. Outdoor dining and seating areas shall always remain clear of litter. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.30.170 Personal Services
Personal service establishments shall be located, developed, and operated in compliance with the following standards:

A.    Hours of Operation. Hours of operation shall be limited to 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. unless otherwise specified in a Use Permit.

B.     Massage Establishments. Massage establishments shall comply with Chapter 5.12, Massage Parlors, of the Municipal Code. Noncompliant establishments which offer massage in exchange for compensation, including sole proprietorships, shall be prohibited. Massage establishments shall comply with the following standards:

1.     No exterior window shall be tinted, covered, or obstructed such that visibility into the business is reduced or eliminated. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.30.180 Recharging Stations
Recharging stations may be provided in any area designed for the parking or loading of vehicles. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.30.190 Recycling Facilities
Recycling facilities shall be located, developed, and operated in compliance with the California Beverage Container Recycling and Litter Reduction Act of 1986 (Public Resources Code Section 14500) and the following standards:

A.    All Recycling Facilities. All recycling facilities shall be subject to the following standards:

1.     Security. Recycling facilities shall be secured from unauthorized entry or removal of material and have enough capacity to accommodate materials collected and collection schedule.

2.     Maintenance. Recycling facilities, including donation areas, shall be maintained in a dust- and litter-free condition and shall be swept daily.

B.     Reverse Vending Machines. In addition to the requirements of subsection A above, reverse vending machines shall be located, developed, and operated in compliance with the following standards.

1.     Maximum Size. Reverse vending machines shall occupy no more than 50 square feet of floor space per installation, including any protective enclosure, and shall be no more than eight feet in height.

2.     Location. In addition to the following requirements, recycling facilities shall comply with the setback requirements of the zone in which the facility is located.

a.     Reverse vending machines shall only be established in conjunction with a commercial or community service host facility in compliance with applicable building and fire codes.

b.     Reverse vending machines shall be located within 30 feet of the entrance to the commercial or community service facility.

c.     Reverse vending machines shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation.

3.     Material. Reverse vending machines shall be constructed and maintained with durable waterproof and rustproof material.

4.     Parking.

a.     Reverse vending machines shall not occupy parking spaces required by the primary use.

b.     Reverse vending machines outside a commercial structure do not require additional parking spaces for patrons.

5.     Signs and Identification. Reverse vending machines shall be clearly marked to identify the type of material to be deposited, operating instructions, and the identity and phone number of the operator or responsible person to call if the machine is inoperative. The maximum sign area on a reverse vending machine is four square feet per machine, not including operating instructions.

6.     Hours of Operation. Operating hours shall be at least the operating hours of the primary use.

7.     Lighting. Reverse vending machines shall be illuminated to ensure comfortable and safe operations if operating hours are between dusk and dawn.

C.     Recycling Collection Facilities. In addition to the requirements of subsection A above, recycling collection facilities shall be located, developed, and operated in compliance with the following standards.

1.     Small Recycling Collection Facilities.

a.     Maximum Size. Small recycling collection facilities shall not exceed a building footprint of 500 square feet or occupy more than five parking spaces (not including space periodically needed for removal or exchange of materials or containers).

b.     Location. In addition to the following requirements, recycling facilities shall comply with the setback requirements of the zone in which the facility is located.

i.      Small recycling collection facilities shall only be established in conjunction with a commercial or community service host facility in compliance with applicable building and fire codes.

ii.     Small recycling collection facilities shall be set back at least 10 feet from any street line, be at least 200 feet from the edge of any four-way intersection, and not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation.

iii.    Attended small recycling collection facilities located within 100 feet of a property zoned or occupied for residential zone shall operate only during the hours between 9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.

iv.    Containers for the 24-hour donation of materials shall all be at least 100 feet from any property zoned or occupied for residential use, unless there is a recognized service corridor and acoustical shielding between the containers and the residential use.

v.     Mobile recycling units shall have an area clearly marked to prohibit other vehicular parking during hours when the mobile unit is scheduled to be present.

c.     Equipment. No power-driven processing equipment, except for reverse vending machines, may be used.

d.     Items Accepted. Small recycling collection facilities shall accept only glass, metals, plastic containers, papers and reusable items. Used motor oil may be accepted with permission of the County Public Health Official.

 

e.     Signs and Identification. Signs shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 17.29, Signs. The Director may authorize increases in the number, size, and nature of additional signs for necessary directional or identification purposes, but not for outdoor advertising.

i.      Informational Sign. Containers shall be clearly marked to identify the type of recyclables that may be deposited. The name and telephone number of the facility operator shall be conspicuously posted, along with the hours of operation, and a notice stating that no material shall be left outside the recycling enclosure or containers.

ii.     Additional Signs. In addition to informational signs, signs with a maximum sign area of 16 square feet are allowed.

f.      Storage. All recyclable material shall be stored in containers or in the mobile unit vehicle. Materials shall not be left outside of containers when attendant is not present.

g.     Parking.

i.      Customer Parking. No additional parking spaces are required for customers of a small collection recycling facility located at the established parking lot of a host use.

ii.     Attendant Parking. One space shall be provided for the facility attendant.

iii.    Parking Reduction. The number of parking spaces required for the primary host may be reduced to allow occupation of parking space by a small collection facility and/or attendant, provided all of the conditions are met:

(A)   The facility is located in a convenience zone, as designated by the California Department of Conservation;

(B)   The facility is certified by the California Department of Conservation;

(C)   A parking study shows available capacity during recycling facility operation;

(D)   The permit will be reconsidered at the end of 18 months; and

(E)   The parking space reduction does not exceed the requirements of Table 17.30.190, Allowed Parking Reduction to Accommodate Small Recycle Collection Facilities.

TABLE 17.30.190: ALLOWED PARKING REDUCTION TO ACCOMMODATE SMALL RECYCLE COLLECTION FACILITIES

Required Parking Space for Primary Host

Maximum Parking Space Reduction

Commercial Facility Host Use

 

0 – 25

0

26 – 35

1

36 – 49

2

50 – 99

3

100 +

4

Commercial Facility Primary Use

 

A maximum reduction of 5 spaces allowed when not in conflict with parking needs of the primary use

 

2.     Large Recycling Collection Facilities.

a.     Location. In addition to the following requirements, recycling facilities shall comply with the setback requirements of the zone in which the facility is located.

i.      Large recycling collection facilities shall not abut any property with a residential use.

ii.     Large recycling collection facility located within 100 feet of property zoned, planned or occupied for residential use, shall not be in operation between 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.

iii.    Any containers provided for after-hours donation of recyclable materials will be at least 100 feet from any property zoned or occupied for residential use.

b.     Equipment. Power-driven processing, including aluminum foil and can compacting, baling, plastic shredding or other light processing activities necessary for efficient temporary storage and shipment of material, may be allowed if all activities are fully enclosed within a building.

c.     Signs and Identification. Signs shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 17.29, Signs. The Director may authorize increases in the number, size, and nature of additional signs for necessary directional or identification purposes, but not for outdoor advertising.

i.      Containers shall be clearly marked to identify the type of recyclables that may be deposited. The facility shall display a notice stating that no material shall be left outside the recycling containers.

ii.     The facility shall be clearly marked with the name and phone number of the facility operator and the hours of operation.

d.     Storage.

i.      All exterior storage shall be in sturdy containers which are covered, secured and maintained in good condition.

ii.     Storage containers for flammable material shall be constructed of nonflammable material. Oil storage must be in containers approved by the Fire Chief.

iii.    No storage, excluding truck trailers and overseas containers, will be visible above the height of the fencing.

iv.    Containers shall be constructed of durable waterproof and rustproof material, shall have enough capacity to accommodate materials.

e.     Screening.

i.      M-L Zone. All processing and storage of material shall take place within a completely enclosed building.

ii.     M-1, M-2, and M-3 Zones. All processing and storage shall be screened from the public right-of-way by operating in an enclosed building, or:

(A)   Within an area enclosed by an opaque fence at least six feet in height with landscaping;

(B)   Located at least 150 feet from property zoned or occupied for residential use.

f.      Noise. Large recycling collection facilities shall not exceed noise levels of 60 dBA as measured at the property line of the nearest residentially zoned or occupied property, or 70 dBA at all other property lines.

g.     Parking. Large recycling collection facilities shall comply with the parking requirements of Chapter 17.27, Parking and Loading. An exception may be made to allow for a parking reduction where it can be shown that parking spaces are not necessary (i.e., when employees are transported in a company vehicle to a work facility).

i.      Customer Parking. The facility shall provide six parking spaces, or the number of spaces to accommodate the anticipated peak customer load, whichever is higher, except where the Director determines that allowing additional parking is appropriate to the site and compatible with surrounding businesses and public safety.

ii.     Commercial Vehicle Parking. One parking space shall be required for each commercial vehicle operated by the large recycling collection facility.

D.    Recycling Processing Facilities. In addition to the requirements of subsection A above, recycling processing facilities shall be located, developed, and operated in compliance with the following standards.

1.     All Recycling Processing Facilities. All recycling processing facilities shall be subject to the following criteria:

a.     No portion of an existing parcel shall be divided for the financial purpose of establishing a subleased recycling facility, nor shall any such facility receive approval, until the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act have been complied with and a record map or description is filed;

b.     All recycling facilities shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 17.27, Parking and Loading;

c.     All sites shall have access to a convenient water supply for cleaning purposes; and

d.     All sites shall be located near or have access to a storm drain.

2.     Light Processing Facilities. In addition to the requirements of subsection D.1. above, light processing facilities shall be located, developed, and operated in compliance with the following standards:

a.     Maximum Size. Light processing facilities shall not exceed 4,500 square feet.

b.     Location. In addition to the following requirements, recycling facilities shall comply with the setback requirements of the zone in which the facility is located.

i.      Light processing facilities shall not abut a property zoned or used for residential use.

ii.     Light processing facilities located within 100 feet of property zoned or occupied for residential use shall not be in operation between 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.

c.     After-Hours Donation Containers.

i.      Shall be located at least 100 feet from any property zoned or occupied for residential use;

ii.     Shall be constructed of durable waterproof rustproof material;

iii.    Shall have enough capacity to accommodate materials collected; and

iv.    Shall be secure from unauthorized entry or removal of materials.

d.     Equipment. Power-driven processing shall be permitted in compliance with Section 17.28.110, Noise. Light processing facilities are limited to baling, briquetting, crushing, compacting, grinding, shredding and sorting of source-separated recyclable materials and repairing of reusable materials.

e.     Items Accepted. Light processing facilities may accept used motor oil for recycling from the generator in accordance with Section 25250.11 of the California Health and Safety Code.

f.      Signs and Identification. Signs shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 17.29, Signs. The Director may authorize increases in the number, size, and nature of additional signs for necessary directional or identification purposes, but not for outdoor advertising.

i.      Containers shall be clearly marked to identify the type of recyclables that may be deposited. The facility shall display a notice stating that no material shall be left outside the recycling containers.

ii.     The facility shall be clearly marked with the name and phone number of the facility operator and the hours of operation.

g.     Storage.

i.      All exterior storage of material shall be in sturdy containers or enclosures which are covered, secured, and maintained in good condition.

ii.     Storage containers for flammable material shall be constructed of nonflammable material. Oil storage must be in containers approved by the Fire Chief. No storage, excluding truck trailers and overseas containers, shall be visible above the height of the fencing.

h.     Screening. All processing and storage shall be screened from the public right-of-way, by operating in an enclosed building, or:

i.      Within an area enclosed by solid masonry walls at least eight feet in height and landscaped on all street frontages; and

ii.     Located at least 100 feet from property zoned or occupied for residential use.

i.      Parking.

i.      Customer Parking. Adequate space shall be provided on site for the anticipated peak load of customers to circulate, park and deposit recyclable materials. If the facility is open to the public, space will be provided for a minimum of 10 customers or the peak load, whichever is higher, except where the Planning Commission determines that allowing additional parking is appropriate to the site and compatible with surrounding businesses and public safety.

ii.     Commercial Vehicle Parking. One parking space shall be provided for each commercial vehicle operated by the light processing facility.

j.      Noise. Light processing facilities shall not exceed noise levels of 60 dBA as measured at the property line of the nearest residentially zoned or occupied property, or 70 dBA at all other property lines.

k.     Operations.

i.      Shipments. Light processing facilities shall have no more than an average of two outbound truck shipments of material per day and may not shred, compact, or bale ferrous metals other than food and beverage containers.

ii.     Personnel. Light processing facilities will be administered by on-site personnel during the hours the facility is open.

l.      Performance Standards. No dust, fumes, smoke, vibration or odor above ambient level shall be detectable on neighboring properties, as provided for by Chapter 17.28, Performance Standards.

E.     Enforcement.

1.     All uses or changes in the use of the land, and the establishment, installation, operation and maintenance of any improvement of the land, shall comply with the provisions of this title and the applicable regulations of all agencies and departments having jurisdiction.

2.     This section applies to the establishment and continued use of all recycling facilities. All facilities in existence prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title shall comply with the terms of this title within 120 days from its effective date. Any such use not in conformance after this 120-day period shall be deemed to be a violation of this title and subject to enforcement in accordance with Chapter 17.46, Enforcement.

3.     Should the actual construction deviate from the plan as approved, the certificate of occupancy shall be withheld until the construction is in conformance with the approved plan. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.30.200 Single-Room Occupancy
Single-room occupancy units shall be located, developed, and operated in compliance with the following standards:

A.    Minimum Size. Each unit shall have at least 150 square feet of floor area. No individual unit may exceed 400 square feet.

B.     Maximum Occupancy. Each unit shall accommodate a maximum of two persons.

C.     Lighting. Exterior lighting shall be provided for the entire outdoor and parking area of the property and shall comply with the requirements of Section 17.22.080, Lighting and Illumination.

D.    Laundry Facilities. Laundry facilities must be provided in a separate enclosed room at the ratio of one washer and one dryer for every 20 units or fractional number thereof, with at least one washer and dryer per floor.

E.     Cleaning Facilities. A cleaning supply room or utility closet with a wash tub with hot and cold running water shall be provided on each floor.

F.     Bathroom. Each unit shall require a separate bathroom containing a water closet, lavatory and bathtub or shower.

G.    Cooking Facilities. Each unit shall require a kitchen sink, functioning cooking appliance and a refrigerator, each having a clear working space of not less than 30 inches in front.

H.    Closet. Each unit shall have a separate closet.

I.      Tenancy. Tenancy of units shall not be less than 30 days or more than 12 months.

J.      Facility Management. An SRO facility with 10 or more units shall provide full-time on-site management. An SRO facility with less than 10 units may provide a management office off site. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.30.210 Solar Energy Systems
Solar energy systems shall be located, developed, and operated in compliance with the following standards:

A.    Height, Ground-Mounted Solar Energy Systems. The maximum height of a ground-mounted solar energy collector system is 25 feet or the maximum height allowed in the base zone, whichever is less.

B.     Required Setback. Solar energy systems less than six feet in height may be installed within a required side and rear setback, but no closer than three feet to any property line. All other solar energy systems shall meet the required setback of the base zone. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.30.220 Temporary Uses
This section establishes standards for certain uses that are intended to be of limited duration of time and that will not permanently alter the character or physical facilities of the site where they occur.

A.    Temporary Uses Not Requiring a Use Permit. The following types of temporary uses may be conducted without a Use Permit. Other permits, such as Building Permits, may be required.

1.     Yard Sales. Yard sales in compliance with the standards contained in Chapter 19.05, Property Maintenance, of the municipal code.

2.     Non-Profit Fund Raising. Fund raising activities by tax exempt organizations pursuant to 501(C) of the Federal Revenue and Taxation Code are allowed in Non-Residential Zones with no limitation on the number of occasions and duration.

3.     Temporary Construction Office Trailers. On-site temporary construction offices during the period of construction. Screening may be required by the Director.

4.     Sales Offices and Model Homes. Model homes with sales offices and temporary information/sales offices in new residential developments of five or more units or lots are subject to the following requirements.

a.     Time Limits.

i.      Temporary Sales Office. A temporary information/sales trailer may be used during the construction of the model homes for a maximum period of six months or completion of the first phase of the development, whichever occurs first.

ii.     Model Homes. Model homes may be established and operated for a term period of three years or until completion of the sale of the lots or units, whichever comes first. One-year extensions may be approved by the Director until the sale of all lots/residences is completed.

b.     Location of Sales. Real estate sales conducted from a temporary sales office are limited to sales of lots or units within the development.

c.     Return to Residential Use. Prior to the sale of any of the model homes as a residence, any portion used for commercial purposes shall be converted to its intended residential purpose.

B.     Temporary Uses Requiring a Temporary Use Permit. Other temporary uses may be permitted pursuant to Chapter 17.39, Temporary Use Permits, subject to the following standards. Additional or more stringent requirements may be established through the Temporary Use Permit process to prevent the use from becoming a nuisance with regard to the surrounding neighborhood or the City as a whole.

1.     Seasonal Sales. The annual sales of holiday related items such as Christmas trees, pumpkins and similar items may be permitted in accordance with the following standards. This subsection is only applicable to temporary seasonal sales that are not in conjunction with an existing business and are not applicable to farmers’ markets or the sale of fireworks.

a.     Time Period.

i.      Seasonal sales associated with holidays are allowed up to a month preceding and one week following the holiday. Christmas tree sales are allowed from Thanksgiving Day through December 31st.

ii.     The subject lot shall not be used for seasonal sales more than two times within the calendar year.

b.     All items for sale, as well as signs and temporary structures, shall be removed within 10 days after the end of sales, and the appearance of the site shall be returned to its original state.

c.     The property shall not be used in such a manner as to create a nuisance due to noise, dust, litter, or other factors.

d.     The City reserves the right to shut down a temporary seasonal sales operation if the operation is posing safety concerns, has become a nuisance, or has violated any requirements of this subsection. All costs associated with the removal and/or abatement shall be paid for by the property owner.

2.     Special Events and Sales. Other short-term special events that do not exceed seven consecutive days, may be permitted in accordance with the following standards:

a.     Location. Events are limited to Non-Residential Zones.

b.     Number of Events. No more than four events at one site shall be allowed within any 12-month period.

c.     Parking. The available parking shall not be reduced to less than 66% of the minimum number of spaces required by Chapter 17.27, Parking and Loading.

d.     Time Limit. When located adjacent to a Residential Zone, the hours of operation shall be limited to 9:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.

e.     Temporary Outdoor Sales. Temporary outdoor sales, including, but not limited to, grand opening events, and other special sales events, are also subject to the following standards:

i.      Temporary outdoor sales shall be part of an existing business on the same site.

ii.     Outdoor display and sales areas shall be located on a paved or other approved hard surfaced area on the same lot as the structure(s) containing the business with which the temporary sale is associated.

iii.    Location of the displayed merchandise shall not disrupt the normal circulation of the site, nor encroach upon driveways, pedestrian walkways, or required landscaped areas, or obstruct sight distances or otherwise create hazards for vehicle or pedestrian traffic.

C.     Temporary Uses Requiring a Minor Use Permit. Other temporary events and special events, outdoor sales, and displays may be allowed with the approval of a Minor Use Permit so long as they are not intended to extend longer than one month and they are determined to not impact neighboring uses or otherwise create significant impacts. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.30.230 Urban Agriculture
Urban agriculture uses shall be located, developed, and operated in compliance with the following standards:

A.    Aquaculture. Aquaculture operations in Residential Zones shall be contained entirely within an enclosed structure or shall be located so as not to be visible from a public right-of-way.

B.     Community and Market Gardens.

1.     Management. A manager shall be designated for each garden who shall serve as liaison between gardeners, property owner(s), and the City.

2.     Hours of Operation. Gardens shall only be tended between dawn and dusk unless additional hours are approved pursuant to a Minor Use Permit.

3.     Buildings and Structures. Accessory buildings, such as sheds, greenhouses, and hoophouses are allowed and shall comply with the property development standards of the zone.

4.     Equipment. Use of mechanized farm equipment is prohibited except as provided below or approved pursuant to a Minor Use Permit.

a.     Heavy equipment may be used initially to prepare the land for gardening.

b.     Landscaping equipment designed for household use is permitted.

5.     Maintenance.

a.     The operator shall be responsible for the overall maintenance of the site and shall remove weeds, debris, etc., in a timely manner.

b.     Soil amendments, composting, and waste material shall be managed and shall not attract nuisance flies or support growth of flies.

6.     Composting.

a.     Compost and compost receptacles shall be located so as not to be visible from a public right-of-way.

b.     Compost and compost receptacles shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from residential buildings.

c.     In Residential Zones, composting is limited to the materials generated on site and shall be used on site.

7.     Utilities. The land shall be served by a water supply sufficient to support the cultivation practices used on the site.

8.     Parking. Two parking spaces shall be provided on site or on street adjacent to the lot frontage.

C.     Private Gardens.

1.     Buildings and Structures. Accessory buildings, such as sheds, greenhouses, and hoophouses are allowed and shall comply with the property development standards of the zone.

2.     Equipment. Only household garden tools and equipment, applicators and products, may be used. This includes, but is not limited to, soil preparation, cultivation, planting, application of chemicals, dust control, harvesting, etc. Pull behind equipment is prohibited.

3.     Composting. Composting is limited to the materials generated on site and shall be used on site.

D.    Urban Agriculture Stands. Urban agriculture stands are permitted on the site of an urban agriculture use subject to the following regulations:

1.     Maximum Size. Limited to 120 square feet unless a larger size is approved pursuant to a Minor Use Permit.

2.     Removal. Urban agriculture stands shall be dismantled and removed during non-operating hours.

3.     Sales. Product sales are limited to produce and value-added products grown and produced on site.

4.     Hours of Operation. Operating hours for an urban agriculture stand are limited to 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.

5.     Days of Operation. In Residential Zones, urban agriculture stands may operate a maximum of three days per week. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.30.240 Wireless Telecommunication Facilities
Wireless telecommunication facilities are subject to the Wireless Telecommunication Facilities Policy. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

Chapter 17.31 TEMPORARY SIGNAGE
17.31.010 Purpose
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety, and welfare through a comprehensive system of reasonable, effective, consistent, content-neutral, and nondiscriminatory sign standards and requirements. More specifically, this chapter is intended to:

A.    Balance public and private objectives by allowing adequate avenues for both commercial and non-commercial messages;

B.     Encourage signs as an effective channel of communication while preventing visual clutter that will detract from the aesthetic character of the City;

C.     Protect and improve the local economy and quality of life by preserving and enhancing the appearance of the streetscape;

D.    Maintain and enhance the City’s appearance by regulating the location, number, type, quality of materials, size, illumination, and maintenance of signs;

E.     Restrict signs that may create a nuisance to nearby properties, violate privacy, or create hazards or unreasonable distractions for pedestrians or drivers;

F.     Provide clear and unambiguous sign standards that enable fair and consistent enforcement; and

G.    Ensure that the constitutionally guaranteed right of free speech is protected. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.31.020 Applicability
A.    The provisions of this chapter apply to all signs in all zones, constructed or physically altered on or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title, unless otherwise specified.

1.     The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to prohibit a person from holding a sign while picketing or protesting on public property that has been determined to be a traditional or designated public forum, so long as the person holding the sign does not block ingress and egress from buildings; create a safety hazard by impeding travel on sidewalks, bike lanes, or vehicle lanes; or violate any other reasonable time, place, and manner restrictions adopted by the City.

2.     The provisions of this chapter shall not require alteration of the display of any registered mark, trademark, service mark, trade name, or corporate name that may be associated with or incorporated into a registered mark, where such alteration would require the registered mark to be displayed in a manner differing from the mark as exhibited in the certificate of registration issued by the United States Patent and Trademark Office. It is the responsibility of the applicant to establish that a proposed sign includes a registered mark.

B.     Regulatory Interpretations. The provisions of this chapter shall be applied in a content-neutral manner. Non-communicative aspects of all signs, not related to the content of the sign, shall comply with the provisions of this chapter. “Non-communicative aspects” include the time, place, manner, location, size, height, illumination, spacing, and orientation of signs. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.31.030 Enforcement
Signs that do not conform to the provisions of this chapter and are erected after its effective date without obtaining required permits thereby are declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. All violations of this chapter shall be subject to enforcement remedies, penalties, and abatement as provided by Chapter 17.46, Enforcement, and Title 19, Nuisance Abatement Code, of the municipal code. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.31.040 Damaged or Abandoned Signs
Any sign that is dented, frayed, faded, damaged, or abandoned shall be removed by the sign owner. If such sign is not removed or repaired by the sign owner, the sign may be removed and abated by the City in accordance with Title 19 of the City’s municipal code. All costs associated with the removal and/or abatement of such sign(s) shall be paid for by the sign owner. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.31.050 Conflicts
It is the intent of this chapter that all signs adhere to the City’s sign ordinance, codified in Chapter 17.29. In the event of a conflict between this chapter and Chapter 17.29, this chapter will control. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.31.060 Substitution of Noncommercial Message
In each instance and under the same conditions to which this chapter permits any sign, a sign containing an ideological, religious, or other noncommercial speech shall be permitted wherever commercial signage is permitted. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.31.070 Severability
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter for any reason shall be held to be invalid or unconstitutional, the decision shall not affect the remaining portions of the chapter. The City Council of the City of West Sacramento hereby declares that it would have passed this chapter and each article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase which is a part thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more articles, sections, subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases are declared to be invalid or unconstitutional. The City Council further specifically declares that the invalidity or unconstitutionality of this chapter shall not affect the validity of Chapter 17.29, and that the invalidity or unconstitutionality of Chapter 17.29 shall not affect the validity of this chapter. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.31.080 Definitions
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:

Agricultural Directional Sign. A directional sign indicating where seasonally-based agricultural products and activities are available.

Animated Sign. A sign with messages that visually change, or images that move or appear to move, flash on or off, wink or blink with varying light intensity, show motion or create the illusion of motion, or revolve to create an illusion of being on or off.

Balloon. Any air- or gas-filled device used for the purposes of signage or advertising.

Banner Sign. A sign that is painted or printed on lightweight flexible material and hung from a staff or other structure by ropes, wires, or similar means in a manner to minimize movement.

Commercial Message. A message on a sign, or portion of a sign, that promotes, informs, or proposes an economic transaction, primarily concerns the economic interests of the sign sponsor and/or audience, or is intended to further discussion in the marketplace of goods and services.

Copy. Also called “sign copy.” The visually communicative elements mounted on a sign.

Damaged Sign. Any sign with cracked or broken panels, peeling paint, missing letters, or any sign that has been partially destroyed by any cause.

Directional Sign. A sign that directs or guides pedestrian or vehicular traffic and which is non-advertising in nature (e.g., handicapped parking, one-way, exit, and entrance).

Graffiti. Marks, such as inscriptions, drawings, or designs, which are placed, scratched, etched, painted, or sprayed on public or private property without the owner’s consent.

Illuminated Sign. A sign with an artificial source of light incorporated internally or externally for illuminating the sign.

Inflatable Sign. A form of inflatable device (e.g., shaped as an animal, blimp, or other object) that is displayed, printed, or painted on the surface of an inflatable background, and is primarily installed outside a building to attract attention to or to advertise a business, a business location, a service, a product, or an event.

Internally Illuminated Sign. A sign that is illuminated by a light source that is contained inside the sign where the message area is luminous, including cabinet signs and channel-letter signs.

Moving Sign. A sign or any portion thereof that rotates, moves, or appears to move in some manner by mechanical, electrical, natural, or other means.

Non-Commercial Message. A message or image on a sign that directs public attention to or advocates an idea or issue of public interest or concern that does not serve to advertise or promote any business, product, activity, service, interest, or entertainment.

Nonconforming Sign. A sign lawfully erected and legally existing on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Code, but which does not conform to the provisions of this Code.

Pennant. A device made of flexible materials, (e.g., cloth, paper, or plastic) that may or may not contain copy, and which is installed for attracting attention.

Permanent Sign. A sign that is intended to be and is so constructed as to be of a lasting and enduring condition, remaining unchanged in character, condition (beyond normal wear) and position, and in a permanent manner affixed to the ground, wall, or building.

Portable Sign. A moveable sign that rests on the ground and is not designed to be permanently attached to a building or permanently anchored to the ground, including, but not limited to, A-frame and H-frame signs are allowed subject to the following standards.



PORTABLE SIGN, A-FRAME SIGN

 

Projecting Sign. A single- or double-faced sign that is perpendicular to the face of a building and projects more than 15 inches from the face.

Real Property Event Sign. A sign advertising a sponsored event for the sale, lease, or exchange of real property.

Real Property Kiosk. A freestanding sign structure that identifies real property that is being advertised for sale, lease, or exchange, and provides directional arrows to indicate the location of the real property.

Real Property Sign. A sign advertising the sale, lease, or exchange of real property.

Roof Sign. Any sign located on a roof of a building or having its major structural supports attached to a roof that extend above the roofline or parapet.



ROOF SIGN

 

Sign. Any identification, description, illustration, or device illuminated or non-illuminated, which is visible to the public from any exterior public right-of-way, and directs attention to a product, service, place, activity, person, institution, business or solicitation, including any permanently installed or situated merchandise; or any emblem, painting, banner, pennant, or placard designed to advertise, identify, or convey information. A display, device, or thing need not contain lettering to be a sign.

Sign Area. The area contained within a single continuous perimeter enclosing all parts of such sign copy, excluding any structural elements outside the limits of the sign required to support the sign.

Sign Face. An exterior display surface of a sign, including non-structural trim, exclusive of the supporting structure. The area of a sign which is available for mounting and public display of the visually communicative image.

Temporary Sign. A structure or device used for the public display of visual messages or images, which is typically made of lightweight or flimsy materials which is not intended for or suitable for long term or permanent display. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.31.090 On-Site Temporary Signs
A.    Portable Signs. A moveable sign that rests on the ground and is not designed to be permanently attached to a building or permanently anchored to the ground, including, but not limited to, A-frame and H-frame signs are allowed subject to the following standards.

1.     Maximum Sign Width. Two feet.

2.     Maximum Sign Height. Four feet.

3.     Location of Sign. Portable signs shall be located on private property within 20 feet of the entrance to the business it is identifying.

4.     Maximum Number of Signs. One per business where the business is not identified on any freestanding sign.

5.     Hours of Display. Portable signs shall be removed during hours when the establishment is not open to the public and cannot be displayed after the activity with which they are associated is over.

B.     Real Property Signs and Campaign Signs. Any temporary sign, banner, balloon, pennant, valance or advertising display for an election or for real estate sales or rental may be erected and located in accordance with the following standards. Tenants and units include planned future tenants and units to be constructed for which a planning approval has been granted or for which a Building Permit has been issued.

1.     Agricultural and Residential Zones.

a.     Maximum Allowable Sign Area. 10 square feet per street frontage.

b.     Maximum Sign Height. Six feet above existing grade.

c.     Location of Sign. Signs greater than three square feet in size shall be set back from all property lines a minimum of five feet.

d.     Additional Individual Unit Signs. For multi-unit residential developments, each ground floor unit is also allowed one sign up to three square feet in size and six feet in height. Each upper floor unit is allowed one sign up to three square feet in size and located no higher than the eave line or parapet line of the unit.

2.     Other Zones.

a.     Maximum Allowable Sign Area. 50 square feet per street frontage.

b.     Maximum Sign Height. Six feet above existing grade.

c.     Location of Sign. Signs between three and 10 square feet in size shall be set back from all property lines a minimum of five feet. Signs 10 square feet in size or larger shall be set back from all property lines a minimum of 10 feet.

d.     Additional Individual Tenant/Unit Signs. Each ground floor tenant/unit is allowed one sign up to three square feet in size and six feet in height. Each upper floor tenant/unit is allowed one sign up to three square feet in size and located no higher than the eave line or parapet line of the unit.

C.     Construction Signs. One sign per property not exceeding 32 square feet identifying contractors, owners, designers, lenders, etc., may be erected on sites of projects under construction on that property.

D.    Temporary Business Advertising Signs. Temporary business advertising signs may be placed on a business for a maximum of 30 consecutive calendar days for the first promotional event of the calendar year for a business and a maximum of 15 consecutive calendar days for all subsequent events for a business during that year.

1.     Temporary business advertising signs will be permitted a maximum of four times per calendar year per business.

2.     Display occurrences shall be interrupted by a minimum of 30 days.

3.     Businesses shall be limited to two banner signs per business.

4.     A banner sign shall not be freestanding and shall only be affixed to the façade of the building including canopies or awnings. Banner signs shall not be affixed to any other permanent or temporary structures, including freestanding walls, fences, and utility poles.

5.     Banner signs shall not extend above the roofline or parapet of the building.

E.     Time Limits. Temporary signs shall be removed within seven days after the conclusion of the event, the drive, the election, or the purpose served by the sign.

1.     Any such sign that remains more than seven days after the event shall be considered abandoned and the City Clerk and/or Public Works Director, or any of their agents, are authorized to remove the sign without notice.

F.     Removal. The City Clerk, Community Development, and/or Public Works Director, or any of their agents, are authorized to remove any sign found to be in violation of this section and shall store the sign in a safe location. The City Clerk and/or Public Works Director shall reasonably attempt to contact the person or entity responsible for posting the sign, such as the organization, campaign, committee, and/or candidate. If the sign is not retrieved within seven calendar days after such notification, or reasonable attempt thereof, the sign shall be considered as abandoned and the City Clerk and/or Public Works Director, or any of their agents, are authorized to dispose of the sign without further notice. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.31.100 Off-Site Temporary Signs
A.    Purpose. The purposes of this section are to:

1.     Comply with California Civil Code Section 713;

2.     Promote the attractive appearance of the City by providing reasonable regulations off-site temporary signs;

3.     Ensure that off-site temporary signs will not, by their size, location, construction, or manner of display, endanger the public health and safety;

4.     Promote the public interest by protecting the safety of pedestrians and vehicles and against fire hazards;

5.     Maintain and enhance the City’s visual appeal for residents and visitors by preventing the degradation of visual quality through unregulated off-site temporary signs;

6.     Direct traffic related to real property that is for sale, lease, or exchange, in a manner that minimizes visual clutter, reduces unnecessary traffic through neighborhoods, and provides an orderly, attractive, high-quality image of the City; and

7.     Direct the public to seasonal agricultural activities in the City.

B.     General Requirements. The following standards shall apply to all off-site temporary signs.

1.     Sign Type. Off-site temporary signs shall be directional signs.

2.     Permission of Owner. The owner of an off-site temporary sign must obtain the written permission of the property owner to place their sign on the property.

3.     Location of Sign. Off-site temporary signs shall be located outside of public right-of-way, public property, and vision triangles. Signs shall not be affixed or displayed in any manner to fences, walls, light poles, trees, bridges, curbs, benches, cables, street medians, sidewalks, public facilities, or utilities, or other signs or structure.

4.     Design of Sign. Off-site temporary signs shall not be illuminated. Materials shall not include paper but may include durable, weatherproof materials such as metal, plastic, laminated cardboard, or other similar materials. Off-site temporary signs shall be designed to ensure that the sign faces are securely fastened to the supporting structure, and that the supporting structure is securely fastened to the ground.

5.     Content of Sign. Off-site temporary signs shall identify the name and telephone number of the sign owner with a minimum of one-half inch lettering.

C.     Agricultural Directional Signs.

1.     Maximum Allowable Sign Area. Agricultural directional signs shall have a maximum allowable sign area of four square feet.

2.     Maximum Sign Height. Agricultural directional signs shall have a maximum height of four feet.

3.     Location of Sign.

a.     Arterial and Collector Roadways. On arterial and collector roadways, agricultural directional signs shall be placed a minimum of 500 feet from any other sign advertising the same agricultural product or activity.

b.     Local Roadways. On local roads, agricultural directional signs may be located at intersections where there is a choice of turning movements.

4.     Time Limits. Agricultural directional signs shall be displayed only during the active selling season of an agricultural product and must be removed after the active selling season is over.

D.    Real Property Kiosks. Real property kiosks are directional, freestanding signs that identify a master planned development and indicate its direction and location and shall only be allowed for master planned development.

1.     Maximum Allowable Sign Area. Kiosks shall have a maximum allowable sign area of 50 square feet. Additional sign area may be obtained subject to a Conditional Use Permit approval.

2.     Maximum Kiosk Height. Kiosks shall have a maximum height of 15 feet. Additional height may be obtained subject to a Conditional Use Permit approval.

3.     Location of Kiosk. Kiosks shall be placed a minimum of 500 feet from any other kiosk.

4.     Maximum Number of Kiosks. Kiosks shall be limited to four per master planned development.

5.     Content of Kiosks.

a.     Kiosks shall identify the name of the master planned development in the upper portion of the sign. City or community logos are permitted.

b.     Kiosks shall include directional signs identifying the names of developments within the master planned development, provided that real property is available for sale, lease, or exchange. No other advertising shall be allowed.

6.     Design of Sign. Kiosks shall be designed as an architecturally enhanced structure that includes features such as a roof element, decorative cap and cornice detail, stone clad, or masonry clad columns, stone-clad or masonry-clad foundations, carved/sculptured wood construction, or other architectural features as determined by the Director.

7.     Time Limits. Kiosks shall be removed 30 days after a Certificate of Occupancy or a final inspection has been issued for the last unit or building in the master planned development.

E.     Real Property Signs.

1.     Maximum Allowable Sign Area.

a.     Weekend Only. Real property signs limited to the weekend shall have a maximum allowable sign area of four square feet.

b.     Not Limited to the Weekend.

i.      Advertising Four or Fewer Lots. Advertisements for the sale, lease, or exchange of four or fewer lots shall be limited to one sign with a maximum allowable sign area of 20 square feet.

ii.     Advertising a Subdivision, or Five or More Lots. Advertisements for the sale, lease, or exchange of a subdivision, or five or more lots, provided the properties are not located within a master planned development, shall be limited to two signs with a maximum allowable sign area of 20 square feet for each sign.

2.     Maximum Sign Height. Real property signs shall have a maximum height of four feet.

3.     Location of Sign.

a.     Arterial and Collector Roads. On arterial and collector roads, temporary real property signs shall be placed a minimum of 500 feet from any other sign advertising the same real property.

b.     Local Roads. On local roads, real property signs may be located at intersections where there is a choice of turning movements.

4.     Design of Sign. Real property signs shall not be illuminated. Materials shall not include paper but may include durable, weatherproof materials such as metal, plastic, laminated cardboard, or other similar materials. Real property signs shall be designed to ensure that the sign faces are securely fastened to the supporting structure, and that the supporting structure is securely fastened to the ground.

5.     Time Limits.

a.     Weekend Only. Real property signs limited to the weekend shall be removed following the end of the weekend.

b.     Not Limited to the Weekend. Real property signs not limited to the weekend shall be removed within seven days after the advertised real property has been sold, leased, or exchanged.

F.     Real Property Event Signs. Real property event signs shall only be for events sponsored by realtors or the property owner and are only allowed for existing properties available for sale, lease, or exchange.

1.     Location of Sign.

a.     Arterial and Collector Roads. On arterial and collector roads, real property event signs shall be placed a minimum of 500 feet from any other sign advertising the same real property.

b.     Local Roads. On local roads, real property event signs may be located at intersections where there is a choice of turning movements.

2.     Design of Sign. Real property signs shall not be illuminated. Materials shall not include paper but may include durable, weatherproof materials such as metal, plastic, laminated cardboard, or other similar materials. Real property signs shall be designed to ensure that the sign faces are securely fastened to the supporting structure, and that the supporting structure is securely fastened to the ground.

3.     Time Limits. Real property event signs may be displayed no earlier than 8:00 a.m. on the day of the event and removed no later than 4:00 p.m. on the day of the event. Real property event signs shall not be displayed on days other than event days. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

Division IV: Administration and Permits
Chapter 17.34 PLANNING AUTHORITIES
17.34.010 Purpose
This chapter lays out the basic roles, responsibilities, and functions of all planning authorities, including the City Council, Planning Commission, Community Development Director, and Zoning Administrator. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.34.020 City Council
The powers and responsibilities of the City Council include, but are not limited to, the following:

A.    Adopt design guidelines for specific areas of the City for review pursuant to Chapter 17.37, Design Review.

B.     Consider and adopt, reject, or modify Development Agreements, following a public hearing and recommended action by the Planning Commission, pursuant to Chapter 17.43, Development Agreements.

C.     Consider and adopt, reject or modify proposed amendments to the General Plan, Zoning Code, Zoning Map, development agreements, specific plans, and environmental documents related to any of the foregoing, pursuant to Chapter 17.44, Amendments to the General Plan, Zoning Code, and Zoning Map.

D.    Hear and decide appeals from decisions of the Planning Commission pursuant to Section 17.35.130, Appeals.

E.     Establish, by resolution, a Municipal Fee Schedule listing fees, charges, and deposits for various applications and services provided, pursuant to this title. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.34.030 Planning Commission
The powers and responsibilities of the Planning Commission include, but are not limited to, the following:

A.    Annually review progress towards implementation of the General Plan and make recommendations to the City Council based on any new legislation, development trends, or changing economic, social, and environmental conditions.

B.     Approve, modify, or deny Conditional Use Permits and Variances, pursuant to Chapter 17.38, Use Permits, and Chapter 17.41, Variances.

C.     Make recommendations to the City Council on development agreements, pursuant to Chapter 17.43, Development Agreements.

D.    Make recommendations to City Council on proposed amendments to the General Plan, Zoning Code, and Zoning Map, specific plans, and environmental documents related to any of the foregoing, pursuant to Chapter 17.44, Amendments to the General Plan, Zoning Code, and Zoning Map.

E.     Hear and decide appeals from decisions of the Zoning Administrator or Community Development Director, pursuant to Section 17.35.130, Appeals.

F.     Hear and decide proposals to revoke permits, pursuant to Section 17.35.120, Revocation of Permits.

G.    Make environmental determinations on any approvals that are subject to environmental review under the California Environmental Quality Act, pursuant to State law.

H.    Such other powers and responsibilities as assigned or directed by the City Council. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.34.040 Community Development Director
The powers and responsibilities of the Community Development Director (“the Director”), or designee, include, but are not limited to, the following:

A.    Perform all of the functions designated by State law, including, but not limited to, the following:

1.     Annual report related to implementation of the General Plan in compliance with Government Code Section 65400;

2.     Review of public works projects for conformity to the General Plan in compliance with Government Code Section 65401; and

3.     Review of acquisition of property for conformity to the General Plan in compliance with Government Code Section 65402.

B.     Maintain and administer the Zoning Code, including the processing of applications, abatements, and other enforcement actions.

C.     Prepare rules and procedures necessary for conducting the Director’s business. They may include the administrative details of hearings officiated by the Director (e.g., scheduling, rules of procedure, and recordkeeping). These rules and procedures must be approved by City Council resolution, following review and recommendation by the Planning Commission.

D.    Issue administrative regulations for the submission and review of applications subject to the requirements of Government Code Section 65950, Deadlines for Project Approval Conformance; Extensions.

E.     Issue a Zoning Clearance pursuant to Chapter 17.36, Zoning Clearance.

F.     Approve, modify, or deny Temporary Use Permits, pursuant to Chapter 17.39, Temporary Use Permits.

G.    Approve, modify, or deny a Modification, pursuant to Chapter 17.40, Modifications.

H.    Approve, modify, or deny requests for Reasonable Accommodation for land use projects, pursuant to Chapter 17.42, Reasonable Accommodation.

I.      Conduct Design Review and approve, modify, or deny land use projects pursuant to Chapter 17.37, Design Review.

J.      Determine whether a project is subject to review under the California Environmental Quality Act and notify the applicant if any additional information is necessary to conduct the review.

K.    Make recommendations to the Planning Commission and City Council on all applications, appeals, and other matters upon which they have the authority and the responsibility to act under this title.

L.     Investigate and report to the Planning Commission on permit violations when the City has initiated revocation procedures, pursuant to Section 17.35.120, Revocation of Permits.

M.    Serve as Zoning Administrator or designate a member of Planning Division staff to serve as Zoning Administrator, pursuant to Section 17.34.050, Zoning Administrator.

N.    Delegate administrative functions to members of the Planning Division.

O.    Such other powers and responsibilities as assigned or directed by the City Council. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.34.050 Zoning Administrator
The powers and responsibilities of the Zoning Administrator, or designee, include, but are not limited to, the following:

A.    Approve, modify, or deny Minor Use Permits, pursuant to Chapter 17.38, Use Permits.

B.     Approve, modify, or deny requests for extensions for land use projects, pursuant to Section 17.35.100, Expiration and Extension.

C.     Decide requests for Minor Revisions to Approved Permits, pursuant to Section 17.35.110, Revisions to an Approved Permit.

D.    Refer items to the Planning Commission where, in his or her opinion, the public interest would be better served by a Planning Commission public hearing and action.

E.     Interpret the Zoning Code as needed for members of the public and other City Departments.

F.     Make General Plan consistency findings such as for the Capital Improvement Program (CIP).

G.    Such other powers and responsibilities as assigned or directed by the Director. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.34.060 Summary of Review Authorities for Decisions and Appeals
This table summarizes the powers and duties that each Review Authority has under this title. Where a land use project requires more than one type of application, all permit requests shall be reviewed and decided on by the highest Review Authority established for any of the applications.

TABLE 17.34.060: SUMMARY OF REVIEW AUTHORITIES FOR DECISIONS AND APPEALS

Decision Type

Reference

Advisory Body

Review Authority

Appeal Body

Interpretations

17.34.050

N/A

Zoning Administrator

Planning Commission

Extension to Permit

17.35.100

N/A

Zoning Administrator

Planning Commission

Minor Revision to Permit

17.35.110

N/A

Zoning Administrator

Planning Commission

Major Revision to Permit

17.35.110

N/A

Review Authority of Original Permit

Appeal Body for Original Permit

Permit Revocation

17.35.120

Director

Planning Commission

City Council

Zoning Clearance

17.36

N/A

Director

Planning Commission

Design Review

17.37

N/A

Director or Planning Commission

Planning Commission or City Council

Minor Use Permit

17.38

N/A

Zoning Administrator

Planning Commission

Conditional Use Permit

17.38

Director

Planning Commission

City Council

Temporary Use Permit

17.39

N/A

Director

Planning Commission

Modification

17.40

N/A

Director

Planning Commission

Variance

17.41

Director

Planning Commission

City Council

Reasonable Accommodation

17.42

N/A

Director

Planning Commission

Development Agreement

17.43

Planning Commission

City Council

N/A

General Plan Amendment

17.44

Planning Commission

City Council

N/A

Zoning Amendment

17.44

Planning Commission

City Council

N/A

Planned Development

17.18

Planning Commission

City Council

N/A

(Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

Chapter 17.35 COMMON PROCEDURES
17.35.010 Purpose
This chapter establishes uniform procedures for the preparation, filing, and processing of all land use permits and approvals provided for in this title, unless superseded by a specific requirement of this title or State law. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.35.020 Application Forms and Fees
A.    Applicant. The owner of property or the owner’s authorized agent. If the application is made by someone other than the owner or the owner’s agent, proof of the right to use and possess the property as applied for, satisfactory to the Director, shall accompany the application.

B.     Application Forms. The Director shall prepare and issue application forms and lists that specify the information that will be required from applicants for projects subject to the provisions of this title.

C.     Supporting Materials. The Director may require the submission of supporting materials as part of the application, including, but not limited to: statements, photographs, plans, drawings, renderings, models, material samples and other items necessary to describe existing conditions and the proposed project and to determine the level of environmental review pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA).

D.    Availability of Materials. All submitted material becomes the property of the City, may be distributed to the public, and shall be made available for public inspection. At any time, upon reasonable request, and during normal business hours, any person may examine application materials in support of or in opposition at the Planning Division offices. Unless prohibited by law or superseded by specific permit confidentiality requirements, copies of such materials shall be made available at a reasonable cost.

E.     Multiple Applications.

1.     Concurrent Filing. An applicant for a project which requires more than one permit (e.g., Conditional Use Permit and Design Review, etc.), shall file all related applications concurrently, together with all application fees. The concurrent filing requirements may be waived by the Director.

2.     Concurrent Processing. Multiple permits for the same project shall be processed concurrently and shall be reviewed and decided on by the highest Review Authority designated for any of the applications.

F.     Application Fees.

1.     Fee Schedule. The Council shall approve by resolution a Municipal Fee Schedule that that establishes fees for permits, informational materials, penalties, copying, and other such items.

2.     Fee Payment. No application shall be deemed complete, and processing shall not commence on any application until all required fees or deposits have been paid.

3.     Fee Waiver. No fee shall be required when the applicant is the City, or if it is waived under any other provision of the West Sacramento Municipal Code.

4.     Refund of Fees. Application fees are non-refundable unless otherwise provided for in the West Sacramento Municipal Code or by policy of the Council. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.35.030 Pre-Application Review
Pre-application review is an optional review process that is intended to provide information on relevant policies, zoning regulations, and procedures. This review is intended for large or complex projects and projects that are potentially controversial.

A.    Exemption from Permit Streamlining Act. Pre-application review is not subject to the requirements of the California Permit Streamlining Act. An application that is accepted for pre-application review shall not be considered complete pursuant to the requirements of the Act unless and until the Director has received an application for approval of a development project, reviewed it, and determined it to be complete under Section 17.35.040, Review of Applications.

B.     Review Procedure. The Planning Division shall conduct pre-application review. The Director may consult with or request review by any City agency or official with interest in the application.

C.     Recommendations Are Advisory. Neither the pre-application review nor the provision of information and/or pertinent policies shall be construed as either a recommendation for approval or denial of the application or project by City staff. Any recommendations that result from pre-application review are considered advisory only and shall not be binding on either the applicant or the City. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.35.040 Review of Applications
A.    Initial Completeness Review. The Director shall determine whether an application is complete within 30 days of the date the application is filed and required fee received.

1.     Incomplete Application. If an application is deemed incomplete, the Director shall provide written notification to the applicant listing the applications for permit(s), forms, information, and any additional fees that are necessary to complete the application.

a.     Zoning Code Violations. An application shall not be found complete if conditions exist on the site in violation of this title or any permit or other approval granted in compliance with this title, unless the proposed project includes the correction of the violations.

b.     Submittal of Additional Information. The applicant shall provide the additional information within the time limit specified by the Director, which shall be no sooner than 30 days. The Director may grant one extension of up to 90 days.

c.     Appeal of Determination. Determinations of incompleteness are subject to the provisions of Section 17.35.130, Appeals, except there shall be a final written determination on the appeal no later than 60 days after receipt of the appeal. The fact that an appeal is permitted to both the Planning Commission and the City Council does not extend the 60-day period.

d.     Expiration of Application. If an applicant fails to correct the specified deficiencies within the specific time limit, the application shall expire and be deemed withdrawn, unless an extension is granted by the Director. After the expiration of an application, review shall require the submittal of a new, complete application, along with all required fees.

2.     Complete Application. When an application is deemed complete, the Director shall make a record of that date. If an application requires a public hearing, the Director shall schedule it and notify the applicant of the date and time, pursuant to Section 17.35.060, Public Notice.

B.     Referral of Application. At the discretion of the Director, or where otherwise required by this title, State or Federal law, any application filed in compliance with this title may be referred to any City department, public agency, or interest group that may be affected by or have an interest in the proposed land use project.

C.     Extensions. The Director may, upon written request and for good cause, grant extensions of any time limit for review of applications imposed by this title. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.35.050 Environmental Review
All projects shall be reviewed for compliance or exemption with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). Environmental review will be conducted pursuant to Title 14 of the California Code of Regulations (CEQA Guidelines). If Title 14 of the California Code is amended, such amendments will govern City procedures. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.35.060 Public Notice
Unless otherwise specified, whenever the provisions of this title require public notice, the City shall provide notice in compliance with State law as follows.

A.    Mailed Notice. At least 10 days before the date of the public hearing, or 15 days before the date of action when no public hearing is required, the Director (or the City Clerk for City Council hearings) shall provide notice by First Class mail delivery to the following:

1.     The applicant, the owner, and any occupant of the subject property;

2.     All property owners of record within a minimum 500-foot radius of the subject property as shown on the latest available assessment roll or a larger radius if deemed necessary by the Director to provide adequate public notification;

3.     All neighborhood and community organizations that have previously filed a written request for notice of projects in the area where the site is located; and

4.     Any person or group who has filed a written request for notice regarding the specific application.

B.     Alternative Method for Large Mailings. If the number of owners to whom notice would be mailed or delivered is greater than 500, instead of a mailed notice, the Director (or City Clerk for City Council hearings) may provide notice by placing a display advertisement of at least one-eighth of a page in at least one newspaper of general circulation in the City, at least 10 days prior to the hearing.

C.     Posted Notice. At their discretion, the Director may require notice be posted in a format approved by the Planning Division, in a prominent place on or near the subject property site at least 10 days prior to the hearing.

D.    Newspaper Notice. At least 10 days before the date of the public hearing or the date of action when no public hearing is required, the Director (or City Clerk for City Council hearings) shall publish a notice in at least one newspaper of general circulation in the City.

E.     Contents of Notice. The notice shall include the following information:

1.     The location of the real property, if any, that is the subject of the application;

2.     A general description of the proposed project or action;

3.     The date, time, location, and purpose of the public hearing or the date of action when no public hearing is required;

4.     The identity of the hearing body or officer;

5.     The names of the applicant and the owner of the property that is the subject of the application;

6.     The location and times at which the complete application and project file, including any environmental impact assessment prepared in connection with the application, may be viewed by the public;

7.     A statement that any interested person or authorized agent may appear and be heard;

8.     A statement describing how to submit written comments; and

9.     For City Council hearings, the Planning Commission recommendation.

F.     Failure to Notify Individual Properties. The validity of the proceedings shall not be affected by the failure of any property owner, resident, or community organization to receive a mailed notice. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.35.070 Conduct of Public Hearings
Whenever the provisions of this title require a public hearing, the hearing shall be conducted in compliance with the requirements of State law as follows.

A.    Generally. Hearings shall be conducted pursuant to procedures adopted by the hearing body. Hearings are not required to be conducted according to technical rules relating to evidence and witnesses.

B.     Scheduling. Hearings before the City Council shall be scheduled by the City Clerk. All other hearings shall be scheduled by the Director.

C.     Presentation. An applicant or an applicant’s representative may make a presentation of a proposed project.

D.    Public Hearing Testimony. Any person may appear at a public hearing and submit oral or written evidence, either individually or as a representative of a person or an organization. Each person who appears at a public hearing representing an organization shall identify the organization being represented.

E.     Time Limits. The presiding officer may establish time limits for individual testimony and require that individuals with shared concerns select one or more spokespersons to present testimony on behalf of those individuals.

F.     Continuance of Public Hearing. The hearing body may by motion continue the public hearing to a fixed date, time and place, or may continue the item to an undetermined date.

G.    Investigations. The hearing body may cause such investigations to be made as it deems necessary and in the public interest in any matter to be heard by it. Such investigation may be made by a committee of one or more members of the hearing body or by City staff. The facts established by such investigation shall be submitted to the hearing body either in writing, to be filed with the records of the matter, or in testimony before the hearing body, and may be considered by the Review Authority.

H.    Decision. The public hearing shall be closed before a vote is taken. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.35.080 Findings and Decision
When deciding to approve, approve with conditions, modify, revoke or deny any discretionary permit under this title, the Review Authority shall issue a Notice of Action and make findings of fact as required by this title.

A.    Date of Action. The Review Authority shall decide to approve, modify, revoke, or deny any discretionary permit following the close of the public hearing, or if no public hearing is required, within the time period set forth below. These deadlines do not apply to any action that has been appealed to the City Council in accordance with Section 17.35.130, Appeals. Time extensions may be granted pursuant to Section 17.35.100, Expiration and Extension.

1.     Project Exempt from Environmental Review. Within 30 days of the date the City has determined an application to be complete, a determination must be made whether the project is exempt from Environmental Review per State CEQA requirements.

2.     Project for Which a Negative Declaration or Mitigated Negative Declaration Is Prepared. Within 60 days of the date a Negative Declaration or Mitigated Negative Declaration has been completed and adopted for project approval, the City shall act on the accompanying discretionary project.

3.     Project for Which an EIR Is Prepared. Within 180 days from the date the Review Authority certifies a Final EIR, the City shall act on the accompanying discretionary project.

B.     Notice of Action. After the Director or Planning Commission takes any action to approve, modify, or deny an application that is subject to appeal under the terms of this title, the Director shall issue a Notice of Action. The Notice shall describe the action taken, including any applicable conditions, and shall list the findings that were the basis for the decisions. The Director shall file the Notice with the City Clerk and mail the Notice to the applicant and to any other person or entity that has filed a written request for such notification with the Planning Division.

C.     Findings. Findings, when required by State law or this title, shall be based upon consideration of the application, plans, testimony, reports, and other materials that constitute the administrative record and shall be stated in writing in the resolution or record of the action on the permit. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.35.090 Conditions of Approval
A.    Scope. The scope of approvals includes only those uses and activities proposed in the application, excluding other uses and activities. Unless otherwise specified, the approval of a new use shall terminate all rights and approvals for previous uses no longer occupying the same site or location.

B.     Conditions. The site plan, floor plans, building elevations, and/or any additional information or representation, whether oral or written, indicating the proposed structure or manner of operation submitted with an application or submitted during the approval process shall be deemed conditions of approval. Any approval may be subject to requirements that the applicant guarantees, warranties, or ensures compliance with submitted plans and conditions in all respects.

C.     Actions Voiding Approval. If the construction of a building or structure or the use established is contrary to the description or illustration in the application, to either violate any provision of this title or require additional permits, then the approval shall be deemed null and void.

D.    Periodic Review. All approvals may be subject to periodic review to determine compliance with the permit and applicable conditions. If a condition specifies that activities or uses allowed under the permit are subject to periodic reporting, monitoring, or assessments, it shall be the responsibility of the permit holder, the property owner, or successor property owners to comply with such conditions. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.35.100 Expiration and Extension
A.    Effective Dates. A final decision on an application for any approval subject to appeal shall become effective after the expiration of the 15-day appeal period following the date of action, unless an appeal is filed. No Building Permit or business license shall be issued until the 16th day following the date of the action.

B.     Expiration. The Review Authority, in the granting of any permit, may specify a time, consistent with the purposes of the use and necessary to safeguard the public safety, health and welfare, within which the proposed use must be undertaken and actively and continuously pursued. If no time period is specified, any permit granted under this title shall automatically expire when no project or use has been initiated within two years after the date of the approval and become null and void.

C.     Exercise of Permit.

1.     Exercise of Planning Approval or Permit. A permit for the use of a building or property is exercised when, if required, a valid City business license has been issued, and the permitted use has commenced on the site.

2.     Exercise of Building Permit. A permit for the construction of a building or structure is exercised when a valid City Building Permit, if required, is issued, and construction has lawfully commenced.

D.    Extensions. The Zoning Administrator may approve a two-year extension of any permit or approval granted under this title upon receipt of a written application with the required fee within the time period specified by the Review Authority, or two years of the date of the approval. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.35.110 Revisions to an Approved Permit
No revision in the use or structure for which a permit or other approval has been issued is permitted unless the permit is revised as provided for in this title. For this section, the revision of a permit may include revision of a Design Review approval.

A.    Minor Revisions. The Zoning Administrator may approve minor revisions to approved plans and permits that are consistent with the original findings and conditions approved by the Review Authority, do not substantially expand the approved floor area, and would not intensify any potentially detrimental effects of the project.

B.     Major Revisions. A request for revisions to conditions of approval of a discretionary permit, a revision to an approved site plan or building plan that would affect a condition of approval, or a revision that would intensify a potential impact of the project shall be treated as a new application and shall be decided on by the same Review Authority as the approved permit. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.35.120 Revocation of Permits
Any permit granted under this title may be revoked or revised for cause if any of the conditions or terms of the permit are violated or if any law or ordinance is violated.

A.    Initiation of Proceeding. Revocation proceedings may be initiated by the City Council, Planning Commission, Director, or Zoning Administrator.

B.     Public Notice, Hearings, and Action. After conducting a duly-noticed public hearing, the Planning Commission shall act on the proposed revocation, pursuant to this chapter.

C.     Required Findings. The Planning Commission may revoke or modify the permit if it makes any of the following findings:

1.     The approval was obtained by means of fraud or misrepresentation of a material fact;

2.     The use, building, or structure has been substantially expanded beyond what is set forth in the permit or substantially changed in character;

3.     The use in question has ceased to exist or has been suspended for six months or more;

4.     There is or has been a violation of or failure to observe the terms or conditions of approval, or the use has been conducted in violation of the provisions of this title, or any applicable local or State law or regulation; or

5.     The use has been conducted in a manner detrimental to the public safety, health and welfare, or to be a nuisance.

D.    Notice of Action. Following Planning Commission action to revoke or modify a permit, the Director shall issue a Notice of Action within seven days. The Notice shall describe the Commission’s action with its findings. The Director shall mail notice to the permit holder and to any person or entity who requested the revocation proceeding. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.35.130 Appeals
Except where otherwise provided, any decision provided for in this title may be appealed in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 1.08, Appeal and Hearing Procedure, of the municipal code.

A.    Appeal Body.

1.     Planning Commission. The Planning Commission is the appeal body for decisions of the Zoning Administrator and Director.

2.     City Council. The City Council is the appeal body for decisions of the Planning Commission. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.35.140 Interpretations and Determinations
Requests for interpretations of this title and verifications relating to prior approvals or permits may be made to the Director. Requests shall be in writing. The decision of the Director on such requests may be appealed under Section 17.35.130, Appeals. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

Chapter 17.36 ZONING CLEARANCE
17.36.010 Purpose
This chapter establishes procedure to verify that each new or expanded use, activity, or structure complies with all of the applicable requirements of this title and conditions of any discretionary approval that the City has granted previously. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.36.020 Applicability
A Zoning Clearance is required for buildings or structures erected, constructed, altered, repaired or moved, the use of vacant land, changes in the character of the use of land or building, or for substantial expansions in the use of land or building, which are allowed as a matter of right by this title. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.36.030 Review Authority
The Director shall act as the Review Authority for Zoning Clearance applications based on consideration of the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.36.040 Procedures
A.    Application. Applications and fees for a Zoning Clearance shall be submitted in accordance with the provisions set forth in Section 17.35.020, Application Forms and Fees. The Director may request that the Zoning Clearance application be accompanied by a written narrative, plans, and other related materials necessary to show that the proposed development, alteration, or use of the site complies with all provisions of this title and the requirements and conditions of any applicable Design Review, Use Permit, or other discretionary land use approval.

B.     Determination. If the Director determines that the proposed use or building is allowed as a matter of right by this title and conforms to all the applicable development and use standards, the Director shall issue a Zoning Clearance. An approved Zoning Clearance may include attachments of other written or graphic information, including, but not limited to, statements, numeric data, site plans, floor plans, and building elevations and sections, as a record of the proposal’s conformity with the applicable regulations of this title. Prior to issuing any Building Permit, subdivision approval, or lot line adjustment, the Director shall review the application to determine whether the use, building, or change in lot configuration complies with all provisions of this title or any applicable Design Review, Use Permit, or other discretionary land use approval and that all conditions of such permits and approvals have been satisfied.

C.     Exceptions. No Zoning Clearance shall be required for the continuation of previously approved or permitted uses and structures or uses and structures that are not subject to any building or zoning regulations. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

Chapter 17.37 DESIGN REVIEW
17.37.010 Purpose
This chapter establishes procedure to ensure that new development supports the goals and objectives of the General Plan and other adopted plans and guidelines. The specific purposes of the Design Review process are to:

A.    Promote excellence in site planning and design and the harmonious appearance of buildings and sites;

B.     Ensure that new and modified uses and development will be compatible with the existing and potential development of the surrounding area; and

C.     Supplement other City regulations and standards to ensure control of aspects of design that are not otherwise addressed. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.37.020 Applicability
Design Review is required in specific areas of the City covered by design guidelines adopted by the City Council and is required for all new construction and other activities as identified in the applicable design guidelines. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.37.030 Review Authority
A.    Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall act as the Review Authority for all projects requiring Planning Commission approval (such as, but not limited to, Conditional Use Permits and Variances).

B.     Community Development Director. The Director shall act as the Review Authority for all projects that do not meet the criteria listed in subsection A for a decision by the Planning Commission. The Director may refer items directly to the Planning Commission when in his or her opinion the public interest would be better served by having the Planning Commission conduct Design Review. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.37.040 Application
A.    Application Forms and Fees. Written applications for Design Review shall be submitted to the Planning Division pursuant to Section 17.35.020, Application Forms and Fees.

B.     Concurrent Processing. When a development project requires a Use Permit, Variance, or any other discretionary approval, the Design Review application shall be submitted to the Planning Division as a part of the application for the discretionary permit or approval. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.37.050 Procedures
A.    If a project requires any Use Permit, Variance, or other discretionary approval other than Design Review, the design review shall be conducted concurrently with the discretionary permit.

B.     If a project does not require any Use Permit, Variance, or other discretionary approval other than Design Review, the Planning Division shall provide public notice and input in the following manner:

1.     Mailed Notice. The Planning Division shall provide mailed notice of the project pursuant to Section 17.35.060.A, Mailed Notice.

2.     Public Input. Any person may submit written comments on the project to the Director. For the comments to be considered in the determination of the project, the comments must specifically relate to the project’s conformity to adopted design guidelines. A comment letter must be received by the Community Development Director within 14 days of the mailed notice of application for Design Review. Late comments will be considered only if the project has not been approved or denied prior to the comments being received.

3.     Director Action. If no comment letter has been received within 14 days of the mailed notice of application, the Director may issue comments or approve the project at any time. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.37.060 Design Review Criteria
The sole criteria for evaluation under the Design Review process shall be compliance with the adopted design guidelines of the area in which the proposed project is located. All projects shall be consistent with applicable design guidelines. An application may be denied if the information provided by the applicant is insufficient to determine compliance with the guidelines. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.37.070 Appeals, Expiration, Extensions, and Revisions
A.    Appeals. Design Review decisions may be appealed to the Planning Commission as provided for in Section 17.35.130, Appeals.

B.     Expiration, Extensions, and Revisions. Design Review approvals may only be expired, extended, or modified as provided for in Chapter 17.35, Common Procedures. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

Chapter 17.38 USE PERMITS
17.38.010 Purpose
The Use Permit review and approval process is intended to apply to uses that are generally consistent with the purposes of the zone where they are proposed but require special consideration to ensure that they can be designed, located, and operated in a manner that will not interfere with the use and enjoyment of surrounding properties. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.38.020 Applicability
Approval of a Use Permit is required for uses or developments specifically identified in Division II, Zone Regulations, and/or any other section of this title which requires a Use Permit. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.38.030 Review Authority
A.    Conditional Use Permits. The Planning Commission shall act as the Review Authority for Conditional Use Permits based on consideration of the requirements of this chapter.

B.     Minor Use Permits. The Zoning Administrator shall act as the Review Authority for Minor Use Permits based on consideration of the requirements of this chapter. The Zoning Administrator may, at his or her discretion, refer any application for a Minor Use Permit for a project that may generate substantial public controversy or involve significant land use policy decisions to the Planning Commission for decision. In that case, the application shall be processed as a Conditional Use Permit. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.38.040 Application
Applications for Use Permits shall be filed with the Planning Division on the prescribed application forms. In addition to any other application requirements, the application for a Use Permit shall include data or other evidence in support of the applicable findings required by Section 17.38.060, Required Findings. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.38.050 Public Notice and Hearing
A.    Conditional Use Permits. All applications for Conditional Use Permits shall require public notice and hearing before the Planning Commission pursuant to Chapter 17.35, Common Procedures.

B.     Minor Use Permits. All applications for Minor Use Permits shall require public notice pursuant to Section 17.35.060, Public Notice. A public hearing on a Minor Use Permit shall occur only when a hearing is requested by the applicant or other interested person(s) in writing and received by the Zoning Administrator within 10 days of the mailed notice. In the event a public hearing is requested, the Minor Use Permit shall be scheduled for a hearing before the Zoning Administrator pursuant to Chapter 17.35, Common Procedures. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.38.060 Required Findings
The Review Authority must make all of the following findings to approve or conditionally approve a Use Permit application. The inability to make one or more of the findings is grounds for denial of an application.

A.    The proposed use is allowed within the applicable zone and complies with all other applicable provisions of this title and all other titles of the West Sacramento Municipal Code;

B.     The proposed use is consistent with the General Plan and any applicable specific plan;

C.     The proposed use will not be averse to the public health, safety, or general welfare of the community, nor detrimental to surrounding properties or improvements;

D.    The proposed use complies with any design or development standards applicable to the zone or the use in question, unless waived or modified pursuant to the provisions of this title;

E.     The design, location, size, and operating characteristics of the proposed activity are compatible with the existing and reasonably foreseeable future land uses and circulation in the vicinity; and

F.     The site is physically suitable for the type, density, and intensity of the use being proposed, including access, utilities, and the absence of physical constraints. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.38.070 Conditions of Approval
In approving a Use Permit, the Review Authority may impose reasonable conditions or restrictions to achieve the following outcomes. The Review Authority may also require reasonable guarantees and evidence that such conditions are being, or will be, complied with.

A.    Ensure that the proposal conforms in all significant respects with the General Plan and with any other applicable plans or policies adopted by the City Council;

B.     Achieve the general purposes of this title or the specific purpose of the zone in which the project is located;

C.     Achieve the findings for a Use Permit listed in Section 17.38.060, Required Findings; or

D.    Mitigate any potentially significant impacts identified because of environmental review conducted in compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.38.080 Appeals, Expiration, Extensions, and Revisions
A.    Appeals. Use Permit decisions may be appealed as provided for in Section 17.35.130, Appeals.

B.     Expiration, Extensions, and Revisions. Use Permit approvals may only be expired, extended, or modified as provided for in Chapter 17.35, Common Procedures. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

Chapter 17.39 TEMPORARY USE PERMITS
17.39.010 Purpose
This chapter establishes a process for review and approval of certain uses that are intended to be of limited duration of time and will not permanently alter the character or physical facilities of the site where they occur. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.39.020 Review Authority
The Director shall act as the Review Authority for Temporary Use Permits based on consideration of the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.39.030 Application
An application for a Temporary Use Permit shall be submitted at least 60 days before the use is intended to begin, pursuant to Section 17.35.020, Application Forms and Fees. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.39.040 Required Findings
The Director must make both of the following findings to approve or conditionally approve a Temporary Use Permit application. The inability to make one or more of the findings is grounds for denial of an application.

A.    The proposed use will not unreasonably affect adjacent properties, their owners and occupants, or the surrounding neighborhood, and will not in any other way constitute a nuisance or be detrimental to the health, safety, peace, comfort, or general welfare of persons residing or working in the area of such use or to the general welfare of the City; and

B.     The proposed use will not unreasonably interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic or circulation in the area surrounding the proposed use and will not create a demand for additional parking that cannot be safely and efficiently accommodated by existing parking areas. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.39.050 Conditions of Approval
The Director may impose reasonable conditions deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the findings for a Temporary Use Permit listed in Section 17.39.040, Required Findings, including, but not limited to:

A.    Regulation of ingress, egress, and traffic circulation;

B.     Regulation of fire protection and access for fire vehicles;

C.     Regulation of lighting and signage;

D.    Regulation of hours of operation, staffing, or other aspects of the use; and

E.     Removal of all trash, debris, temporary structures and electrical service.

The Director may also require reasonable guarantees and evidence that such conditions are being, or will be, complied with. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

Chapter 17.40 MODIFICATIONS
17.40.010 Purpose
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a means of granting relief from locational, developmental, and operational standards where doing so would be consistent with this title and the General Plan, and where it is not possible or practical to approve a Variance. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.40.020 Applicability
Modifications may be granted as specifically identified in any other section of this title and as follows:

A.    Dimensional Requirements. Relief from dimensional requirements of property development standards specified in this title, not to exceed 25% of the requirement.

B.     Exclusions. Modifications cannot be granted for any of the following standards:

1.     Lot area, width, or depth.

2.     Residential density. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.40.030 Application
An application for a Modification shall be filed to the Planning Division in accordance with Section 17.35.020, Application Forms and Fees. The application shall state in writing the nature of the request and explain how the required findings are satisfied. The applicant shall also submit plans delineating the requested Modification. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.40.040 Procedures
A.    Review Authority. The Director shall act as the Review Authority for Modification applications based on consideration of the requirements of this chapter except in the case of concurrent processing pursuant to subsection B.

B.     Concurrent Processing. If a request for a Modification is being submitted in conjunction with an application for another approval, permit, or entitlement that requires Planning Commission action, it shall be heard and acted upon at the same time and in the same manner as that application.

C.     Public Notice and Hearing. Modifications do not require a public hearing or notice. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.40.050 Required Findings
The Director must make all of the following findings in order to approve a Modification application. The inability to make one or more of the findings is grounds for denial of an application.

A.    The Modification is necessary due to the physical characteristics of the property and the proposed use or structure or other circumstances, including, but not limited to: topography, noise exposure, irregular property boundaries, or other unusual circumstances;

B.     There are no alternatives to the requested Modification that could provide an equivalent level of benefit to the applicant with less potential detriment to surrounding owners and occupants or to the public; and

C.     The granting of the requested Modification would not be detrimental to the health or safety of the public or the occupants of the property or result in a change in land use or density that would be inconsistent with the requirements of this title. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.40.060 Conditions of Approval
In approving a Modification, the Review Authority may impose any conditions deemed necessary to:

A.    Ensure that the proposal conforms in all significant respects with the General Plan and with any other applicable plans or policies adopted by the City Council;

B.     Achieve the general purposes of this title or the specific purposes of the zone in which the project is located;

C.     Achieve the findings for a Modification granted; or

D.    Mitigate any potentially significant impacts identified because of review conducted in compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.40.070 Appeals, Expiration, Extensions, and Revisions
A.    Appeals. Modification decisions may be appealed as provided for in Section 17.35.130, Appeals.

B.     Expiration, Extensions, and Revisions. Modifications may only be expired, extended, or modified as provided for in Chapter 17.35, Common Procedures. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

Chapter 17.41 VARIANCES
17.41.010 Purpose
This chapter is intended to provide a mechanism for relief from the strict application of this title where it would deprive the property owner of privileges enjoyed by similar properties because of the subject property’s unique and special conditions. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.41.020 Applicability
Variances may be granted to vary or modify dimensional and performance standards but may not be granted to allow uses or activities that this title does not authorize for a specific lot or size. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.41.030 Review Authority
The Planning Commission shall act as the Review Authority for Variance applications based on consideration of the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.41.040 Application
Applications for a Variance shall be filed with the Planning Division on the prescribed application forms in accordance with the procedures in Section 17.35.020, Application Forms and Fees. In addition to any other application requirements, the application for a Variance shall include evidence showing that the requested Variance conforms to the required findings set forth in Section 17.41.060, Required Findings. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.41.050 Procedures
A.    Public Notice. An application for a Variance shall require a public notice prior to the Planning Commission decision, pursuant to Section 17.35.060, Public Notice.

B.     Public Hearing. An application for a Variance shall require a public hearing before the Planning Commission, pursuant to Section 17.35.070, Conduct of Public Hearings. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.41.060 Required Findings
After conducting a public hearing, the Planning Commission must make all of the following findings in order to approve or conditionally approve a Variance application. The Commission shall deny an application for a Variance if it is unable to make any of the required findings, in which case it shall state the reasons for that determination.

A.    There are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions applicable to the property involved that do not apply generally to property in the vicinity and identical zone, and that the granting of a Variance will not constitute a granting of a special privilege inconsistent with the limitations on the property in the vicinity and identical zone;

B.     The granting of the application is necessary to prevent a physical hardship which is not of the applicant’s own actions or the actions of a predecessor in interest;

C.     The granting of the application will not be detrimental or injurious to property or improvements in the vicinity, and will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, general welfare or convenience; and

D.    The granting of the Variance will be consistent with the general purposes and objectives of this title, any applicable specific plans, and the General Plan. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.41.070 Conditions of Approval
In approving a Variance, the Planning Commission may impose reasonable conditions deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the findings required in Section 17.41.060, Required Findings, and may require reasonable guarantees and evidence that such conditions are being, or will be, complied with. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.41.080 Appeals, Expiration, Extensions, and Revisions
A.    Appeals. Variance decisions may be appealed as provided for in Section 17.35.130, Appeals.

B.     Expiration, Extensions, and Revisions. Variances may only be expired, extended or revised as provided for in Chapter 17.35, Common Procedures. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

Chapter 17.42 REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION
17.42.010 Purpose
This chapter establishes the procedures to request Reasonable Accommodation for persons with disabilities seeking equal access to housing under the California Fair Employment and Housing Act, the Federal Fair Housing Act, and the Americans with Disabilities Act (“the Acts”) in the application of zoning law and other land use regulations, policies, procedures, and conditions of approval. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.42.020 Applicability
A.    A request for Reasonable Accommodation may be made by any person with a disability, their representative, or any other entity, when the application of zoning law or other land use regulation, policy, or procedure acts as a barrier to fair housing opportunities.

B.     A person with a disability is a person who has a physical or mental impairment that limits or substantially limits one or more major life activities, anyone who is regarded as having this type of impairment, or anyone who has a record of this type of impairment.

C.     A request for Reasonable Accommodation may include a change or exception to the practices, rules, and standards for the development, siting, and use of housing or housing-related facilities that would eliminate regulatory barriers and provide a person with a disability equal opportunity to housing of their choice. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.42.030 Review Authority
The Director shall act as the Review Authority for Reasonable Accommodation applications based on consideration of the requirements of this chapter. Requests submitted for concurrent review with another discretionary land use application shall be reviewed by the Review Authority for the discretionary land use application. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.42.040 Application
An application for a Reasonable Accommodation shall be prepared, filed, and processed in compliance with Section 17.35.020, Application Forms and Fees. No noticing or public hearing are required for a Reasonable Accommodation request. In addition to any other information required under the West Sacramento Municipal Code, an applicant submitting a request for Reasonable Accommodation must provide the following information:

A.    Description of the accommodation request;

B.     The applicant’s name, address, and telephone number;

C.     Location of the subject property, including address and assessor’s parcel numbers;

D.    Name and address of the property owner and the owner’s written consent to the application;

E.     The current actual use of the subject property;

F.     Verifiable documentation of the individual’s disability status;

G.    The regulation(s), policy, or procedure for which accommodation is sought;

H.    Reason that the requested accommodation may be necessary for the individual(s) with the disability to use and enjoy the dwelling; and

I.      Additional information necessary for Planning Division staff to facilitate proper consideration of the request, consistent with fair housing laws. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.42.050 Procedures
The Director shall make a written determination within 45 days of the application being deemed complete and either approve, modify, or deny a request for Reasonable Accommodation in compliance with Section 17.42.060, Required Findings. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.42.060 Required Findings
The Director must consider all of the following factors in order to approve or deny a request for Reasonable Accommodation that will be consistent with the Acts:

A.    Whether the housing, which is the subject of the request, will be used by an individual defined as disabled under the Acts;

B.     Whether the request for Reasonable Accommodation is necessary to make specific housing available to an individual with a disability under the Acts;

C.     Whether the requested Reasonable Accommodation would impose an undue financial or administrative burden on the City; and

D.    Whether the requested Reasonable Accommodation would require a fundamental alteration of a City program or law, including, but not limited to, land use and zoning. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.42.070 Conditions of Approval
In granting a request for Reasonable Accommodation, the Review Authority may impose any conditions of approval deemed reasonable and necessary to ensure that the Reasonable Accommodation would comply with the findings required herein. The conditions shall also state whether the accommodation granted shall terminate if the recipient of the accommodation that was requested no longer resides on the property. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.42.080 Appeals, Expiration, Extensions, and Revisions
A.    Appeals. Reasonable Accommodation decisions may be appealed as provided for in Section 17.35.130, Appeals.

B.     Expiration, Extensions, and Revisions. Reasonable Accommodations may only be expired, extended or revised as provided for in Chapter 17.35, Common Procedures. A Reasonable Accommodation shall terminate if the accommodation is no longer required, or if the recipient of the accommodation no longer resides at the property. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

Chapter 17.43 DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS
17.43.010 Purpose
This chapter establishes procedures and requirements for considering and entering into legally binding agreements with applicants for development projects, as provided for in State law. Such agreements provide a greater degree of certainty than the normal permit approval process by granting assurance that an applicant may proceed with development in accord with policies, rules, and regulations in effect at the time of the approval subject to conditions to promote the orderly planning of public improvements and services, allocate costs to achieve maximum utilization of public and private resources in the development process, and ensure that appropriate measures to enhance and protect the environment are achieved. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.43.020 Applicability
A.    The City incorporates by reference the provisions of Government Code Sections 65864 through 65869.5. In the event of any conflict between those statutory provisions and this chapter, the statutes shall control.

B.     A development agreement may be considered for a proposed development that will require a developer to make a substantial investment at the early stages of the project for planning and engineering for the entire project and for public facilities and services. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.43.030 Review Authority
A.    The Director shall negotiate the specific components and provisions of the Development Agreement on behalf of the City for Planning Commission review and recommendation to the City Council. The Director may request input from other affected departments as needed.

B.     The Planning Commission shall act as the advisory body and review the Development Agreement to provide recommendation to the City Council.

C.     The City Council shall act as the Review Authority, and after receiving recommendations from the Planning Commission, may adopt, reject, or modify a Development Agreement based on consideration of the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.43.040 Procedures
An applicant for a development project may request that the City review the application as a Development Agreement application in accordance with the following procedures. The City incorporates by reference the provisions of Government Code Sections 65864 through 65869.5. In the event of any conflict between these statutory provisions and this section, this section shall control.

A.    Application Requirements. Applications for Development Agreements shall be filed with the Community Development Department in accordance with the provisions set forth in Section 17.35.020, Application Forms and Fees. In addition to any other application requirements, the application for a Development Agreement shall include data or other evidence in support of the applicable findings required by Section 17.43.070, Required Findings.

B.     Contents of Development Agreements.

1.     Required Contents. A Development Agreement shall specify its duration, the permitted uses of the subject property, the general location and density or intensity of uses, the general location, maximum height and size of proposed buildings, and provisions for reservation or dedication of land for public purposes. It shall contain provisions concerning its transferability (assignment).

2.     Additional Contents. Development Agreements may also include the following:

a.     Improvements and Fees. A Development Agreement may include requirements for construction and maintenance of onsite and offsite improvements or payment of fees in lieu of such dedications or improvements.

b.     Conditions. A Development Agreement may also include conditions, terms, restrictions, and requirements for subsequent discretionary actions but does not eliminate the applicant’s responsibility to obtain all required land use approvals.

c.     Phasing. A Development Agreement may provide that the project be constructed in specified phases, that construction shall commence within a specified time, and that the project or any phase thereof be completed within a specified time.

d.     Financing. If the Development Agreement requires applicant financing of necessary public facilities, it may include terms relating to subsequent reimbursement over time for such financing.

e.     Indemnity. A Development Agreement may contain an indemnity clause requiring the applicant to indemnify and hold the City harmless against claims arising out of or in any way related to the actions of applicant in connection with the application or the development process, including all legal fees and costs.

f.      Performance Obligation Fees. A Development Agreement may include provisions to guarantee performance of obligations stated in the agreement.

g.     Other Items. Other components and provisions as negotiated by City.

C.     Concurrent Processing. It is the intent of this chapter that the application for a Development Agreement will be made and considered simultaneously with the review of other necessary applications, including, but not limited to, rezoning, Planned Development, and Conditional Use Permits. If combined with an application for rezoning, Planned Development, or Conditional Use Permit, the application for a Development Agreement shall be submitted with said application and shall be processed, to the maximum extent possible, jointly to avoid duplication of hearings and repetition of information. A Development Agreement is not a substitute for, nor an alternative to, any other required permit or approval, and the qualified applicant or developer must comply with all other required procedures for development approval. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.43.050 Planning Commission Hearings and Recommendations
A.    Notice. Public notice of hearings by the Planning Commission for a Development Agreement shall be given as specified in Section 17.35.060, Public Notice. Notice of the hearing shall also be mailed or delivered to any other local agency expected to provide essential facilities or services to the property that is the subject of the Development Agreement.

B.     Hearing. The Planning Commission shall conduct a public hearing for making recommendations to the City Council in conformance with the provisions of Section 17.35.070, Conduct of Public Hearings.

C.     Recommendation to Council. Following the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall make a written recommendation on the proposed Development Agreement. The Director shall transmit the Planning Commission’s written recommendation and complete record of the application to the City Council.

1.     Approval. If the Planning Commission has recommended approval of the Development Agreement, the City Council is required to take final action pursuant to Section 17.43.060, City Council Hearings and Actions.

2.     Denial. If the Planning Commission has recommended against the Development Agreement, the City Council is not required to take any further action unless an appeal is filed in accordance with Section 17.35.130, Appeals. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.43.060 City Council Hearings and Actions
A.    Applicant Execution of Agreement. A proposed Development Agreement shall be executed by the Applicant before it is placed before City Council for consideration at a public hearing.

B.     Notice. Public notice of hearings by the City Council for a Development Agreement shall be given as specified in Section 17.35.060, Public Notice. Notice of the hearing shall also be mailed or delivered to any other local agency expected to provide essential facilities or services to the property that is the subject of the Development Agreement.

C.     Hearing. After receiving the report from the Planning Commission but no later than the time specified by Section 65943 of the Government Code, the City Council shall hold a public hearing in conformance with the provisions of Section 17.35.070, Conduct of Public Hearings.

D.    Decision. After the City Council completes the public hearing, the City Council shall approve, modify, or deny the Development Agreement. Approval of a Development Agreement shall be by ordinance. The ordinance shall refer to and incorporate by reference the text of the Development Agreement. Matters not previously considered by the Planning Commission during its hearing may, but need not, be referred to the Planning Commission for report and recommendation. The Planning Commission may, but need not, hold a public hearing on matters referred to it by the City Council. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.43.070 Required Findings
The City Council must make the finding that a proposed Development Agreement and its provisions are consistent with the General Plan and any applicable specific plan to approve a Development Agreement. This requirement may be satisfied by a finding that the provisions of a proposed Development Agreement are consistent with proposed General Plan or specific plan provisions to be adopted concurrently with the approval of the proposed Development Agreement. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.43.080 Execution and Recordation
Within 10 days after the ordinance approving the Development Agreement takes effect, the Mayor or designee shall execute the Development Agreement on behalf of the City, and the City Clerk shall record the Development Agreement with the County Recorder. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.43.090 Periodic Review
The applicant shall be required to demonstrate compliance with the provisions of the Development Agreement at least once a year at which time the City Manager or designee shall review each approved Development Agreement.

A.    Finding of Compliance. If the City Manager or designee, based on substantial evidence, finds compliance by the applicant with the provisions of the Development Agreement, no action is required.

B.     Finding of Noncompliance. If the City Manager or designee finds the applicant has not complied with the provisions of the Development Agreement, the Director may issue a finding of noncompliance which may be recorded by the City with the County Recorder after it becomes final. The Director shall specify in writing to the applicant the respects in which the applicant has failed to comply and shall set forth terms of compliance and specify a reasonable time for the applicant to meet the terms of compliance. If the applicant does not comply with any terms of compliance within the prescribed time limits, the Development Agreement shall be subject to termination or revision pursuant to this chapter.

C.     Appeal of Determination. Within 10 days after issuance of a finding of noncompliance, any interested person may file a written appeal of the finding with the City Council. The appellant shall pay fees and charges for the filing and processing of the appeal in amounts established by resolution of the City Council. The appellant shall specify the reasons for the appeal. The issuance of a finding of compliance or finding of noncompliance and the expiration of the appeal period without appeal, or the confirmation by the City Council of the issuance of the finding on such appeal, shall conclude the review for the applicable period and such determination shall be final. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.43.100 Amendment or Cancellation
A.    Mutual Agreement. Any development may be canceled or amended by mutual consent of the parties following compliance with the procedures specified in this section. A Development Agreement may also specify procedures for administrative approval of minor amendments by mutual consent of the applicant and City Manager or designee.

B.     After Finding of Noncompliance. If a finding of noncompliance does not include terms of compliance, or if applicant does not comply with the terms of compliance within the prescribed time limits, the City Manager or designee may refer the Development Agreement to the City Council for termination or revision. After the public hearing, the City Council may terminate the Development Agreement, modify the finding of noncompliance, or rescind the finding of noncompliance, and issue a finding of compliance.

C.     Recordation. If the parties to the agreement or their successors in interest amend or cancel the Development Agreement, or if the City terminates or modifies the Development Agreement for failure of the applicant to fully comply with the provisions of the Development Agreement, the City Clerk shall record notice of such action with the County Recorder.

D.    Rights of the Parties After Cancellation or Termination. If a Development Agreement is cancelled or terminated, all rights of the applicant, property owner or successors in interest under the Development Agreement shall terminate. If a Development Agreement is terminated following a finding of noncompliance, the City may, in its sole discretion, determine to return all benefits, including reservations or dedications of land, and payments of fees, received by the City. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.43.110 Effect of Approved Agreement
A.    Existing Rules and Regulations. Unless otherwise specified in the Development Agreement, the City’s rules, regulations, and official policies governing permitted uses of the property, density and design, and improvement standards and specifications applicable to development of the property shall be those City rules, regulations, and official policies in force on the effective date of the Development Agreement.

B.     Future Rules and Regulations. A Development Agreement shall not prevent the City, in subsequent actions applicable to the property, from applying new rules, regulations and policies that do not conflict with those rules, regulations and policies applicable to the property as set forth in the Development Agreement. A Development Agreement shall not prevent the City from denying or conditionally approving any subsequent land use project or authorization for the project on the basis of such rules, regulations, and policies. Unless otherwise specified in the Development Agreement, a Development Agreement shall not exempt the applicant from obtaining future discretionary land use approvals.

C.     State and Federal Rules and Regulations. In the event that any regulation or law of the State of California or the United States, enacted or interpreted after a Development Agreement has been entered into prevents or precludes compliance with one or more provisions of the Development Agreement, then the Development Agreement may be modified or suspended in the manner and pursuant to the procedures specified in the Development Agreement, as may be necessary to comply with such regulation or law. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.43.120 Enforcement
The procedures for enforcement, revision, cancellation, or termination of a Development Agreement specified in this chapter and in Government Code Section 65865.4 or any successor statute, are non-exclusive. A Development Agreement may be enforced, revised, cancelled or terminated by any manner otherwise provided by law or by the provisions of the Development Agreement. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

Chapter 17.44 AMENDMENTS TO THE GENERAL PLAN, ZONING CODE, AND ZONING MAP
17.44.010 Purpose
This chapter establishes procedures for consideration and review of amendments to the General Plan, Zoning Code, and/or Zoning Map, when there are compelling reasons to do so. More specifically, this chapter addresses:

A.    Amendments to the General Plan, to address changes in State or Federal law and problems and opportunities that were unanticipated at the time of adoption or the last amendment; and

B.     Amendments to the Zoning Code and Zoning Map, whenever the public necessity, convenience, general welfare, or good practice justify such amendment, consistent with the General Plan. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.44.020 Applicability
The procedures in this chapter shall apply to:

A.    All proposals to change the text of the General Plan and the maps that illustrate the application of its provisions; and

B.     All proposals to change the text of this Zoning Code or to revise a zone or boundary line shown on the Zoning Map. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.44.030 Review Authority
The Planning Commission shall act as the advisory body for all amendments to the General Plan, Zoning Code, and Zoning Map and provide recommendations to the City Council. The City Council shall act as the Review Authority, and after receiving recommendations from the Planning Commission, may adopt, reject, or modify all amendments to the General Plan, Zoning Code, and Zoning Map. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.44.040 Initiation of Amendment
An amendment to the General Plan, Zoning Code, or Zoning Map may be initiated by any qualified applicant identified in Section 17.35.020, Application Forms and Fees, the Community Development Director, or by a motion of the City Council or Planning Commission. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.44.050 Procedures
A.    Application. A qualified applicant shall submit an application accompanied by the required fee, pursuant to Chapter 17.35, Common Procedures. The Planning Division may require an applicant to submit such additional information and supporting data as considered necessary to process the application. The Planning Division may allow Amendments to the General Plan, Zoning Code, and Zoning Map to be processed concurrently with other applications.

B.     Staff Report. The Director shall prepare a report and recommendation to the Planning Commission on any amendment application. The report shall include, but is not limited to, a discussion of how the proposed amendment meets the criteria in Section 17.44.080, General Plan Consistency Required for Zoning Amendments (if applicable), as well as an environmental document prepared in compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). Applications involving projects for which an environmental document is required shall not be heard until the environmental assessment procedures required by CEQA are satisfied.

C.     Public Hearing and Notice. All Amendments to the General Plan, Zoning Code, and Zoning Map shall be referred to the Planning Commission, which shall conduct at least one public hearing on any proposed amendment. At least 10 days before the date of any public hearing, the Planning Division shall provide notice as provided for in Section 17.35.060, Public Notice. Notice of the hearing also shall be mailed or delivered to any local agency expected to provide essential facilities or services to the property that is the subject of the proposed amendment. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.44.060 Planning Commission Hearing and Recommendation
A.    Planning Commission Hearing. Before submitting a recommendation report to the City Council, the Planning Commission shall conduct at least one public hearing in accordance with Section 17.35.070, Conduct of Public Hearings.

B.     Recommendation to City Council. Following the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall make a recommendation on the proposed amendment to the City Council. Such recommendation shall include the reasons for the recommendation, findings related to Section 17.44.080, General Plan Consistency Required for Zoning Amendments (if applicable), and the relationship of the proposed amendment to other adopted documents. The recommendation shall be transmitted in the form of a Council memo, prepared by the Planning Division, with a copy of the approved minutes from the Planning Commission meeting.

1.     Approval. If the Planning Commission has recommended approval of the proposed amendment, the City Council is required to take final action pursuant to Section 17.44.070, City Council Hearing and Action.

2.     Denial. If the Planning Commission has recommended against the proposed amendment, the City Council is not required to take any further action unless an appeal is filed in accordance with Section 17.35.130, Appeals. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.44.070 City Council Hearing and Action
A.    City Council Hearing. After receiving the recommendation from the Planning Commission, the City Council shall hold a hearing in accordance with Section 17.35.070, Conduct of Public Hearings. The notice for the hearing shall include a summary of the Planning Commission recommendation.

B.     City Council Action. After the conclusion of the hearing, the City Council may approve, modify, or deny the proposed amendment. If the Council proposes any substantial revision not previously considered by the Planning Commission during its hearings, the proposed revision shall first be referred to the Planning Commission for report and recommendation, but the Planning Commission shall not be required to hold a public hearing. The failure of the Planning Commission to report within 45 days after the referral shall be deemed a recommendation for approval and the amendment shall be returned to Council for adoption. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.44.080 General Plan Consistency Required for Zoning Amendments
The Planning Commission shall not recommend and the City Council shall not approve a Zoning Amendment unless the proposed amendment is found to be consistent with the General Plan. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

Chapter 17.45 PRE-ZONING
17.45.010 Purpose
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a procedure for zoning property upon annexation. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.45.020 Applicability
Unincorporated territory adjoining the City may be pre-zoned for determining the zoning that will apply to such property upon annexation. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.45.030 Procedure
Zoning of property to be annexed shall be established through initiation and processing according to the procedures established under Chapter 17.44, Amendments to the General Plan, Zoning Code, and Zoning Map. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.45.040 Effective Date of Zoning and Time Limit
The zoning of the property to be annexed shall become effective at the time that annexation to the City becomes effective pursuant to Government Code Section 56000 et seq. If the subject area has not been annexed to the City within five years of the date of zoning approval, the zoning approval is subject to reconsideration. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

Chapter 17.46 ENFORCEMENT
17.46.010 Purpose
This chapter establishes the responsibilities of various departments, officials, and public employees of the City to enforce the requirements of this Zoning Code and establishes uniform procedures the City will use to identify, abate, remove, and enjoin uses, buildings, or structures that are deemed to be in violation of this title. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.46.020 Enforcement Responsibilities
All departments, officials and public employees of the City vested with the duty or authority to issue permits, certificates or licenses shall comply with the provisions of this title and shall issue no permit, certificate or license for uses, buildings or purposes which may be in conflict with the provisions of this title and any such permit, certificate or license issued in conflict with the provisions of this title, intentionally or otherwise, shall be null and void.

A.    Community Development Director. The Director shall enforce the provisions of this title pertaining to the use of any land or structure, bulk, height and land coverage of structures, open spaces about structures and the dimensions and area of sites upon which structures are located.

B.     Other Officials. Requirements pertaining to health and sanitation, fire protection and building code regulations shall be enforced by the respective agencies which have jurisdiction in such matters. Whenever there is a conflict between the provisions of this title and other City, State and Federal regulations, the more restrictive regulations apply. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.46.030 Revocation
Any permit granted under this title may be revoked in accordance with the provisions in Section 17.35.120, Revocation of Permits, if any of the conditions or terms of such permit are violated or if any law or ordinance is violated in connection therewith. Notwithstanding this provision, no lawful residential use can lapse regardless of the length of time of the vacancy. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.46.040 Nuisance Defined
Any building, structure, or planting set up, erected, constructed, altered, enlarged, converted, moved, or maintained contrary to the provisions of this title, any use of any land, building, or premises established, conducted, operated, or maintained contrary to the provisions of this title, and failure to comply with any of the conditions of a permit granted under this title is declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.46.050 Penalties
Any person, firm, or corporation, whether as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, violating or failing to comply with a mandatory requirement of this title shall be guilty of a misdemeanor but may be cited or charged, at the election of the enforcing officer or City Attorney, as an infraction. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished as set forth in Chapter 1.12, General Penalty, of the West Sacramento Municipal Code. A person, firm, or corporation shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each day during any portion of which any violation of this title is committed, continued or permitted by such person, firm or corporation, and shall be punished accordingly. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.46.060 Remedies
The remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive. Upon a finding of nuisance pursuant to Section 17.46.040, Nuisance Defined, and after giving the property owner an opportunity to cure the nuisance and determining that the nuisance still exists, the Planning Commission or City Council may impose any remedy available at law or in equity, which shall include, but is not limited to, any of the following or combination thereof:

A.    Ordering the cessation of the use in whole or in part;

B.     Imposing reasonable conditions upon any continued operation of the use, including those uses that constitute existing nonconforming uses;

C.     Requiring continued compliance with any conditions so imposed;

D.    Requiring the user to guarantee that such conditions shall in all respects be complied with; or

E.     Imposing additional conditions or ordering the cessation of the use in whole or in part upon finding of a nuisance. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.46.070 Nuisance Abatement
Notices of violation shall be provided and recorded and nuisances abated, according to the procedures of Title 19, Nuisance Abatement Code, of the West Sacramento Municipal Code. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

Division V: Terms and Definitions
Chapter 17.50 USE CLASSIFICATIONS
17.50.010 Residential Uses
Family Day Care. A day care facility licensed by the State of California, located in a residential unit where resident of the dwelling provides care and supervision for children under the age of 18 for periods of less than 24 hours a day.

Large. A facility that provides care for eight to 14 children, including children who reside at the home and are under the age of 10.

Small. A facility that provides care for seven or fewer children, including children who reside at the home and are under the age of 10.

Group Residential. Shared living quarters without separate kitchen or bathroom facilities for each room or unit, offered for rent for permanent or semi-transient residents on a weekly or longer basis. This classification includes rooming and boarding houses, dormitories and other types of organizational housing, private residential clubs, and extended stay hotels intended for long-term occupancy (30 days or more) but excludes hotels and motels, and residential care facilities.

Manufactured Home Park. A development designed and occupied by manufactured housing units including development with facilities and amenities used in common by occupants who rent, lease, or own spaces for manufactured housing units through a subdivision, cooperative, condominium or other form of resident ownership.

Residential Care Facilities. A facility licensed by the State of California to provide living accommodations, 24-hour care for persons requiring personal services, supervision, protection, or assistance with daily tasks. Amenities may include shared living quarters, with or without a private bathroom or kitchen facilities. This classification includes those both for and not-for-profit institutions but excludes supportive housing and transitional housing.

Large. A facility that is licensed by the State of California to provide care for more than six persons.

Small. A facility that is licensed by the State of California to provide care for six or fewer persons.

Residential Facility, Assisted Living. A facility that provides a combination of housing and supportive services for the elderly or functionally impaired, including personalized assistance, congregate dining, recreational, and social activities. These facilities may include medical services. Examples include assisted living facilities, retirement homes, and retirement communities. These facilities typically consist of individual units or apartments, with or without kitchen facility, and common areas and facilities. The residents in these facilities require varying levels of assistance.

Residential Housing Types.

Accessory Dwelling Unit. An attached or detached unit that is ancillary to the primary unit and has a kitchen, sleeping, and bathroom facilities located on a lot with one single-unit dwelling, where one of the units is owner occupied.

Multi-Unit Residential. Three or more attached or detached dwelling units on a single lot. Types of multi-unit residential include townhouses, multiple detached residential units, and apartment buildings.

Single-Unit Dwelling, Attached. A dwelling unit that is designed for occupancy by one household located on a separate lot from any other unit (except a second dwelling unit, where permitted), and is attached through common walls to one or more dwellings on abutting lots. An attached single-unit dwelling is sometimes called a “townhouse” or a “condominium.”

Single-Unit Dwelling, Detached. A dwelling unit that is designed for occupancy by one household with private yards on all sides and located on a separate lot from any other unit (except an accessory dwelling unit, where permitted). This classification includes individual manufactured housing units.

Two-Unit Dwelling. A residential building containing two dwelling units, both of which are located on a single parcel (also referred to as a “duplex” or “two-flat”). The dwelling units are attached and may be located on separate floors or side-by-side.

Single-Room Occupancy. A residential facility where living accommodations are individual secure rooms, with or without separate kitchen or bathroom facilities for each room, are rented to one- or two-person households for a weekly or monthly period of time. This use classification is distinct from a hotel or motel, which is a commercial use.

Supportive Housing. Dwelling units with no limit on length of stay, that are occupied by the target population as defined in subdivision (d) of Section 53260 of the California Health and Safety Code, and that are linked to onsite or offsite services that assist the supportive housing resident in retaining the housing, improving his or her health status, and maximizing his or her ability to live and, where possible, work in the community.

Transitional Housing. Transitional housing is housing that has a predetermined end point in time and operated under a program that requires the termination of assistance, in order to provide another eligible program recipient to the service. The program length is usually no less than six months. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.50.020 Public/Semi-Public Uses
Campground. An open-air facility, where recreational vehicle or camping spaces are rented, or held out for rent, for overnight stay in tents, trailers, or recreational vehicles for 30 consecutive days or less.

Colleges and Trade Schools. Institutions of higher education providing curricula of a general, religious, or professional nature, granting degrees and including junior colleges, business and computer schools, management training, technical and trade schools, however excluding personal instructional services such as music lessons.

Community Assembly. A facility for public or private meetings, including community centers, union halls, meeting halls, and other membership organizations. Included in this classification is the use of functionally related facilities for the use of members and attendees such as kitchens, multi-purpose rooms, classrooms and storage.

Cultural Institutions. An institution and/or associated facility engaged in activities to promote aesthetic and educational interest among the community that are open to the public on a regular basis. This classification includes performing arts centers for performances and events; spaces for display or preservation of objects of interest in the arts or sciences; libraries; museums; historical sites; aquariums; art galleries; and zoos and botanical gardens, all of which are public or private. This does not include schools or institutions of higher education providing curricula of a general nature.

Day Care Centers. Establishments providing non-medical care for persons on a less than 24-hour basis other than family day care. This classification includes nursery schools, preschools, and day care facilities for children or adults, and any other day care facility licensed by the State of California.

Emergency Shelter. Housing with minimal supportive services for homeless persons that is limited to occupancy of six months or less, as defined in Section 50801 of the California Health and Safety Code. Medical assistance, counseling, and meals may be provided.

Government Offices. Administrative, clerical, or public contact offices of a government agency, including postal facilities and courts, along with the storage and maintenance of vehicles. This classification excludes corporation yards, equipment service centers, and similar facilities that require maintenance and repair services and storage facilities for related vehicles and equipment (see Section 17.50.050, Public Works and Utilities).

Hospitals and Clinics. State-licensed facilities providing medical, surgical, psychiatric, or emergency medical services to sick or injured persons. This classification includes facilities for inpatient or outpatient treatment, including substance-abuse programs, as well as training, research, and administrative services for patients and employees. This classification excludes veterinaries and animal hospitals (see Section 17.50.030, Animal Care, Sales, and Services).

Clinic. A facility providing medical, psychiatric, or surgical service for sick or injured persons exclusively on an out-patient basis including emergency treatment, diagnostic services, administration, and related services to patients who are not lodged overnight. Services may be available without a prior appointment. This classification includes licensed facilities offering substance abuse treatment, blood banks and plasma centers, and emergency medical services offered exclusively on an out-patient basis. This classification does not include private medical and dental offices that typically require appointments and are usually smaller scale.

Hospitals. A facility providing medical, psychiatric, or surgical services for sick or injured persons, primarily on an inpatient basis, and including supplementary facilities for outpatient and emergency treatment, diagnostic services, training, research, administration, and services to patients, employees, or visitors. The institutions are to be licensed by the State of California to provide surgical and medical services.

Skilled Nursing Facility. A State-licensed facility or a distinct part of a hospital that provides continuous skilled nursing and supportive care to patients whose primary need requires the availability of skilled nursing care on an extended basis. The facility provides 24-hour inpatient care and, at a minimum, includes physician, nursing, dietary, pharmaceutical services and an activity program. Intermediate care programs that provide skilled nursing and supportive care for patients on a less-than-continuous basis are classified as skilled nursing facilities.

Instructional Services. Establishments that offer specialized programs in personal growth and development such as music, martial arts, vocal, fitness and dancing instruction.

Park and Recreation Facilities. Parks, playgrounds, recreation facilities, trails, wildlife preserves, and related open spaces, all of which are noncommercial. This classification includes playing fields, courts, gymnasiums, swimming pools, picnic facilities, tennis courts, golf courses, and botanical gardens, as well as related food concessions or community centers within the facilities.

Parking Lots and Structures. Surface lots and structures offering parking for a fee when such use is not incidental to another on-site activity.

Public Safety Facilities. Facilities providing public-safety and emergency services, including police and fire protection and emergency medical services, with incidental storage, training and maintenance facilities.

Schools. Facilities for primary or secondary education, including public schools, charter schools, and private and parochial schools having curricula comparable to that required in the public schools of the State of California.

Social Service Facilities. Facilities providing a variety of supportive services for disabled and homeless individuals and other targeted groups on a less than 24-hour basis. Examples of services provided are counseling, meal programs, personal storage lockers, showers, instructional programs, television rooms, and meeting spaces. This classification is distinguished from licensed day care centers (see Day Care Centers), clinics, and emergency shelters providing 24-hour care (see Emergency Shelter).

Tutoring Facilities. Facilities offering academic instruction to individuals or to groups in a classroom setting where an adult accompanies a minor. Facilities where minors are not accompanied by adults are classified as day care centers. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

17.50.030 Commercial Uses
Adult Entertainment. Any business or entertainment which is conducted exclusively for the patronage of adults and as to which minors are specifically excluded from patronage, either by law and/or operators of such business, and which is characterized by an emphasis on “specified sexual activities” and/or specified anatomical areas. Adult entertainment also includes any adult motion picture theater, adult bookstore/adult video store/adult novelty store, adult cabaret, adult dance studio, adult hotel or motel, adult theater, sexual encounter establishment, nude modeling studio, adult tanning salon, sex supermarket/sex mini-mall, and any other business or establishment that, on a regular and substantial basis, offers its patrons entertainment or services which involve, depict, describe, or relate to “specified sexual activities” and/or “specified anatomical areas.”

Animal Care, Sales, and Services. Retail sales and services related to the boarding, grooming, and care of household pets including:

Animal Sales and Grooming. Retail sales of animals and/or services, including grooming, for animals on a commercial basis. Typical uses include dog bathing and clipping salons, pet grooming shops, and pet stores and shops. This classification excludes dog walking and similar pet care services not carried out at a fixed location and excludes pet supply stores that do not sell animals or provide on-site animal services.

Boarding/Kennels. A commercial, non-profit, or governmental facility for keeping, boarding, training, breeding or maintaining dogs, cats, or other household pets not owned by the kennel owner or operator. Typical uses include pet clinics, pet day care, and animal shelters, but exclude pet shops and animal hospitals that provide 24-hour accommodation of animals receiving medical or grooming service.

Veterinary Services. Veterinary services for small animals. This classification allows 24-hour accommodation of animals receiving medical services but does not include kennels.

Automobile/Vehicle Sales and Services. Retail or wholesale businesses that sell, rent, and/or repair automobiles, boats, recreational vehicles, trucks, vans, trailers, and motorcycles including the following:

Automobile Rentals. Establishment providing for the rental of automobiles. Typical uses include car rental agencies.

Automobile/Vehicle Repair, Major. Repair of automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, motor homes, boats and recreational vehicles, generally on an overnight basis that may include disassembly, removal or replacement of major components such as engines, drive trains, transmissions or axles; automotive body and fender work, vehicle painting or other operations that generate excessive noise, objectionable odors or hazardous materials, and towing services. This classification excludes vehicle dismantling or salvaging and tire retreading or recapping.

Automobile/Vehicle Sales and Leasing. Sale or lease, retail or wholesale, of automobiles, light trucks, motorcycles, motor homes, and trailers, together with associated repair services and parts sales, but excluding body repair and painting. Typical uses include automobile dealers and recreational vehicle sales agencies.

Automobile/Vehicle Service and Repair, Minor. The service and repair of automobiles, light-duty trucks, boats, and motorcycles, including the incidental sale, installation, and servicing of related equipment and parts. This classification includes the replacement of small automotive parts and liquids as an accessory use to a gasoline sales station or automotive accessories and supply store, and smog checks, tire sales and installation, auto radio/electronics installation, auto air conditioning/heater service, and quick-service oil, tune-up and brake and muffler shops where repairs are made or service provided in enclosed bays and no vehicles are stored overnight.

Fueling Stations. Establishments primarily engaged in retailing automotive fuels or retailing these fuels in combination with activities, such as providing minor automobile/vehicle repair services; selling automotive oils, replacement parts, and accessories; and/or providing incidental food and retail services. This classification includes “mini-marts” and/or convenience stores that sell products, merchandise, or services that are ancillary to the primary use related to the operation of motor vehicles where such sale is by means other than vending machines.

Large Vehicle and Equipment Sales, Service and Rental. Sales, servicing, rental, fueling, and washing of large trucks, trailers, tractors, and other equipment used for construction, moving, agricultural, or landscape gardening activities.

Towing and Impound. Establishments primarily engaged in towing light or heavy motor vehicles, both local and long distance. These establishments may provide incidental services, such as vehicle storage and emergency road repair services (for automobile dismantling, see Section 17.50.040, Salvage and Wrecking).

Washing. Washing, waxing, or cleaning of automobiles or similar light vehicles.

Banks and Financial Institutions.

Banks and Credit Unions. Financial institutions providing retail banking services. This classification includes only those institutions serving walk-in customers or clients, including banks, savings and loan institutions, and credit unions, but excluding check-cashing businesses.

Check-Cashing Businesses. Establishments that, for compensation, engage in the business of cashing checks, warrants, drafts, money orders, or other commercial paper serving the same purpose. This classification also includes the business of deferred deposits, whereby the check casher refrains from depositing a personal check written by a customer until a specific date pursuant to a written agreement as provided in Civil Code Section 1789.33. Check-cashing businesses do not include State- or Federally-chartered banks, savings associations, credit unions, or industrial loan companies. They also do not include retail sellers engaged primarily in the business of selling consumer goods, such as consumables to retail buyers, that cash checks or issue money order incidental to their main purpose or business.

Business Services. Establishments providing goods and services to other businesses on a fee or contract basis, including printing and copying, blueprint services, advertising and mailing, equipment rental and leasing, office security, custodial services, photofinishing, model building, taxi or delivery services with two or fewer fleet vehicles on site.

Cannabis Retailer, Microbusiness, or Dispensary. Any facility or location, whether fixed or mobile, where cannabis is cultivated, provided, sold, made available, or otherwise distributed, as defined in Division 10 of the Business and Professions Code and Chapter 6, Article 2 and 2.5 of the Health and Safety Code.

Commercial Entertainment and Recreation. Provision of participant or spectator entertainment to the public. These classifications may include restaurants, snack bars, and other incidental food and beverage services to patrons.

Cinema/Theaters. Any facility for the indoor display of films and motion pictures on single or multiple screens. This classification may include incidental food and beverage service to patrons as well as auditoriums within buildings.

Indoor Sports and Recreation. Establishments providing predominantly participant sports, indoor amusement and entertainment services conducted within an enclosed building, including coin-operated electronic amusement centers. Typical uses include bowling alleys, billiard parlors, card rooms, health clubs, ice- and roller-skating rinks, indoor racquetball courts, athletic clubs, and physical fitness centers.

Outdoor Entertainment. Predominantly spectator uses, conducted in open or partially enclosed or screened facilities. Typical uses include amusement and theme parks, sports stadiums and arenas, racetracks, amphitheaters, and drive-in theaters.

Outdoor Sports and Recreation. Predominantly spectator sports conducted in open or partially enclosed or screened facilities. Typical uses include driving ranges, golf courses, miniature golf courses, tennis clubs, outdoor batting cages, swimming pools, archery ranges, and riding stables.

Drive-Through Facility. A motor vehicle drive-through facility which is a commercial building or structure or portion thereof which is designed or used to provide goods or services to the occupants of motor vehicles. It includes, but is not limited to, banks and other financial institutions, fast food establishments, and film deposit/pick-up establishments, but shall not include drive-in movies, service stations, or car-wash operations.

Eating and Drinking Establishments. Businesses primarily engaged in serving prepared food and/or beverages for consumption on or off the premises.

Bars/Night Clubs/Lounges. Businesses serving beverages for consumption on the premises as a primary use, including on-sale service of alcohol including beer, wine, and mixed drinks. This use includes tasting rooms and micro-breweries where alcoholic beverages are sold and consumed on site and any beverage production or distilling, and food service is subordinate to the sale of alcoholic beverages.

Restaurant. Establishments where food and beverages are served to patrons on-site or off-site, including full-service, limited-service, and take-out/delivery businesses. This classification includes brewpubs manufacturing 5,000 barrels per year or less, cafes, coffee shops, delicatessens, fast-food businesses, and bakeries that have tables for on-site consumption of products. It excludes catering services and commercial kitchens that do not sell food or beverages for on-site consumption.

Farmer’s Markets. Temporary but recurring outdoor retail sales of food, plants, flowers, and products such as jellies, breads, and meats that are predominantly grown or produced by vendors who sell them.

Food Preparation. Businesses preparing and/or packaging food primarily for off-site consumption, excluding those of an industrial character in terms of processes employed, waste produced, water used, and traffic generation. Typical uses include caterers and commercial kitchens.

Funeral Parlors and Interment Services. An establishment primarily engaged in the provision of services, involving the care, preparation, or disposition of human remains and conducting memorial services. Typical uses include a crematory, columbarium, mausoleum, or mortuary.

Lodging. An establishment providing overnight lodging to transient patrons. These establishments may provide additional services, such as conference and meeting rooms, restaurants, bars, or recreation facilities available to guests or to the public. This use classification includes motor lodges, motels, extended-stay hotels, and tourist courts.

Hotels. An establishment providing overnight lodging to transient patrons where rooms open only to the interior of the building. Hotels may provide additional services, such as conference and meeting rooms, restaurants, bars, or recreation facilities available to guests or to the public.

Motels. An establishment providing overnight lodging to transient patrons designed primarily for motorists, typically with parking directly outside of room doors. Rooms may open to the exterior of the building. Motels may provide recreation facilities available to guests but generally do not provide conference and meeting rooms, restaurants, or bars.

Short-Term Rental. The rental of any structure or any portion of any structure for occupancy for dwelling, lodging, or sleeping purposes for 30 consecutive calendar days or less in duration.

Maintenance and Repair Services. Establishments engaged in the maintenance or repair of office machines, household appliances, furniture, and similar items. This classification excludes maintenance and repair of motor vehicles (see Automotive/Vehicle Sales and Services) and personal apparel (see Personal Services: General Personal Services).

Mobile Vendor. A self-contained truck or trailer or non-motorized push cart that is readily movable without disassembling, and is used to sell merchandise, prepare and serve food and beverages, or provide other services.

Nurseries and Garden Centers. Any establishment(s) primarily engaged in retailing nursery and garden products, such as trees, shrubs, plants, seeds, bulbs, and sod that are predominantly grown elsewhere. These establishments may sell a limited amount of a product they grow themselves. This classification includes commercial and wholesale greenhouses and nurseries offering plants for sale.

Offices. Offices of firms, organizations, or public agencies providing professional, executive, management, administrative or design services, such as accounting, architectural, computer software design, engineering, graphic design, interior design, investment, insurance, and legal offices, excluding banks and savings and loan associations with retail banking services (see Banks and Financial Institutions). This classification also includes offices where medical and dental services are provided by physicians, dentists, chiropractors, acupuncturists, optometrists, and similar medical professionals, including medical/dental laboratories within medical office buildings, but excludes clinics or independent research laboratory facilities (see Section 17.50.040, Research and Development) and hospitals.

Business, Professional, and Technology. Offices of firms, organizations, or agencies providing professional, executive, management, or administrative services, such as accounting, architectural, computer software design, engineering, graphic design, interior design, legal, and tax preparation offices.

Medical and Dental. Offices providing consultation, diagnosis, therapeutic, preventive, or corrective personal-treatment services by doctors and dentists; medical and dental laboratories that see patients; and similar practitioners of medical and healing arts for humans licensed for such practice by the State of California. Incidental medical and/or dental research within the office is considered part of the office use if it supports the on-site patient services.

Personal Services.

General Personal Services. An establishment providing non-medical services to individuals as a primary use, of personal convenience, as opposed to products that are sold to individual consumers, or from/by companies. Personal services include barber and beauty shops, shoe and luggage repair, photographers, laundry and cleaning services and pick-up stations, copying, repair and fitting of clothes, and similar services.

Fortunetelling. Any place of business where any person allows or professes to carry on, engage in or practice the art or transaction of palmistry, fortunetelling, clairvoyance, crystal gazing, seancing, numerology, mediumship, tarot-card reading, past-life regression, prophecy, phrenology or divination for personal gain or other similar activity.

Massage Establishments. Any establishment having a fixed place of business where any person engages in or carries on any method of pressure on or friction against, or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating, or stimulating of the external parts of the body with the hands or with the aid of any mechanical electrical apparatus or appliances with or without such supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powder, creams, lotions, ointments, or other similar preparations commonly used in this practice. Such establishment shall have health enhancement as part of its purpose. Exempted from this definition are massage therapists operating in conjunction with and on the same premises as a physician, surgeon, chiropractor, osteopath, nurse or any physical therapist (State-licensed professions or vocations) who are duly State-licensed to practice their respective professions in the State of California.

Tattoo or Body Modification Parlor. An establishment whose principal business activity is one or more of the following: (1) using ink or other substances that result in the permanent coloration of the skin using needles or other instruments designed to contact or puncture the skin; or (2) creation of an opening in the body of a person for the purpose of inserting jewelry or other decoration.

Retail Sales.

Building Materials Sales and Services. Retail sales or rental of building supplies or equipment. This classification includes lumber yards, tool and equipment sales or rental establishments, and includes establishments devoted principally to taxable retail sales to individuals for their own use. This definition does not include construction and material yards, hardware stores less than 10,000 square feet in floor area, or plant nurseries.

Convenience Markets. Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of frequently or recurrently needed small personal items or services for residents within a reasonable walking distance. These include various general retail sales and personal services of an appropriate size and scale to meet the above criteria. Typical uses include neighborhood grocery stores, convenience markets, and drugstores.

Food and Beverage Sales. Retail sales of food and beverages primarily for off-site preparation and consumption. Typical uses include food markets, groceries, liquor stores, meat markets and butcher shops, and retail bakeries.

General Retail. The retail sale or rental of merchandise not specifically listed under another use classification. This classification includes retail establishments with 25,000 square feet or less of sales area; including department stores, clothing stores, furniture stores, pet supply stores, small hardware stores (with 10,000 square feet or less of floor area), and businesses retailing the following goods: toys, hobby materials, handcrafted items, jewelry, cameras, photographic supplies and services (including portraiture and retail photo processing), medical supplies and equipment, pharmacies, electronic equipment, sporting goods, kitchen utensils, hardware, appliances, antiques, art galleries, art supplies and services, paint and wallpaper, carpeting and floor covering, office supplies, bicycles, video rental, and new automotive parts and accessories (excluding vehicle service and installation). Retail sales may be combined with other services such as office machine, computer, electronics, and similar small-item repairs.

Secondhand Store. Any establishment whose business includes buying, selling, trading, selling on consignment, or auctioning secondhand tangible personal property. Tangible personal property shall be defined as stated in the California Business and Professions Code. Acceptance of donated material and goods are not allowed. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.50.040 Industrial Uses
Cannabis-Related Industrial.

Cannabis Indoor Commercial Cultivation Facility. A building or portion of a building used for a business involving the wholly indoor commercial cultivation of cannabis plants within California in compliance with the Medicinal and Adult-Use Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act (the “MAUCRSA,” Business and Professions Code Section 26000, et seq.).

Cannabis Laboratory Materials Testing Facility. A building, or portion thereof, used for a business involving the materials testing, investigation, scientific research, or experimentation of medicinal or nonmedicinal cannabis or cannabis products within California in compliance with the Medicinal and Adult-Use Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act (the “MAUCRSA,” Business and Professions Code Section 26000, et seq.).

Cannabis Manufacturing Facility. A building, or portion thereof, used for a business involving the manufacture for off-site sale of cannabis products within California in compliance with the Medicinal and Adult-Use Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act (the “MAUCRSA,” Business and Professions Code Section 26000, et seq.).

Wholesale Cannabis Logistics, Distribution, and Transportation Facility. A building, or portion thereof, used for a business involving the procurement, sale, and transport of cannabis and cannabis products within California in compliance with the Medicinal and Adult-Use Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act (the “MAUCRSA,” Business and Professions Code Section 26000, et seq.).

Cargo Handling. Facilities and mobile equipment for loading, unloading, storage, cleaning, and processing of bulk storage and container cargo to and from vessels, rail cars, and trucks.

Construction and Material Yards. Storage of construction materials or equipment on a site other than a construction site.

Custom and Artisan Manufacturing. Any establishment primarily engaged in on-site production or fabrication of goods by hand manufacturing or artistic endeavor, which involves only the use of hand tools or small mechanical equipment, and which may include incidental instruction or direct sales for consumers. Typical uses include ceramic studios, fabric and needleworking, leather working, metalworking, glassworking, candle-making shops, woodworking, and custom jewelry manufacturers.

Donation Center/Station. A facility where materials and goods are donated, accepted for sale on consignment or auction, or otherwise dropped off. Includes sorting and distribution of goods and materials.

Food and Beverage Manufacturing. Establishments engaged in the production, processing, packaging, or manufacturing of food or beverage products and any instruction, direct sales, or on-site consumption are incidental to the food or beverage production activity.

Large Scale. Large-scale production, packaging, processing, preparation, or manufacturing of a food, beverage, or ingredient used or intended for use for human digestion in a facility over 10,000 square feet. This classification includes uses such as bottling of alcoholic or nonalcoholic beverages; canning, bottle, processing, and packaging of food; coffee roasting; food products; oleomargarine; brewing; and distillation of liquor and spirits. This definition does not include slaughtering of animals or fowl, or direct retail sales.

Small Scale. A small-scale food and beverage products manufacturing and distribution establishment located in facilities less than 10,000 square feet in size. Examples include small coffee roasters, micro-breweries (manufacturing 15,000 barrels per year or less), micro-distilleries (manufacturing 10,000 barrels per year or less), wine manufacturing, meat or fish processing, small-batch candy shops, cheese makers, wholesale bakeries, and brew-on-premises stores which provide ingredients and equipment for customers to manufacture their own product.

General Industrial. Establishments engaged in manufacturing of non-edible products from extracted or raw materials or recycled or secondary materials, or bulk storage and handling of such products and materials. Production typically involves some transformation by way of heating, chilling, combining, or through a chemical or biochemical reaction or alteration. Toxic, hazardous, or explosive materials may be produced or used in large quantities as part of the manufacturing process. These industrial activities may produce impacts on nearby properties, such as noise, gas, odor, dust, or vibration. This classification includes manufacturing for biomass energy conversion, commercial advertising, cosmetics and perfumes, electrical appliances and explosives, film and photographic processing plants, apparel and textile mills, leather and allied products manufacturing, wood and paper, glass and glass products, chemical products, medical/pharmaceutical products, plastics and rubber, nonmetallic minerals, primary and fabricated metal products, and automotive and heavy equipment.

Light Industrial. Establishments engaged in manufacturing of non-edible products and finished parts primarily from previously-prepared materials by means of physical assembly or reshaping. These industrial activities produce limited impacts on nearby properties, such as noise, gas, odor, or vibration. This classification includes uses where retail sales are clearly incidental to an industrial or manufacturing use; commercial laundries and dry-cleaning plants; monument works; printing, engraving and publishing; computer and electronic product manufacturing; furniture and related product manufacturing; and industrial services.

Research and Development. A facility for the scientific research and the design, development, and testing of electrical, electronic, magnetic, optical, pharmaceutical, chemical, and biotechnology components and products in advance of product manufacturing. This classification includes assembly of related products from parts produced off site, where the manufacturing activity is secondary to the research and development activities, in addition to involving the production of experimental products.

Salvage and Wrecking. Storage and dismantling of vehicles and equipment for sale of parts, as well as their collection, storage, exchange or sale of goods including, but not limited to, any used building materials, used containers or steel drums, used tires, and similar or related articles or property.

Warehousing, Storage, and Wholesaling and Distribution. Storage and distribution facilities without sales to the public on-site or direct public access except for public storage in small individual space exclusively and directly accessible to a specific tenant.

Indoor Warehousing, Storage, and Wholesaling and Distribution. Indoor storage and/or sale of goods to other firms for resale; storage of goods for transfer to retail outlets of the same firm; or storage and sale of materials and supplies used in production or operation, including janitorial and restaurant supplies. This use includes cold storage, freight moving and storage, warehouses, and wholesalers. Wholesalers are primarily engaged in business-to-business sales but may sell to individual consumers through mail or internet orders. They normally operate from a warehouse or office having little or no display of merchandise and are not designed to solicit walk-in traffic. This classification does not include wholesale sale of building materials (see Section 17.50.030, Retail Sales: Building Materials Sales and Services) or any use that involves cannabis.

Outdoor Storage. Storage of commercial goods in open lots.

Personal Storage. Facilities offering enclosed storage with individual access for personal effects and household goods including mini-warehouses and mini-storage. This use excludes workshops, hobby shops, manufacturing, or commercial activity. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.50.050 Transportation, Communication, and Utility Uses
Airports and Heliports. Facilities for the takeoff and landing of airplanes and helicopters, including runways, helipads, aircraft storage buildings, public terminal building and parking, air freight terminal, baggage handling facility, aircraft hangar and public transportation and related facilities, including bus operations, servicing and storage. Also includes support activities such as fueling and maintenance, storage, airport operations and air traffic control, incidental retail sales, coffee shops and snack shops and airport administrative facilities, including airport offices, terminals, operations buildings, communications equipment, buildings and structures, control towers, lights, and other equipment and structures required by the United States Government and/or the State for the safety of aircraft operations.

Communication Facilities. Facilities for the provision of broadcasting and other information-relay services using electronic and telephonic mechanisms.

Facilities within Buildings. Includes radio, television or recording studios, and telephone switching centers.

Telecommunication. Broadcasting and other communication services accomplished through electronic or telephonic mechanisms, as well as structures and equipment cabinets designed to support one or more reception/transmission systems. Typical uses include wireless telecommunication towers and facilities, radio towers, television towers, telephone exchange/microwave relay towers, cellular telephone transmission/personal communications systems towers, and associated equipment cabinets and enclosures.

Docking Facilities. Any property and improvement facilities for the short-term loading, unloading and servicing of freight and passenger vessels.

Freight/Trucking Facilities. Any property and improvements used for freight, courier, and postal services; freight transfer truck terminals; or for the operations of a “common carrier trucking company,” including the parking, or servicing, or repairing, or storage of trucks, truck tractors, and/or truck trailers.

Light Fleet-Based Services. Passenger transportation services, local delivery services, medical transport, and other businesses that rely on fleets of three or more vehicles with rated capacities less than 10,000 pounds. This classification includes parking, dispatching, and offices for taxicab and limousine operations, ambulance services, non-emergency medical transport, local messenger and document delivery services, home cleaning services, and similar businesses.

Marinas. Facilities that provides a range of services related to the use of boats and other watercraft and commercial and recreational fishing. Services may include, but are not limited to, boat moorings; sales, storage, construction, repair, and maintenance of boats, boat parts, and other marine-related items; marine fueling stations and washing facilities; seafood processing, boat and watercraft charter operations; offices; bait and tackle shops; and hardware sales.

Public Works and Utilities. Generating plants, electric substations, solid waste collection, including transfer stations and materials recovery facilities, solid waste treatment and disposal, water or wastewater treatment plants, and similar facilities of public agencies or public utilities.

Rail Car Loading Facility. A facility which involves the loading or unloading of goods from a rail car or train.

Recycling Facility. A facility for receiving, temporarily storing, transferring and/or processing materials for recycling, reuse, or final disposal. This use classification does not include waste transfer facilities that operate as materials recovery, recycling, and solid waste transfer operations and are classified as utilities.

Recycling Collection Facility. An incidental use that serves as a neighborhood drop-off point for the temporary storage of recyclable or reusable materials but where the processing and sorting of such items is not conducted on site.

Large Collection Facility. Large collection facilities may occupy an area of more than 500 square feet and may include permanent structures.

Small Collection Facility. Small collection facilities occupy no more than 500 square feet and may include:

A “mobile recycling unit,” which means an automobile, truck, trailer or van, licensed by the Department of Motor Vehicles, and used for the collection of recyclable materials. A mobile recycling unit also means the bins, boxes or containers transported by trucks, vans or trailers, and used for the collection of recyclable materials;

Bulk reverse vending machines or a grouping of reverse vending machines occupying more than 50 square feet;

Booth-type units which may include permanent structures; and

Unattended containers placed for the donation of recyclable materials.

Recycling Processing Facility. A facility that receives, sorts, stores and/or processes recyclable materials.

Heavy Processing Facility. Any processing facility other than a light processing facility.

Light Processing Facility. A light processing facility occupies an area of under 45,000 square feet of gross collection, processing and storage area and has up to an average of two outbound truck shipments per day. Light processing facilities are limited to baling, briquetting, crushing, compacting, grinding, shredding and sorting of source-separated recyclable materials and repairing of reusable materials sufficient to qualify as a certified processing facility. A light processing facility shall not shred, compact, or bale ferrous metals other than food and beverage containers.

Reverse Vending Machine. An automated mechanical device that accepts, sorts and processes recyclable materials and issues a cash refund or a redeemable credit slip. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.50.060 Agricultural and Extractive Uses
Agriculture.

Animal Production. Commercial facilities engaged in the breeding, raising, feeding, and trans-shipping of livestock for producing animal products, animal increase, or value increase. The uses set forth in this section shall not include stockyards, slaughterhouses, hog farms, fertilizer works or plants for the reduction of animal matter.

Crop Production. The cultivation of tree, vine, field, forage, and other plant crops intended to provide food or fibers. The classification excludes wholesale or retail nurseries (see Section 17.50.030, Nurseries and Garden Centers).

Horticulture Production. Commercial facilities for growing flowers, trees and ornamentals. The classification excludes wholesale or retail nurseries (see Section 17.50.030, Nurseries and Garden Centers).

Mineral Extraction. The extraction of minerals, including mining, digging, dredging, drilling and pumping of water, gases, minerals or combustibles.

Urban Agriculture.

Aquaculture. The cultivation of marine or freshwater fish, shellfish, or plants under controlled conditions. Aquaculture includes aquaponics which integrates aquaculture with hydroponics by recycling the waste products from fish to fertilize hydroponically growing plants.

Community Garden. Use of land for and limited to the cultivation of herbs, fruits, flowers, or vegetables, including the cultivation and tillage of soil and the production, cultivation, growing, and harvesting of any agricultural, floricultural, or horticultural commodity, by several individuals or households.

Market Garden. The primary use of a site for cultivation of fruits, vegetables, flowers, fiber, nuts, seeds, or culinary herbs for sale or donation of its produce to the public.

Private Garden. A private food-producing garden that is accessory to the primary use of the site. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

Chapter 17.51 LIST OF TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
17.51.010 List of Terms
Abutting

Change of Use

Access

City

Accessory Building

City Council

Accessory Structure

Collector Roadway

Accessory Use

Commercial Vehicle

Adjacent

Commission

Adjoining

Community Development Director

A-Framed Sign

Compatible

Agent or Authorized Agent

Conditionally Permitted

Aggrieved Person

Conditional Use

Alley

Condition of Approval

Alteration

County

Applicant

Deck

Architectural Feature

Demolition

Arterial Roadway

Density

Attached Building or Structure

Detached Building

Awning

Detached Structure

Balcony

Development

Bedroom

Development Agreement

Block

Development Permit

Buffer

Director

Building

District

Building, Accessory

Driveway

Building, Attached

Dwelling Unit

Building, Detached

Easement

Building, Main

Effective Date

Building Code

Electrical Code

Building Face

Emergency

Building Footprint

Emergency Vehicle

Building Frontage

Environmental Impact Report (EIR)

Building Height

Environmental Review

Building Site

Equipment

California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)

Erect

Camper

Façade

Canopy

Family

Carport

Feasible

Fence

Reversed Corner Lot

Firearms

Through Lot

Floor Area

Lot Area

Floor Area Ratio (FAR)

Lot Coverage

Foot-Candle

Lot Depth

Footprint

Lot Frontage

Freeway

Lot Line

Frontage, Building

Front Lot Line

Frontage, Street

Interior Lot Line

Garage

Rear Lot Line

General Plan

Side Lot Line

Glare

Street Side Lot Line

Government Code

Lot, Nonconforming

Grade

Lot Width

Grade, Existing or Natural

Maintenance and Repair

Grade, Finished

Municipal Code

Ground Floor

Noise

Hazardous Materials

Nonconforming Building

Heat

Nonconforming Lot

Height

Nonconforming Structure

Home Occupation

Nonconforming Use

Household

On-Site

Household Pets

Outdoor Storage

Illegal Use

Owner

Impervious Surface

Parapet

Improvement

Parking Area

Incidental Use

Passenger Vehicle

Income Levels

Permitted Use

Extremely Low Income Household

Person

Very Low Income Household

Planning Commission

Low Income Household

Planning Division

Moderate Income Household

Pre-Existing

Intensity of Use

Primary Use

Intersection, Street

Project

Kitchen

Property Line

Landscaping

Public Resources Code

Land Use

Public Works Director

Light Fixture

Qualified Applicant

Liquor Sales

Reasonable Accommodation

Lot

Review Authority

Abutting Lot

Right-of-Way

Corner Lot

Roofline

Flag Lot

Senior Citizen

Interior Lot

Setback

Key Lot

Sidewalk

Sign Terms. See Chapter 17.29, Signs

Site

Agricultural Directional Sign

Soil

Animated Sign

Solar Reflectance Index

Awning Sign

Specific Plan

Balloon

State

Banner Sign

Story

Billboard

Street

Canopy Sign

Street Line

Commercial Message

Structure

Copy

Structure, Accessory

Damaged Sign

Structure, Attached

Directional Sign

Structure, Detached

Electronic Copy

Structure, Main

Flag

Structure, Nonconforming

Freestanding Sign

Structure, Temporary

Freeway Information Sign

Swimming Pool

General Advertising for Hire

Tandem Parking

Government Sign

Telecommunication Terms

Graffiti

Antenna

High-Rise Building Identification Sign

Co-Location

Illuminated Sign

Satellite Dish

Inflatable Sign

Support Equipment

Internally Illuminated Sign

Telecommunication Facility

Master Sign Program

Tenant

Memorial Sign

Trailer

Mobile Billboard

Use

Moving Sign

Use, Accessory

Non-Commercial Message

Use, Incidental

Nonconforming Sign

Use, Nonconforming

Outdoor Advertising Structure

Use, Permitted

Pennant

Use, Primary

Permanent Sign

Use Classification

Portable Sign

Use Permit

Projecting Sign

Use Type

Real Property Event Sign

Utilities

Real Property Kiosk

Variance

Real Property Sign

Vehicle

Roof Sign

Vibration

Sign

Visible

Sign Area

Wall

Sign Face

Yard

Temporary Sign

Front Yard

Traffic Sign

Interior Side Yard

Wall Sign

Rear Yard

Window Sign

Required Yard

Zoning Administrator

Side Yard

Zone

Street Side Yard

(Ord. 19-1 § 3)

 

17.51.020 Definitions
A.    “A” Terms.

Abutting. Having a common boundary.

Access. The place or way through which pedestrians and/or vehicles must have safe, adequate, and usable ingress and egress to a property.

Accessory Building. See “Building, Accessory.”

Accessory Structure. See “Structure, Accessory.”

Accessory Use. See “Use, Accessory.”

Adjacent. Directly abutting, having a common boundary or property line, or contiguous to.

Adjoining. See “Abutting.”

Agent or Authorized Agent. Any person who can show certified written proof that he or she is representing and acting in the place of another person or individual.

Aggrieved Person. Any person who, in person or through a representative, appeared at a City public hearing in conjunction with a decision or action appealed or who, by other appropriate means prior to a hearing, informed the local government of the nature of his or her concerns or who, for good cause, was unable to do either.

Alley. A public or private way, not more than 30 feet wide, reserved primarily for secondary vehicular access to the rear or side of properties abutting on a street.

Alteration. Any change, addition, or modification that changes the exterior architectural appearance or materials of a structure or object. Alteration includes changes in exterior surfaces, changes in materials, additions, remodels, demolitions, and relocation of buildings or structures, but excludes ordinary maintenance and repairs.

Applicant. The person, partnership, corporation, or State or local government agency applying for a permit, certificate, zoning approval, or other entitlement.

Architectural Feature. An exterior building feature, including a roof, walls, windows, doors, porches, posts, pillars, recesses or projections, and exterior articulation or walls, and other building surfaces.

Arterial Roadway. A street classified as an arterial in the Transportation Element of the General Plan.

Attached Building or Structure. See “Building, Attached” and “Structure, Attached.”

Awning. An architectural projection that provides weather protection, identity, or decoration, and is wholly supported by the building to which it is attached. An awning is typically constructed of non-rigid materials on a supporting framework which projects from and is supported by the exterior wall of a building.

B.     “B” Terms.

Balcony. A platform that projects from the wall of a building 30 inches or more above grade that is accessible from the building’s interior, is not accessible from the ground, and is not enclosed by walls on more than three sides.

Bedroom. Any room having the potential of being a bedroom and meeting the standards of the Building Code as a sleeping room.

Block. All property fronting on one side of a street between an intersection and intercepting streets or between a street and a waterway, dead-end street, major easement or right-of-way, or unsubdivided land. An intercepting street shall only determine the boundary of a block on the side of the street which it intercepts.

Buffer. An open area or barrier used to separate potentially incompatible activities and/or development features; for example, a required setback to separate an area of development from environmentally sensitive habitat, to reduce or eliminate the effects of the development on the habitat.

Building. Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and intended for the shelter, housing, or enclosure of any individual, animal, process, equipment, goods, or materials.

Building, Accessory. A detached, subordinate building used only as incidental to the main building on the same lot.

Building, Attached. A building which has a common wall with another building or structure.

Building, Detached. A building which does not have a common wall with another building or structure.

Building, Main. A building in which the primary use of the parcel on which it is located is conducted.

Building Code. Any ordinance or regulations of the City governing the type and method of construction of buildings and structures, including sign structures and any amendments thereto and any substitute therefor including, but not limited to, the California Building Code and other State-adopted uniform codes.

Building Face. The general outer surface of the structure or walls of a building. Where bay windows or pillars project beyond the walls, the outer surface of the windows or pillars is considered to be the face of the building.

Building Footprint. See “Footprint.”

Building Frontage. See “Frontage, Building.”

Building Height. See “Height.”

Building Site. A lot or parcel of land occupied or to be occupied by a main building and accessory buildings together with such open spaces as are required by the terms of this Code and having its principal frontage on a street, road, highway, or waterway.

C.     “C” Terms.

California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). Public Resources Code Section 21000, et seq., or any successor statute and regulations promulgated thereto (14 California Code of Regulations Section 15000, et seq.) that require public agencies to document and consider the environmental effects of a proposed action before a decision.

Camper. As defined in the California Vehicle Code.

Canopy. A roofed shelter projecting over a sidewalk, driveway, entry, window, or similar area that may be wholly supported by a building or may be wholly or partially supported by columns, poles, or braces extending from the ground.

Carport. An accessible and usable covered space enclosed on not more than two sides, designed, constructed, and maintained for the parking or storage of one or more motor vehicles.

Change of Use. The replacement of an existing use on a site, or any portion of a site, by a new use, or a change in the type of an existing use; does not include a change of ownership, tenancy, or management associated with a use for which the previous type of use will remain substantially unchanged.

City. The City of West Sacramento.

City Council. The City Council of the City of West Sacramento.

Collector Roadway. A roadway classified as a collector in the Transportation Element of the General Plan.

Commercial Vehicle. Defined in the California Vehicle Code. Pickup trucks and vans not exceeding one-ton rated capacity and which are used primarily for private noncommercial purposes are not considered commercial vehicles.

Commission. See “Planning Commission.”

Community Development Director. The Community Development Director of the City of West Sacramento or designee.

Compatible. That which is harmonious with and will not adversely affect surrounding buildings and/or uses.

Conditionally Permitted. Permitted subject to approval of a Use Permit.

Conditional Use. A use that is generally compatible with other uses permitted in a zone, but that requires individual review of its location, design, configuration, and intensity and density of use and structures, and may require the imposition of conditions pertinent thereto to ensure the appropriateness of the use at that location.

Condition of Approval. A performance standard, required change in a project, environmental mitigation measure, or other requirement imposed by the decision-making body to alter or modify a project in any manner from the description in the application originally submitted for City approval.

County. The County of Yolo.

D.    “D” Terms.

Deck. A platform, either freestanding or attached to a building that is supported by pillars or posts.

Demolition. The intentional destruction and removal of 50% or more of the enclosing exterior walls and 50% of the roof of any structure.

Density. The number of dwelling units per acre of land.

Detached Building. “See Building, Detached.”

Detached Structure. “See Structure, Detached.”

Development. Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, the division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels; the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation, or enlargement of any structure; any mining, excavation, landfill or land disturbance; and any use or extension of the use of land.

Development Agreement. An agreement between the City and any person having a legal or equitable interest in real property for the development of such property, and which complies with the applicable provisions of the Government Code for such development agreements.

Development Permit. Any permit issued by the City for the construction of real property improvements. Development permits include grading permits, encroachment permits, use permits, tentative maps, planned development permits and Building Permits. Sign permits are excluded from this definition.

Director. See “Community Development Director.”

District. See “Zone.”

Driveway. An accessway that provides direct vehicular access for vehicles between a street and the parking or loading facilities located on an adjacent property.

Dwelling Unit. One or more rooms designed, occupied, or intended for occupancy as separate living quarters, with full cooking, sleeping, and bathroom facilities for the exclusive use of a single household. Excludes tents, cabins, boats, trailers, dormitories, labor camps, hotels, and motels.

E.     “E” Terms.

Easement. A portion of land created by grant or agreement for specific purpose; an easement is the right, privilege or interest which one party has in the land of another.

Effective Date. The date on which a permit or other approval becomes enforceable or otherwise takes effect, rather than the date it was signed or circulated.

Electrical Code. Any ordinance of the City regulating the alteration, repair, and the installation and use of electricity or electrical fixtures.

Emergency. A sudden unexpected occurrence demanding immediate action to prevent or mitigate loss or damage to life, health, property, or essential public services.

Emergency Vehicle. A self-propelled vehicle or trailer used in the discharge of duties of public districts, agencies or departments, or privately-owned public utilities responsible for fire prevention and control, policing, sanitation, sewerage, drainage, levee maintenance, flood control, public utility lines and all essential services.

Environmental Impact Report (EIR). An Environmental Impact Report as required under the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA).

Environmental Review. An evaluation process pursuant to CEQA to determine whether a proposed project may have a significant impact on the environment.

Equipment. Non-vehicular items such as, but not limited to, boats, campers, camper shells, tents and related camping supplies, tools, machinery, aircraft, barrels, drums, large cans or containers and parts related to these items.

Erect. To build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend, or affix to or upon any surface. Such term also includes the painting of wall signs.

F.     “F” Terms.

Façade. The exterior wall of a building exposed to public view or that wall viewed by persons not within the building. The portion of any exterior elevation of a building extending vertically from the grade to the top of a parapet wall or eave, and horizontally across the entire width of the building elevation.

Family. One or more persons living together in a single dwelling unit, with common access to, and common use of, all living and eating areas and all areas and facilities for the preparation and storage of food; who share living expenses, including rent or mortgage payments, food costs and utilities, and who maintain a single mortgage, lease, or rental agreement for all members of the household.

Feasible. Capable of being accomplished in a successful manner within a reasonable period of time, taking into account economic, environmental, social, and technological factors.

Fence. Any horizontal or vertical structural device forming a physical barrier intended to separate properties, retain soil materials, and provide security; or as defined by the Building Official. Fences may also be walls, hedges, and screen plantings, or constructed from wood, mesh, metal, chain, brick, stakes of plastic or similar materials.

Firearms. Any device designed to be used as a weapon or modified to be used as a weapon, from which a projectile is expelled through a barrel by the force of an explosion or other form of combustion.

Floor Area. The total horizontal area of all floors below the roof and within the outer surface of the walls of a building or other enclosed structure unless otherwise stipulated. See also Section 17.02.030.F, Determining Floor Area.

Floor Area Ratio (FAR). The ratio of the total floor area of all buildings on a lot to the lot area or building site area. See also Section 17.02.030.G, Determining Floor Area Ratio.

Foot-Candle. A quantitative unit of measure for luminance. One foot-candle is equal to the amount of light generated by one candle shining on one square foot surface located one foot away. It is equal to one lumen uniformly distributed over an area of one square foot.

Footprint. The horizontal area, as seen in plan view, of a building or structure, measured from the outside of exterior walls and supporting columns, and excluding eaves. See also Section 17.02.030.H, Determining Lot Coverage.

Freeway. A multilane State or Interstate highway for through traffic with full control of access and with grade separations at all intersections and railroad crossings, and to which highway the owners of abutting lands have no right of easement or access to or from their abutting lands.

Frontage, Building. The lineal dimension, parallel to the ground, of a building abutting on a public street, or a parking lot accessory to that business, even though another business may also have entitlement to that parking lot.

Frontage, Street. That portion of a lot or parcel of land that borders a public street. Street frontage shall be measured along the common lot line separating said lot or parcel of land from the public street, highway, or parkway.

G.    “G” Terms.

Garage. An accessory structure or portion of a main structure, enclosed on three or more sides and containing accessible and usable enclosed space designed, constructed, and maintained for the parking and storage of one or more motor vehicles.

General Plan. The General Plan of the City of West Sacramento.

Glare. The effect produced by a light source within the visual field that is sufficiently brighter than the level to which the eyes are adapted, such as to cause annoyance, discomfort, or loss of visual performance and ability.

Government Code. The Government Code of the State of California.

Grade. The location of the ground surface.

Grade, Existing or Natural. Ground elevation prior to any grading or other site preparation related to, or to be incorporated into, a proposed development or alteration of an existing development.

Grade, Finished. Final ground elevation after the completion of any grading or other site preparation related to, or to be incorporated into, a proposed development or alteration of an existing development.

Ground Floor. The first floor of a building other than a basement that is closest to finished grade.

H.    “H” Terms.

Hazardous Materials. Any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.

Heat. Thermal energy of a radioactive, conductive, or convective nature.

Height. The vertical distance from a point on the ground below a structure to a point directly above. See also Section 17.02.030.C, Measuring Height.

Home Occupation. A commercial use conducted on residential property by the inhabitants of the subject residence, which is incidental and secondary to the residential use of the dwelling.

Household. See “Family.”

Household Pets. Animals that are customarily kept within a dwelling or a yard for the personal use or enjoyment of the residents. Household pets include domestic birds, cats, dogs, fish, rabbits, rodents, or snakes, but do not include horses, mules, goats, cows, hogs or other similar size animals, or roosters or peacocks.

I.      “I” Terms.

Illegal Use. Any use of land or building that does not have the currently required permits, and was originally constructed and/or established without permits or approvals required for the use at the time it was brought into existence.

Impervious Surface. Impervious surfaces are mainly artificial structures—such as pavements (roads, sidewalks, driveways and parking lots, as well as industrial areas such as airports, ports and logistics and distribution centers) that are covered by impenetrable materials such as asphalt, concrete, brick, stone, etc.

Improvement. An object affixed to the ground other than a structure.

Incidental Use. See “Use, Incidental.”

Income Levels. Income levels for households whose gross incomes do not exceed the qualifying extremely low, very low, low, and moderate-income limits established in Section 6932 of the California Code of Regulations, and amended periodically based on the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) estimate based on the Yolo County median income levels by family size. These income limits are equivalent to the following:

Extremely Low Income Household. Under 30% of area median income, adjusted for household size appropriate for the unit.

Very Low Income Household. 30 to 50% of area median income, adjusted for household size appropriate for the unit.

Low Income Household. 50 to 80% of area median income, adjusted for household size appropriate for the unit.

Moderate Income Household. 80 to 120% of area median income, adjusted for household size appropriate for the unit.

Intensity of Use. The extent to which a use or the use in combination with other uses affects the natural and built environment in which it is located; the demand for services; and persons who live, work, and visit the area. Measures of intensity include, without limitation: requirements for water, gas, electricity, or public services; number of automobile trips generated by a use; parking demand; number of employees on a site; hours of operation; the amount of noise, light, or glare generated; the number of persons attracted to the site, or in eating establishments, the number of seats.

Intersection, Street. The area common to two or more intersecting streets.

J.      “J” Terms.

Reserved.

K.    “K” Terms.

Kitchen. Any room or space within a building intended to be used for the cooking or preparation of food.

L.     “L” Terms.

Landscaping. The planting, configuration and maintenance of trees, ground cover, shrubbery, and other plant material, decorative natural and structural features (walls, fences, hedges, trellises, fountains, sculptures), earth-patterning and bedding materials, and other similar site improvements that serve an aesthetic or functional purpose.

Land Use. The purpose for which land or a structure is designed, arranged, intended, occupied, or maintained, including residential, commercial, industrial, etc.

Light Fixture. The assembly that holds a lamp and may include an assembly housing, a mounting bracket or pole socket, a lamp holder, a ballast, a reflector or mirrors, and a refractor or lens.

Liquor Sales. The sale of liquor for offsite consumption.

Lot. A parcel, tract, or area of land whose boundaries have been established by a legal instrument, such as a deed or map recorded with the County of Yolo, and which is recognized as a separate legal entity for purposes of transfer of title, except public easements or rights-of-way. Lot types include the following:

Abutting Lot. A lot having a common property line or separated by a public path or lane, private street, or easement to the subject lot.

Corner Lot. A lot or parcel bounded by two or more adjacent street lines that have an angle of intersection of not more than 135 degrees.

Flag Lot. A lot so shaped that the main portion of the lot area does not have access to a street other than by means of a corridor having less than 20 feet of width.

Interior Lot. A lot bounded on one side by a street line and on all other sides by lot lines between adjacent lots or that is bounded by more than one street with an intersection greater than 135 degrees; a lot other than a corner lot.

Key Lot. An interior lot adjoining the rear lot line of a reversed corner lot.

Reversed Corner Lot. A corner lot, the rear of which abuts the side of another lot, whether across a lane or not.

Through Lot. A lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately parallel streets.



FIGURE 17.51.020.L.1: LOT TYPES

Lot Area. The area of a lot measured horizontally between bounding lot lines.

Lot Coverage. The portion of a lot that is covered by structures, including main and accessory buildings, garages, carports, and roofed porches, but not including unenclosed and unroofed decks, landings, or balconies. See also Section 17.02.030.H, Determining Lot Coverage.

Lot Depth. The horizontal distance between the front and rear property lines of a site measured midway between the side property lines. See also Section 17.02.030.D, Measuring Lot Width and Depth.

Lot Frontage. See “Frontage, Street.”

Lot Line. The boundary between a lot and other property or the public right-of-way.

Front Lot Line. On an interior lot, the line separating the lot from the street or lane. On a corner lot, the shorter lot line abutting a street or lane. On a through lot, the lot line abutting the street or lane providing the primary access to the lot. On a flag lot, the interior lot line most parallel to and nearest the street or lane from which access is obtained.

Interior Lot Line. Any lot line that is not adjacent to a street.

Rear Lot Line. The lot line that is opposite and most distant from the front lot line. Where no lot line is within 45 degrees of being parallel to the front lot line, a line 10 feet in length within the lot, parallel to and at the maximum possible distance from the front lot line, will be deemed the rear lot line for establishing the minimum rear yard.

Side Lot Line. Any lot line that is not a front or rear lot line.

Street Side Lot Line. A side lot line of a corner lot that is adjacent to a street.



FIGURE 17.51.020.L.2: LOT LINE TYPES

 



FIGURE 17.51.020.L.3: REAR LOT LINES, IRREGULAR LOTS

 

Lot, Nonconforming. A legal parcel of land having less area, frontage, or dimensions than required in the zone in which it is located.

Lot Width. The average distance between the side lot lines measured at right angles to the lot depth. See also Section 17.02.030.D, Measuring Lot Width and Depth. When not applicable due to irregularity of lot shape, lot width shall be determined by the Director, subject to appeal and review by the Planning Commission.

M.    “M” Terms.

Maintenance and Repair. The repair or replacement of nonbearing walls, fixtures, wiring, roof, or plumbing that restores the character, scope, size, or design of a structure to its previously existing, authorized, and undamaged condition.

Municipal Code. The City of West Sacramento Municipal Code.

N.    “N” Terms.

Noise. Any sound that annoys or disturbs humans or which causes or tends to cause an adverse psychological or physiological effect on humans.

Nonconforming Building. See “Building, Nonconforming.”

Nonconforming Lot. See “Lot, Nonconforming.”

Nonconforming Structure. See “Structure, Nonconforming.”

Nonconforming Use. See “Use, Nonconforming.”

O.    “O” Terms.

On-Site. Located on the lot that is the subject of discussion.

Outdoor Storage. The keeping, in an unroofed area, of any goods, junk, material, merchandise, or vehicles in the same place for more than 72 hours, except for the keeping of building materials reasonably required for construction work on the premises pursuant to a valid and current Building Permit issued by the City.

Owner. A person or persons holding single or unified beneficial title to the property, including without limitation, the settlor of a grantor trust, a general partner, firm, or corporation.

P.     “P” Terms.

Parapet. That part of a wall that extends above the roof line.

Parking Area. An area of a lot, structure, or any other area, including driveways, which is designed for and the primary purpose of which is to provide for the temporary storage of operable motor vehicles.

Passenger Vehicle. As defined in the California Vehicle Code.

Permitted Use. See “Use, Permitted.”

Person. Any individual, firm, association, organization, partnership, business trust, company, or corporation.

Planning Commission. The Planning Commission of the City of West Sacramento.

Planning Division. The Planning Division of the Community Development Department of the City of West Sacramento.

Pre-Existing. In existence prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Code.

Primary Use. See “Use, Primary.”

Project. Any proposal for a new or changed use or for new construction, alteration, or enlargement of any structure that is subject to the provisions of this title. This term includes, but is not limited to, any action that qualifies as a “project” as defined by the California Environmental Quality Act.

Property Line. The recorded boundary of a lot or parcel of land.

Public Resources Code. The Public Resources Code of the State of California.

Public Works Director. The Public Works Director of the City of West Sacramento.

Q.    “Q” Terms.

Qualified Applicant. The property owner, the owner’s agent, or any person, corporation, partnership, or other legal entity that has a legal or equitable title to land that is the subject of a development proposal or is the holder of an option or contract to purchase such land, or otherwise has an enforceable proprietary interest in such land.

R.     “R” Terms.

Reasonable Accommodation. Any deviation requested and/or granted from the strict application of the City’s zoning and land use laws, rules, policies, practices and/or procedures under provisions of Federal or California law to make housing or other facilities readily accessible to and usable by persons with disabilities and thus enjoy equal employment or housing opportunities or other benefits guaranteed by law.

Review Authority. Body or entity responsible for making decisions on applications.

Right-of-Way. A strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication, forced dedication, prescription or condemnation and intended to be occupied or occupied by a road, railroad, electric transmission lines, oil or gas pipeline, water line, sanitary storm sewer, or other similar use.

Roofline. The top edge of a roof or building parapet, whichever is higher, excluding any cupolas, pylons, chimneys, or minor projections.

S.     “S” Terms.

Senior Citizen. An individual 62 years of age or older.

Setback. The distance between a property line and a building or structure that must be kept clear or open.

Sidewalk. A paved, surfaced, or leveled area, paralleling and usually separated from the street, used as a pedestrian walkway.

Sign Terms. See Chapter 17.29, Signs.

Site. A lot, or group of contiguous lots, that is proposed for development in accordance with the provisions of this Code and is in a single ownership or under unified control.

Soil. Naturally occurring superficial deposits overlying bedrock.

Solar Reflectance Index. Measure of a surface’s ability to reflect solar heat, combining reflectance and emittance into one number. It is defined so that a standard black (reflectance 0.05, emittance 0.90) is zero and a standard white (reflectance 0.80, emittance 0.90) is 100.

Specific Plan. A plan for all or part of the area covered by the General Plan that is prepared to be consistent with and to implement the General Plan, pursuant to the provisions of Government Code Section 65450 et seq.

State. The State of California.

Story. That portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, except that the topmost story is that portion of a building included between the upper surface of the topmost floor and the upper surface of the roof above.

Street. A public or private thoroughfare, which affords the principal means of access to a block and to abutting property. “Street” includes avenue, court, circle, crescent, place, way, drive, boulevard, highway, road, and any other thoroughfare, except an alley or walkway.

Street Line. The boundary between a street and a lot or parcel of land.

Structure. Anything constructed or erected which requires a location on the ground.

Structure, Accessory. A detached subordinate structure used only as incidental to the main structure on the same site or lot.

Structure, Attached. A structure which is affixed to another building or structure on the site.

Structure, Detached. A structure which is not affixed to another building or structure on the site.

Structure, Main. A structure housing the primary use of a site or functioning as the primary use.

Structure, Nonconforming. A building or structure, or portion thereof, which was lawfully erected or altered or maintained, but which, because of the application of this Code to it, no longer conforms to the specific regulations applicable to the zone in which it is located.

Structure, Temporary. A structure without any foundation or footings, and which is intended to be removed when the designated time period, activity, or use for which the temporary structure was erected has ceased.

Swimming Pool. A pool, pond, lake, or open tank capable of containing water to a depth greater than one and one-half feet at any point.

T.     “T” Terms.

Tandem Parking. An arrangement of parking spaces such that one or more spaces must be driven across to access another space or spaces.

Telecommunication Terms.

Antenna. Any system of wires, poles, rods, horizontal or vertical elements, panels, reflecting discs, or similar devices used for the transmission and/or reception of electromagnetic waves.

Co-Location. The location of two or more wireless communications facilities owned or used by more than one public or private entity on a single support structure, or otherwise sharing a common location. Co-location also includes the location of wireless communications facilities with other facilities, such as buildings, water tanks, light standards, and other utility facilities and structures.

Satellite Dish. A device (also known as a parabolic antenna) incorporating a reflective surface that is solid, open, or mesh or bar-configured, and is in the shape of a shallow dish, cone, horn cornucopia, or flat plate that is used to receive or transmit radio or electromagnetic waves between terrestrially and/or orbitally based units. This term includes satellite earth stations, satellite receivers, satellite discs, direct broadcast systems, television-reception-only systems, and satellite microwave antennas.

Support Equipment. The physical, electrical, and/or electronic equipment included within a telecom facility used to house, power, transport, and/or process signals from or to the facility’s antenna or antennas.

Telecommunication Facility. A mobile cell site that consists of a cell antenna tower and electronic radio transceiver equipment on a truck or trailer, designed to be part of a cellular network.

Tenant. A person renting or leasing a housing unit or non-residential space.

Trailer. A vehicle with or without motor power, which is designed or used for hauling materials or vehicles, or for human habitation, office, or storage including camper, recreational vehicle, travel trailer, and mobile home, but not including mobile homes on a permanent foundation.

U.    “U” Terms.

Use. The purpose for which land or the premises of a building, structure or facility is arranged, designed, or intended, or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained.

Use, Accessory. A use that is customarily associated with, and is incidental and subordinate to, a primary use and located on the same lot as a primary use.

Use, Incidental. A secondary use of a lot and/or building that is located on the same lot, but is not customarily associated with the primary use.

Use, Nonconforming. The use of a building, structure, site, or portion thereof, which was lawfully established and maintained, but which, because of the adoption and application of this title, no longer conforms to the specific regulations applicable to the zone in which it is located.

Use, Permitted. Any use or structure that is allowed in a zone without a requirement for approval of a Use Permit, but subject to any restrictions applicable to that zone.

Use, Primary. A primary, principal, or dominant use established, or proposed to be established, on a lot.

Use Classification. A system of classifying uses into a limited number of use types on the basis of common functional, product, or compatibility characteristics. All use types are grouped into the following categories: residential, public and semi-public, commercial, industrial, and transportation, communication, and utilities. See Chapter 17.50, Use Classifications.

Use Permit. A discretionary permit which may be granted by the appropriate City of West Sacramento authority to provide for the accommodation of land uses with special site or design requirements, operating characteristics, or potential adverse effects on surroundings, which are not permitted as of right, but which may be approved upon completion of a review process and, where necessary, the imposition of special conditions of approval. See Chapter 17.38, Use Permits.

Use Type. A category that classifies similar uses based on common functional, product, or compatibility characteristics.

Utilities. Equipment and associated features related to the mechanical functions of a building(s) and services such as water, electrical, telecommunications, and waste.

V.    “V” Terms.

Variance. A discretionary grant of permission to depart from the specific requirements of this title that is warranted when, due to special circumstances regarding the physical characteristics of the property, the strict application of standards would deprive the property of privileges available to other property in the same zone.

Vehicle. Any vehicle, as defined by the California Vehicle Code, including any automobile, camper, camp trailer, trailer, trailer coach, motorcycle, house car, boat, or similar conveyance.

Vibration. A periodic motion of the particles of an elastic body or medium in alternately opposite directions from the position of equilibrium.

Visible. Capable of being seen (whether legible) by a person of normal height and visual acuity walking or driving on a public road or in a public place.

W.    “W” Terms.

Wall. Any vertical exterior surface of building or any part thereof, including windows.

X.    “X” Terms.

Reserved.

Y.    “Y” Terms.

Yard. An open space on the same site as a structure, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided by this Code.

Front Yard. A yard extending across the front of a lot for the full width of the lot between the side lot lines. The depth of a front yard shall be a distance specified by this Code for the zone in which it is located and measured inward from the front lot line.

Interior Side Yard. A yard which does not abut a street.

Rear Yard. A yard extending across the rear of a lot for its full width between side lot lines, and to a depth specified by this Code for the zone in which it is located. If a lot has no rear lot line, a line 10 feet in length within the lot, parallel to and at the maximum possible distance from the front lot line, will be deemed the rear lot line for establishing the minimum rear yard.

Required Yard. A yard which complies with the minimum setback requirements for the zone in which the lot is located.

Side Yard. A yard extending from the rear line of the required front yard, or the front property line of the site where no front yard is required, to the front line of the required rear yard, or the rear property line of the site where no rear yard is required, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the side property line and a line parallel thereto on the site.

Street Side Yard. A yard on a corner lot or reversed corner lot extending from the front yard to the rear lot line between the building setback line and the nearest side street lot line.



FIGURE 17.51.020.Y: YARD TYPES

Z.     “Z” Terms.

Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator of the City of West Sacramento.

Zone. A specifically delineated area in the City within which regulations and requirements uniformly govern the use, placement, spacing, and size of land and buildings. (Ord. 19-1 § 3)

Title 18 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
Chapter 18.04 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE AND METHODS
Chapter 18.08 DEFINITIONS
Chapter 18.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 18.16 ADMINISTRATION
Chapter 18.20 PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
Chapter 18.24 VARIANCE PROCEDURE
Chapter 18.28 APPEALS
Chapter 18.32 INSPECTIONS AND NOTICES OF VIOLATIONS
Chapter 18.36 VIOLATIONS—PUBLIC NUISANCES—REMEDIES—PENALTIES

Chapter 18.04 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE AND METHODS
18.04.010 Statutory authorization.
    The legislature of the state of California has in Government Code Sections 65302, 65560, and 65800 conferred upon local government units authority to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry. The National Flood Insurance Program has also established regulations for local agencies to adopt in Part 60 of 44 CFR. Therefore, the city council of the city of West Sacramento does adopt the following floodplain management regulations. (Ord. 94-11 § 2)

 

18.04.020 Findings of fact.
    A.  The flood hazard areas of the city of West Sacramento are subject to periodic inundation which could result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare.

    B.   These flood losses are caused by uses that are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or protected from flood damage. The cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights and velocities also contribute to the flood loss. (Ord. 94-11 § 2)

 

18.04.030 Statement of purpose.
    It is the purpose of this title to promote the public health, safety and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:

    A.  Protect human life and health;

    B.   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;

    C.   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;

    D.  Minimize prolonged business interruptions;

    E.   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains; electric, telephone and sewer lines; and streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard;

    F.   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future blighted areas caused by flood damage;

    G.  Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and

    H.  Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions. (Ord. 94-11 § 2)

 

18.04.040 Methods of reducing flood losses.
    In order to accomplish its purposes, this ordinance includes methods and provisions to:

    A.  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or flood heights or velocities;

    B.   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;

    C.   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel floodwaters;

    D.  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage; and

    E.   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas. (Ord. 94-11 § 2)

Chapter 18.08 DEFINITIONS
18.08.010 Definitions.
    Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this title shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this title its most reasonable application.

    “Accessory use” means a use which is incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the parcel of land on which it is located.

    “Appeal” means a request for a review of the floodplain administrator’s interpretation of any provision of this title.

    “Area of shallow flooding” means a designated AO or AH Zone on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to three feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.

    Area of Special Flood Hazard. See “Special flood hazard area.”

    “Base flood” means a flood which has a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the “one hundred year flood”). Base flood is the term used throughout this title.

    “Basement” means any area of the building having its floor subgrade, i.e., below ground level, on all sides.

    Building. See “Structure.”

    “Development” means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.

    “Encroachment” means the advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.

    “Existing manufactured home park or subdivision” means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.

    “Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision” means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).

    “Flood, flooding or floodwater” means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters; the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.

    “Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM)” means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the floodway.

    “Flood Hazard Boundary Map” means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated the areas of flood hazards.

    “Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)” means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.

    “Flood Insurance Study” means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood.

    “Floodplain or flood-prone area” means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. See “Flooding.”

    “Floodplain administrator” is the individual designated in Section 18.16.020.

    “Floodplain management” means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management regulations, and open space plans.

    “Floodplain management regulations” means this title and other zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as grading and erosion control) and other application of police power which control development in flood-prone areas. This term describes federal, state or local regulations in any combination thereof which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage.

    “Floodproofing” means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.

    “Floodway” means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. Also referred to as “regulatory floodway.”

    “Floodway encroachment lines” means the lines marking the limits of floodways on federal, state and local floodplain maps.

    “Floodway fringe” is that area of the floodplain on either side of the regulatory floodway where encroachment may be permitted.

    “Fraud and victimization variances,” as related to Chapter 18.24 of this title, means that the variance granted must not cause fraud on or victimization of the public. In examining this requirement, the city council will consider the fact that every newly constructed building adds to government responsibilities and remains a part of the community for fifty to one hundred years. Buildings that are permitted to be constructed below the base flood elevation are subject during all those years to increased risk of damage from floods, while future owners of the property and the community as a whole are subject to all the costs, inconvenience, danger, and suffering that those increased flood damages bring. In addition, future owners may purchase the property, unaware that it is subject to potential flood damage, and can be insured only at very high flood insurance rates.

    “Functionally dependent use” means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, and does not include long term storage or related manufacturing facilities.

    “Governing body” is the city council.

    “Hardship variances,” as related to Chapter 18.24 of this title, means the exceptional hardship that would result from a failure to grant the requested variance. The city council requires that the variance be exceptional, unusual and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or financial hardship alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences or the disapproval of one’s neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship. All of these problems can be resolved through other means without granting a variance, even if the alterative is more expensive, or requires the property owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally intended.

    “Highest adjacent grade” means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.

    “Historic structure” means any structure that is:

    1.   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;

    2.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;

    3.   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or

    4.   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states with approved programs.

    “Levee” means a man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding.

    “Levee system” means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accord with sound engineering practices.

    “Lowest floor” means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area (see “Basement”) is not considered a building’s lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements contained in 44 CFR 60.3 and this title. (Note: This definition allows attached garages to be built at grade. Below grade garages are not allowed as they are considered to be basements.)

    “Manufactured home” means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities, The term “manufactured home” does not include a “recreational vehicle.”

    “Manufactured home park or subdivision” means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.

    “Mean sea level” means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.

    “New construction,” for floodplain management purposes, means structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by this community, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.

    “New manufactured home park or subdivision” means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by this community.

    “Obstruction” includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, or due to its location, its propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its likelihood of being carried downstream.

    One Hundred Year Flood or 100-Year Flood. See “Base flood.”

    “Principal structure” means a structure used for the principal use of the property as distinguished from an accessory use.

    “Public safety and nuisance variances,” as related to chapter 18.24 of this title, means that the granting of a variance must not result in anything which is injurious to safety or health of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, or river, canal or basin.

    “Recreational vehicle” means a vehicle which is:

    1.   Built on a single chassis;

    2.   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;

    3.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and

    4.   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.

    “Regulatory floodway” means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.

    “Riverine” means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.

    Sheet Flow Area. See “Area of shallow flooding.”

    “Special flood hazard area (SFHA)” means an area having special flood hazards and shown on an FHBM or FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, AR and AH.

    “Start of construction” includes substantial improvement and other proposed new development and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty days from the date of the permit. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufacture home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.

    “Structure” means a walled and roofed building that is principally aboveground; this includes a gas or liquid storage tank or a manufactured home.

    “Substantial damage” means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.

    “Substantial improvement” means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or other proposed new development of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent of the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:

    1.   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations or state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or

    2.   Any alteration of a historic structure; provided, that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a historic structure.

    “Variance” means a grant of relief from the requirements of this title which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this title.

    “Violation” means the failure of any structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this title is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.

    “Water surface elevation” means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, (or other datum, where specified) of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of riverine areas.

    “Watercourse” means a lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo, channel or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur. (Ord. 09-17 § 2; Ord. 94-11 § 2)

Chapter 18.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS
18.12.010 Applicability.
    This title shall apply to all areas of special flood-hazards within the jurisdiction of the city of West Sacramento. (Ord. 94-11 § 2)

 

18.12.020 Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard.
    The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for the City of West Sacramento and accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) dated March 5, 1990, as amended January 19, 1995, and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions, are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this title. This FIS and attendant mapping is the minimum area of applicability of this title and may be supplemented by studies for other areas which allow implementation of this title and which are recommended to the city council by the floodplain administrator. The study, and FIRMS, are on file at the West Sacramento community development department. (Ord. 94-11 § 2)

 

18.12.030 Compliance.
    No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this title and other applicable regulations. Violation of the requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing herein shall prevent the city of West Sacramento from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. (Ord. 94-11 § 2)

 

18.12.040 Abrogation and greater restrictions.
    This title is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this title and another ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. (Ord. 94-11 § 2)

 

18.12.050 Interpretation.
    In the interpretation and application of this title, all provisions shall be:

    A.  Considered as minimum requirements;

    B.   Liberally construed in favor of the city; and

    C.   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. (Ord. 94-11 § 2)

 

18.12.060 Warning and disclaimer of liability.
    The degree of flood protection required by this title is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This title does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This title shall not create liability on the part of the city of West Sacramento, any officer or employee thereof, the state of California, or the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this title or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. (Ord. 94-11 § 2)

Chapter 18.16 ADMINISTRATION
18.16.010 Development permit—Required—Application.
    A development permit shall be obtained before any construction or other development begins within any area of special flood hazard established in Section 18.12.020. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the floodplain administrator and may include, but not be limited to: plans drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevation of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required.

    A.  Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures, elevation of highest adjacent grade and proposed elevation of lowest floor of all structures; and

    B.   Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure will be floodproofed, if required in Section 18.20.010(C)(3); and

    C.   All appropriate certifications listed in Section 18.16.030(D) of this title; and

    D.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. (Ord. 94-11 § 2)

 

18.16.020 Floodplain administrator—Designated.
    The city manager or designee is hereby designated as the floodplain administrator. (Ord. 09-17 § 2; Ord. 94-11 § 2)

 

18.16.030 Floodplain administrator—Duties and responsibilities.
    The duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to the following:

    A.  Permit Review. Review all development permits to determine that:

    1.   Permit requirements of this title have been satisfied;

    2.   All other required state and federal permits have been obtained;

    3.   The site is reasonably safe from flooding; and

    4.   The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying capacity of areas where base flood elevations have been determined but a floodway has not been designated. For purposes of this title, “adversely affects” means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point.

    B.   Review and Use of Any Other Base Flood Data. When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Section 18.12.020, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency, or other source, in order to administer Chapter 18.20. Any such information shall be submitted to the city council for adoption.

    C.   Notification of Other Agencies. In alteration or relocation of a watercourse:

    1.   Notify adjacent communities and the California Department of Water Resources prior to alteration or relocation;

    2.   Submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency; and

    3.   Assure that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse is maintained.

    D.  Documentation of Floodplain Development. Obtain and maintain for public inspection and make available as needed the following:

    1.   Certification required by Section 18.20.010 (C)(1) (floor elevations);

    2.   Certification required by Section 18.20.010 (C)(2) (elevation or floodproofing of nonresidential structures);

    3.   Certification required by Section 18.20.010 (C)(3) (wet floodproofing standard);

    4.   Certification of elevation required by Section 18.20.030(B) (subdivision standards);

    5.   Certification required by Section 18.20.060 (A) (floodway encroachments).

    E.   Map Determinations. Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard, for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in Chapter 18.24.

    F.   Remedial Action. Take action to remedy violations of this title as specified in Section 18.12.030.

    G.  Variances. Take action to review and act on applications for variances to the physical standards of this chapter. (Ord. 94-11 § 2)

 

18.16.040 Appeals.
    The city council of the city of West Sacramento shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this title. (Ord. 94-11 § 2)

Chapter 18.20 PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
18.20.010 Standards of construction.
    In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required:

    A.  Anchoring.

    1.   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.

    2.   All manufactured homes shall meet the anchoring standards of Section 18.20.040.

    B.   Construction Materials and Methods. All new construction and substantial improvement shall be constructed:

    1.   With materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage;

    2.   Using methods and practices that minimize flood damage;

    3.   With electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; and if

    4.   Within Zones AH or AO, so that there are adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide flood waters around and away from proposed structures.

    C.   Elevation and Floodproofing. (See Chapter 18.08 definitions for “new construction,” “substantial damage” and “substantial improvement.”)

    1.   Residential construction, new or substantial improvement, shall have the lowest floor, including basement,

    a.   In an AO Zone, elevated above the highest adjacent grade to a height at least one foot above the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM, or elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified.

    b.   In an A Zone, elevated at least one foot above the base flood elevation, as determined by this community.

    c.   In all other zones, elevated at least one foot above the base flood elevation.

    Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor including basement shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor, or verified by the community building inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification or verification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator.

    2.   Nonresidential construction shall either be elevated to conform with subsection (C)(1) of this section or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities:

    a.   Be floodproofed below the elevation recommended under subsection (C)(1) of this section so that the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;

    b.   Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and

    c.   Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator.

    3.   All new construction and substantial improvement with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (excluding basements) that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, and which are subject to flooding, shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwater. Designs for meeting this requirement must meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:

    a.   Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect; or

    b.   Be certified to comply with a local floodproofing standard approved by the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency; or

    c.   Have a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwater.

    4.   Manufactured homes shall also meet the standards in Section 18.20.040. (Ord. 94-11 § 2)

 

18.20.020 Standards for utilities.
    A.  All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate:

    1.   Infiltration of floodwaters into the systems; and

    2.   Discharge from the systems into floodwaters.

    B.   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them, or contamination from them during flooding. (Ord. 94-11 § 2)

 

18.20.030 Standards for subdivisions.
    A.  All preliminary subdivision proposals shall identify the flood hazard area and the elevation of the base flood.

    B.   All subdivision plans will provide the elevation of proposed structure(s) and pad(s). If the site is filled above the base flood elevation, the final first floor and pad elevations shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor and provided to the floodplain administrator.

    C.   All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.

    D.  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.

    E.   All subdivisions shall provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards. (Ord. 94-11 § 2)

 

18.20.040 Standards for manufactured homes.
    A.  All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved, within Zones Al-30, AH and AE on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map, on sites located:

    1.   Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision;

    2.   In a new manufactured home park or subdivision;

    3.   In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or

    4.   In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on a site upon which a manufactured home has incurred “substantial damage” as the result of a flood, shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated at least one foot above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation collapse and lateral movement.

    B.   All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within Zones A1-30, AH, AE on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map that are not subject to the provisions of subsection A of this section will be elevated so that either the

    1.   lowest floor of the manufactured home is at least one foot above the base flood elevation, or

    2.   manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than thirty-six inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. (Ord. 94-11 § 2)

 

18.20.050 Standards for recreational vehicles.
    A.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map will either:

    1.   Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty consecutive days;

    2.   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use—a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions; or

    3.   Meet the permit requirements of Chapter 18.16 of this title and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in Section 18.20.040(A). (Ord. 94-11 § 2)

 

18.20.060 Floodways.
    Located within areas of special flood hazard established in Section 18.12.020 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions apply.

    A.  Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvement, and other new development unless certification by a registered professional engineer or architect is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood elevation during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.

    B.   If subsection A of this section is satisfied, all new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Chapter 18.20. (Ord. 94-11 § 2)

Chapter 18.24 VARIANCE PROCEDURE
18.24.010 Nature of variances.
    The variance criteria set forth in this section of this title are based on the general principle of zoning law that variances pertain to a piece of property and are not personal in nature. A variance may be granted for a parcel of property with physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the requirements of this title would create an exceptional hardship to the applicant or the surrounding property owners. The characteristics must be unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent parcels. The unique characteristic must pertain to the land itself, not to the structure, its inhabitants, or the property owners.

    It is the duty of the city of West Sacramento to help protect its citizens from flooding. This need is so compelling and the implications of the cost of insuring a structure built below flood level are so serious that variances from the flood elevation or from other requirements in this title are quite rare. The long term goal of preventing and reducing flood loss and damage can only be met if variances are strictly limited. Therefore, the variance guidelines provided in this title are more detailed and contain multiple provisions that must be met before a variance can be properly granted. The criteria are designed to screen out those situations in which alternatives other than a variance are more appropriate. (Ord. 94-11 § 2)

 

18.24.020 Procedure.
    A.  In passing upon requests for variances, the floodplain administrator shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this title, and the:

    1.   Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;

    2.   Danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;

    3.   Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the existing individual owner and future owners of the property;

    4.   Importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;

    5.   Necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;

    6.   Availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;

    7.   Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;

    8.   Relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area;

    9.   Safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;

    10. Expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site; and

    11. Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water system, and streets and bridges.

    B.   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice over the signature of the floodplain administrator that:

    1.   The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as twenty-five dollars for one hundred dollars of insurance coverage; and

    2.   Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. It is recommended that a copy of the notice shall be recorded by the floodplain administrator in the office of the Yolo County recorder and shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land.

    C.   The floodplain administrator will maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its biennial report submitted to the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency. (Ord. 09-17 § 2; Ord. 94-11 § 2)

 

18.24.030 Issuance conditions.
    A.  Generally, variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level; providing, that the procedures of Chapters 18.16 and 18.20 of this title have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.

    B.   Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures (as defined in Chapter 18.08 of this title) upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as an historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.

    C.   Variances shall not be issued within any mapped regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.

    D.  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the “minimum necessary” considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. “Minimum necessary” means to afford relief with a minimum of deviation from the requirements of this title. For example, in the case of variances to an elevation requirement, this means the floodplain administrator need not grant permission for the applicant to build at grade, or even to whatever elevation the applicant proposes, but only to that elevation which the floodplain administrator believes will both provide relief and preserve the integrity of this title.

    E.   Variances shall only be issued upon a:

    1.   Showing of good and sufficient cause;

    2.   Determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional “hardship” (as defined in Chapter 18.08) to the applicant; and

    3.   Determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense, create a nuisance (as defined in Chapter 18.08; see “Public safety or nuisance”), cause fraud or victimization (as defined in Chapter 18.08) of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.

    F.   Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that the provisions of Sections 18.24.020(A) through (E) are satisfied and that the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and does not result in additional threats to public safety and does not create a public nuisance.

    G.  Upon consideration of the factors of Section 18.24.010(C) and the purposes of this title, the floodplain administrator may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this title. (Ord. 94-11 § 2)

Chapter 18.28 APPEALS
18.28.010 Filing—Time limits—Standing—Fees.
    A.  Filing—Time Limits—Fees. The action of the floodplain administrator on any decision made pursuant to this chapter shall be final, unless within fifteen days after such action any person aggrieved by the decision files a written appeal, together with an appeal fee in the amount set by the city council, with the city clerk. Such appeal shall specifically delineate the decision which is appealed and specifically recite the grounds for the appeal.

    B.   The planning commission shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this title.

    C.   Hearings—Setting—Notices. The appeal shall be placed on the agenda of the next available planning commission meeting; provided, however, if the underlying development permit is to be acted upon by the planning commission, such appeal, with the consent of the applicant, may be set at the same meeting at which the planning commission shall consider such development application.

    D.  Public Notices. Public notice of the hearing on the appeal shall be that as would be required for a hearing on the underlying development application and, in the floodplain administrator’s discretion, provide any such additional notice to the general public and affected landowners as is appropriate under the circumstances. (Ord. 09-17 § 2; Ord. 94-11 § 2)

 

18.28.020 Hearings—Determinations of the planning commission.
    A.  Upon hearing the appeal, the planning commission shall either announce its finding and decision or announce its intention and order the preparation of formal written findings and its decision for subsequent adoption.

    B.   In passing upon such appeal applications, the planning commission shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this title, and:

    1.   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;

    2.   The danger of loss of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;

    3.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage;

    4.   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;

    5.   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;

    6.   The availability of alterative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;

    7.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;

    8.   The relationship of the proposed use to the general plan and floodplain management program for that area;

    9.   The safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;

    10. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters expected at the site; and

    11. The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public facilities. (Ord. 94-11 § 2)

 

18.28.030 Planning commission—Procedures.
    All appeals to the planning commission shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures set forth in Chapter 1.08, Appeal and Hearing Procedure. (Ord. 09-17 § 2; Ord. 94-11 § 2)

 

18.28.040 Appeals to the city council.
    A.  Filing—Time Limits—Fees. Any subject of the prior action, or any member of the city council, may appeal a decision of the planning commission to the city council within fifteen days after such action by filing a written appeal, together with an appeal fee (items appealed by members of the city council shall not require a fee) in the amount set by the city council with the city clerk. Such appeal shall specifically delineate the decision which is appealed and specifically recite the grounds for appeal.

    B.   Hearings—Setting—Notices. The city clerk shall set a date for a hearing upon such appeal and shall give notice thereof to all interested parties and to such additional parties as received notice of the planning commission’s hearing on the appeal. (Ord. 09-17 § 2; Ord. 94-11 § 2)

Chapter 18.32 INSPECTIONS AND NOTICES OF VIOLATIONS
18.32.010 Inspections.
    The floodplain administrator or designee may make such investigations as necessary at any reasonable time to determine compliance with the terms of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter. This authorization is not intended, nor shall it be construed, to modify or conflict with state laws requiring the issuance of an administrative search warrant. (Ord. 09-17 § 2; Ord. 94-11 § 2)

 

18.32.020 Service of notices of violations.
    A.  Whenever the floodplain administrator has reasonable cause to believe that a violation of this title or of any term of condition of a permit issued pursuant to this title, has occurred or is occurring, he or she shall service a written notice of violation upon the property owner by the deposit of a notice in the United States mail, certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, addressed to the address listed in the initial application. In the event such certified mailing is returned unreceived, the service of the notice of violation shall be complete upon posting a copy of the notice of violation in a conspicuous place on or at the entry to the site.

    B.   The notice shall specifically describe the violation and shall specifically set forth the state laws requiring the issuance of an administrative search warrant.

    C.   The notice shall describe the remedial steps required to correct such violation.

    D.  The notice shall state the date, time, and place set for a hearing on the notice of violation. (Ord. 09-17 § 2; Ord. 94-11 § 2)

 

18.32.030 Notice of planning commission hearings.
    Upon the service of a notice of violation, the floodplain administrator shall set and notice a public hearing before the planning commission on the violation. Such hearing shall be conducted no sooner than ten days and no later than sixty days after the service of the notice of violation upon the owner. Public notice of such hearing upon the notice of violation shall be given as required for the initial permit application, and such additional notice shall be given as, in the discretion of the floodplain administrator, is appropriate. (Ord. 09-17 § 2; Ord. 94-11 § 2)

 

18.32.040 Planning commission hearings.
    At the time and place set forth for the hearing upon the notice of violation, the planning commission shall commence a public hearing to determine whether a violation has occurred, whether the permit should be revoked, and whether a cease and desist order should be issued. Such hearing may be continued from time to time. (Ord. 94-11 § 2)

 

18.32.050 Findings—Continuing jurisdiction.
    A.  Upon hearing a notice of violation, the planning commission shall either announce its findings and decision or announce its intention and order the preparation of formal written findings and this decision for subsequent adoption.

    B.   Upon the finding that a violation has occurred, the planning commission may order the owner to take such actions as are necessary to remedy the violation. The planning commission may continue its jurisdiction in the case to insure compliance by the owner. (Ord. 94-11 § 2)

 

18.32.060 Appeals to the city council.
    A.  Any aggrieved party may appeal a decision of the planning commission on a notice of violation to the city council within fifteen days after such action by filing an appeal with the city clerk along with an appeal fee in the amount set by the city council.

    B.   The city council shall conduct such hearing on the violation in the same mode and manner as provided for hearings on appeals form initial permit decisions. (Ord. 94-11 § 2)

Chapter 18.36 VIOLATIONS—PUBLIC NUISANCES—REMEDIES—PENALTIES
18.36.010 Performance standard violations—Nuisance.
    The city council declares that any violation of the performance standards set forth in Chapter 18.20 of this title is, and shall be, a public nuisance, in that compliance with such performance standards by all development in areas subject to this title is necessary to prevent substantial harm to the environment occasioned by increase in base flood depths; and to prevent substantial harm to the owners and subsequent owners of the property occasioned by locating habitable floors lower than the base flood elevation; and to prevent substantial harm to other properties located downstream from the offending structure into a floodflow; and presents a threat of decertification of the city program by the Federal Insurance Administrator, with the corresponding unavailability of flood insurance, and therefore, federally subsidized purchase money loans for construction within the area which is subject to this title. (Ord. 94-11 § 2)

 

18.36.020 Permit violations—Nuisance.
    Any person who violates the terms of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter after the receipt of a final decision upon a notice of violation shall be guilty of conducting a public nuisance and shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter for each and every day such nuisance is maintained. (Ord. 94-11 § 2)

 

18.36.030 Violations—Penalty.
    The penalty for violations of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor as set forth in Chapter 1.12 of this code. (Ord. 94-11 § 2)

Title 19 NUISANCE ABATEMENT CODE
Chapter 19.00 PURPOSE AND ADMINISTRATION
Chapter 19.05 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
Chapter 19.10 ABANDONED, WRECKED DISMANTLED OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLES
Chapter 19.15 CODE ENFORCEMENT FEES
Chapter 19.20 ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES

Chapter 19.00 PURPOSE AND ADMINISTRATION
Article I. General Provisions
19.00.001 Citation.
    This title shall be known as, and may be cited and referred to, as the “Nuisance Abatement Code.” (Ord. 03-1 § 2)

 

19.00.002 Application.
    This code applies generally to all real and personal property within the city of West Sacramento.

    A.  Every owner of real and personal property within the city is required to maintain such property in accordance with the provisions of this code, and such owner shall be liable for violations of this code regardless of any contract or agreement that the owner might have with a third party regarding the property.

    B.   Every legal occupant, lessee or other person with an interest in real property, with the exception of a property owner or a lender whose sole interest in the property is as security for the repayment of a debt, is required to maintain such property in the same manner as is required of the property owner. The duty imposed on a property owner shall, in no instance, relieve legal occupants, lessees, or other persons of their duties under this code. (Ord. 03-1 § 2)

 

19.00.003 Severability.
    If any chapter, article, section, subsection or subdivision thereof, provision, sentence, clause or phrase of this code, or any application thereof, is for any reason held to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the remaining provisions of this code which can be given effect without the invalid portions and, therefore, such invalid portions are declared to be severable. The city council hereby declares that it would have enacted this code and each of its chapters, articles, sections, subsections or subdivisions thereof, provisions, sentences, clauses or phrases irrespective of the fact that one or more of them is declared invalid. (Ord. 03-1 § 2)

 

19.00.004 Reference.
    Whenever reference is made to any portion of this code, the reference applies to this code as adopted and any subsequent amendments or additions. (Ord. 03-1 § 2)

 

19.00.005 Continuity of provisions.
    The provisions of this code, insofar as they are substantially the same as previously existing city municipal code provisions relating to the same subject matter, shall be construed as restatements and continuations thereof and not new enactments. Any actions or proceedings commenced, permits issued, or entitlements granted pursuant to any prior existing ordinance or city municipal code provisions, shall not be affected by the enactment of this code; but such actions, proceedings, permits and entitlements shall hereafter conform to this code. (Ord. 03-1 § 2)

 

19.00.006 Nonexclusive remedies.
    The remedies provided in this code are cumulative, and shall be in addition to any other remedies provided by law. Nothing in this code shall be deemed to prevent the city from commencing any other available civil or criminal proceeding to abate a nuisance under applicable provisions of state or other law. (Ord. 03-1 § 2)

 

Article II. Declaration of Purpose
19.00.007 Purpose.
    The city council finds that the enforcement of this code and applicable state codes within the city is an important public service, critical to the protection of the public health, the improvement of the quality of life in the community, enhancement of public safety and the general welfare of the citizens of West Sacramento. The city council further finds that a comprehensive code enforcement system that uses a combination of administrative and judicial remedies will substantially facilitate compliance with this code. It is the direction of the council that the enforcement philosophy for this code shall be to achieve voluntary compliance from the property owner(s) whenever possible. Although “letter of the law” enforcement may become necessary from time to time, the council prefers that a commitment to the “intent of the law” be the prevailing enforcement posture in the city. Thus, the city council adopts this code to:

    A.  Provide a comprehensive method for the identification and abatement of certain nuisances within the city and to impose any costs of abatement against the owners of the offending properties as a personal obligation and/or as a lien against real property.

    B.   Provide for the protection of life, limb, health, safety, property or welfare of the general public and occupants of, and neighbors to, properties or conditions constituting public nuisances.

    C.   Provide the citizens of the city with an attractive community and protect property values.

    D.  Allow the citizens of the city to actively participate in the community enhancement process. (Ord. 03-1 § 2)

 

Article III. Definitions
19.00.010 Definitions.
    For purposes of this code, the following words shall have the following meaning, unless a different meaning is specifically provided for in this code.

    “Appeals board” means the board of appeals of the city of West Sacramento.

    “Building” means any structure or any portion thereof used or intended for housing or the enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, equipment or property of any kind, and also includes other structures wherein things may be grown, made, produced, kept, handled, stored or disposed of, and all appendages, accessories, apparatus, appliances and equipment installed as part thereof.

    “Building” shall not include machinery, equipment, or appliances installed for manufacture or process purposes only, nor shall it include any construction installations, which are not part of a building, or include any house trailer or vehicle, which conforms to the vehicle code.

     “Building official” means the city official and his or her designated representative charged with enforcement of the city building code.

    “Chief of police” means the chief of police of the city of West Sacramento or designated representatives.

    “City” means the city of West Sacramento.

    “City manager” means the city manager of the city of West Sacramento or designated representative.

    “City clerk” means the clerk of the city of West Sacramento or his or her designated representative.

    “Code” or “Nuisance Abatement Code” means Title 19 of the West Sacramento Municipal Code.

    “Combustible materials” means materials which are readily ignitable, free burning, or which will ignite through contact with flames of ordinary temperatures and includes combustible decorative materials, combustible dust, combustible fibers, and combustible liquids as those terms are defined in the California Fire Code as adopted by the city.

    “Days” means calendar days unless otherwise specified.

    “Demolish” means to destroy a building and to remove all debris and waste materials from the lot on which the building stood.

    “Dwelling” means a building which contains more than two dwelling units used, intended or designed to be used, rented, leased, let or hired out to be occupied for living purposes as defined by the California Fire Code. Dwellings do not include vehicles, travel trailers, recreational vehicles, watercraft or similar conveyances.

    “Dwelling unit” means a single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more person, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation as defined by the California Fire Code.

    “Enforcement” means diligent effort to secure compliance or abatement. This may include review of plans and permit applications, response to complaints, citation of violations, and other legal process. Except as otherwise provided in this code, “enforcement” may, but need not include inspections of existing buildings on which no complaint or application has been filed; and show effort to secure compliance as to such existing buildings.

    “Hearing officer” means an individual or individuals appointed by the city manager, acting singularly or collectively, to hear matters as provided for and described in this code, in accordance with regulations that may be established by the city council.

    “Imminently dangerous” means that the condition of property or a building, if abated according to the procedures set forth in this code requiring notice and an opportunity for a hearing, may, during the pendency of those proceedings, subject the public, occupants, or neighbors, or the property of these persons to potential harm of a serious nature.

    “Junk” means any worn out, cast off, or discarded article or material that is ready for destruction or has been collected or stored for salvage or conversion to some use. Any article or material which unaltered or unchanged and without further reconditioning, can be used for its original purpose as readily as when new shall not be considered junk.

    “Junkyard” means any property, or the use of any portion of a property other than for any licensed automobile wrecking yard, for the dismantling of machinery other than motor vehicles or for the storage or keeping for sale of parts and equipment resulting from such dismantling or wrecking or for the storage or keeping of junk, including scrap metals or other scrap material, whether or not such activity is done for profit.

    “Legal occupant” means any person over one year of age lawfully living, sleeping, cooking or eating in, or otherwise having actual legal possession of a dwelling unit.

    “Major vehicle repair” means any maintenance, repair, or replacement not listed in the definition of minor vehicle repair, including, but not limited to, the installation, repair, or refinishing of body, paint, radiator, starter and alternator, transmission, muffler, and engine.

    “Mediation” means a meeting held between the city manager and a responsible party under the supervision of an impartial third party to informally resolve issues relating to alleged violations of the Nuisance Abatement Code or other applicable laws.

    “Minor vehicle repair” means the installation, repair or refinishing of battery and ignition, brakes, detailing, diagnosis and tuning, glass, car stereo, seat covers and re-upholstery, tires and trailer hitch installation.

    “Notice of administrative violation” means the notice issued by the city manager or designated representatives, which may include, but are not limited to, police officer and/or code enforcement officer.

    “Nuisance” means any nuisance defined pursuant to Part 3 of Division 4 of the Civil Code commencing with Section 3479, any other nuisance recognized at common law or in equity, or any nuisance as defined by this code.

    “Occupy” means to reside or dwell in for purposes of shelter, sleeping or cooking.

    “Order of abatement” means any final order or notice requiring abatement of a nuisance pursuant to this code or other applicable law, whether issued by the hearing officer, appeals board, or other person, body, court, tribunal, committee, board, or council authorized by this code or other applicable law to order abatement of nuisances.

    “Person” means an individual, firm, co-partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, corporation, estate, trust, receiver, syndicate, city, local agency, or any other group or combination acting as an entity or their successors or assigns, or the agent of any of these persons or entities.

    “Person” includes an owner, lessee, sublessor, sublessee, or occupant of premises.

    “Personal property” means temporary or moveable property as distinguished from real property.

    “Property” means all real property, including, but not limited to, the entire premises, parking lots, sidewalks, gutters, driveways, walkways and shall include any building and structure and improvement thereon located on such property.

    “Property owner” or “owner” means any person owning real property as shown on the last equalized assessment roll for city taxes.

    “Public nuisance” includes, but is not limited to, a nuisance that affects at the same time an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, although the extent of the annoyance or damage inflicted upon individuals may be unequal; or any public nuisance as defined by state law or this code.

    “Reasonable time(s)” means between the hours of eight a.m. and five p.m., Monday through Friday, inclusive, unless otherwise required by: (1) an emergency impacting the safety or preservation of life or property; or (2) the fact that the alleged violation of the Nuisance Abatement Code or other applicable laws only occurs at some other hour or on a weekend

    “Registered,” with respect to vehicles, means a current, valid California Registration for a vehicle conforming to California Vehicle Code Sections 4000 or 9840 et seq.

    “Rental dwelling unit” means a dwelling unit rented for any tenure, type or price.

    “Responsible party” means any person, business, company or entity, and the parent or legal guardian of any person under the age of eighteen years, who has committed any act for which the city may impose an administrative fine or penalty.

    “Rubbish” means and includes castaway furniture, packing materials, construction waste, dry manure, debris, tree or shrub trimmings, or other matter that could constitute or increase a fire hazard.

    “Service request” means a report, by any person or entity, of an alleged violation of the Nuisance Abatement Code or other applicable laws.

    “State housing law” means Division 13, Part 1.5 of the Health and Safety Code (commencing at Section 17910) and Article 1 (commencing at Section 1) of Chapter 1, Title 25 of the California Code of Regulations.

    “Tenant” means the person lawfully occupying a building or portion thereof, or a dwelling unit or rental dwelling unit.

    “Vehicle” means a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved or drawn upon a highway, road or body of water and, for the purposes of this code, shall include, but not be limited to, automobiles, trailers, recreational vehicles, campers, boats, motorcycles and mopeds, whether or not such vehicles are registered as required by law.

    “Weeds” means and includes, but is not limited to, plants which bear seeds of a downy or winged nature; sagebrush, chaparral, manzanita, berry bushes, bamboo, and any other brush which can become a fire hazard to the property or adjacent property; poison oak; and dry grass, grass or weed stubble, dry or dead brush or shrubs. The city manager shall have discretion to determine whether a particular plant or brush is a weed for purposes of this code, subject to any appeal procedures as provided by this code.

    “Yard sale” means a sale of personal property on property that is used for residential purposes. (Ord. 19-11 § 4; Ord. 13-7 § 4; Ord. 12-11 § 5; Ord. 08-20 § 3; Ord. 03-1 § 2)

 

Article IV. Administration and Enforcement
19.00.050 Code interpretation.
    The city manager shall have the power to render interpretations of this code and its regulations in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations shall conform to the intent and purpose of this code. (Ord. 12-11 § 3; Ord. 03-1 § 2)

 

19.00.051 Adoption of code enforcement regulations.
    The city manager is authorized to adopt and enforce reasonable regulations consistent with the purposes, intent and express terms of this code as he or she deems necessary to implement such purposes, intent, and express terms. No regulation or amendment thereto, shall be enforced or become effective until thirty days following the date on which the proposed regulation or amendment has been filed with the city clerk. (Ord. 12-11 § 3; Ord. 03-1 § 2)

 

19.00.052 Authority to enter and inspect.
    A.  Inspections. To the extent allowed by law, the city manager may enter and inspect any building or property whenever necessary to secure compliance with, or prevent a violation of, the provisions of this code, the State Housing Law relating to the regulation of buildings used for human habitation, and rules and regulations promulgated pursuant thereto, or the city building code. The city manager may make any examinations and surveys as necessary in performing these inspections as permitted by law and consistent with legally recognized privacy rights. These duties may also include the taking of photographs, samples or other physical evidence. All inspections, entries, examinations and surveys shall be conducted in a reasonable manner.

    B.   Right of Entry. Whenever it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of this code, or when the city manager has reasonable cause to believe that there exists a condition which is contrary to or in violation of this code, which makes a building or property unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the city manager may enter a building or property at reasonable times to inspect or to perform the duties imposed by this code, provided that if such building or property is occupied that credentials be presented to the occupant and entry requested. If entry is refused, the city manager shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry, including, but not limited to, commencing proceedings to obtain an inspection warrant pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure, Sections 1822.50 et seq., as now existing or hereinafter amended.

    If such a building or property is unoccupied, the city manager shall make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge of control of the building or property and request entry.

    No person authorized to enter buildings shall enter any dwelling between the hours of six p.m. of any day and eight a.m. of the succeeding day, without the consent of the owner or occupants of the dwelling, nor enter any dwelling in the absence of the occupants without a proper written order executed and issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 12-11 § 3; Ord. 03-1 § 2)

 

19.00.053 Authority to issue criminal citations and make arrests.
    In performing his or her duties under this code, the chief of police and designated representatives shall have the authority and impunities of a public officer and employee as set forth in Penal Code Section 836.5, which include, but are not limited to: (1) making arrests without a warrant whenever he or she has reasonable cause to believe that the person to be arrested has committed a misdemeanor in his or her presence, which is a violation of this code or applicable state codes; and (2) issuing field citations as a substitute for physical arrest. (Ord. 03-1 § 2)

 

19.00.054 Disclaimer of liability.
    Nothing in this code shall be construed as requiring the city to enforce its prohibitions against all properties that may violate such prohibitions. The city envisions that this code will be enforced, in the city’s prosecutorial discretion, as resources permit. This code is not intended to and shall not be construed or given effect in a manner that imposes upon the city or any officer or employee thereof a mandatory duty of care towards persons and property within or without the city so as to provide a basis of civil liability for damages, except as otherwise imposed by law. (Ord. 03-1 § 2)

 

19.00.055 Confidentiality in connection with service requests.
    The city shall take all reasonable steps to ensure that the identity of any person making a service request to the city concerning a violation of the Nuisance Abatement Code or other applicable laws shall remain confidential. However, no enforcement action shall be taken beyond issuance of a notice to abate unless: (1) the complaining witness agrees to be identified upon request of the responsible party; or (2) the city manager has developed sufficient independent evidence to take further action. (Ord. 12-11 § 3; Ord. 03-1 § 2)

Chapter 19.05 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
Article I. Public Nuisances
19.05.001 Unlawful public nuisances declared.
    It is unlawful and a nuisance for any person owning, occupying, leasing or having charge or possession of any property in the city to maintain or allow to be maintained on such property any of the conditions set forth in this section:

    A.  The exterior accumulation of weeds, rank growths, dirt, litter, rubbish or debris that is visible from a public or private street, sidewalk or right-of-way.

    B.   Broken, abandoned or discarded furniture or other household equipment, appliances, or fixtures, packing boxes, lumber, junk, trash, rubbish, or other materials or debris, or fencing built with non-fencing materials, which are visible from a public or private street, sidewalk or right-of-way. This includes the dumping, spillage or storage of solids or liquids, which adversely affect the aesthetic or olfactory nature of the area.

    C.   Buildings, fences or other structures, the exterior walls or windows, which are visible from a public or private street, sidewalk or right-of-way, containing graffiti or other inscribed material or which are cracked, broken, leaning, fallen, decayed, deteriorated or defaced.

    D.  Neglected or improperly maintained landscaping, visible from a public or private street, sidewalk or right-of-way, including, but not limited to, dead, debris laden, weed-infested or overgrown vegetation, such as trees, shrubs, hedges, grass and ground covers, or vegetation dying as a result of physical damage, disease, insect infestation or lack of water, or the removal or failure to maintain in good condition any landscaping required as a condition to any permit or development approved or included in the project plans or application, without city approval; provided, however, that the provision as to dead or dying vegetation due to lack of water shall not be enforced during a drought year, as determined by the city. Neglected, improperly maintained, and overgrown landscaping and/or vegetation for purposes of this subdivision, includes, but is not limited to, a lawn area with fifty percent or more of its area exceeding twelve inches in height.

    E.   Buildings for human use or occupancy that are boarded by voluntary action of the owner or as a result of enforcement activity by the city, which are not rehabilitated within ninety days after the building is boarded.

    F.   Buildings designed for human use or occupancy that stand vacant for more than ninety consecutive days, unless the city manager finds in writing that any of the following applies:

    1.   The building is the subject of an active building permit for repair or rehabilitation and the owner is progressing diligently to complete the repair or rehabilitation.

    2.   The building meets all codes, does not contribute to blight, is ready for occupancy, and is actively being offered for sale, lease, or rent.

    3.   The building does not contribute to and is not likely to contribute to blight because the owner is actively maintaining and monitoring the building so that it does not contribute to blight. Active maintenance and monitoring shall include:

    a.   Maintenance, of landscaping and plant materials in good condition;

    b.   Maintenance of the exterior of the building, including but not limited to paint and finishes, in good condition;

    c.   Regular removal of all exterior trash, debris and graffiti;

    d.   Maintenance of the building in continuing compliance with all applicable codes and regulations;

    e.   Prevention of criminal activity on the property, including, but not limited to, use and sale of controlled substances, prostitution and criminal street gang activity.

    G.  Where visible from a public or private street, sidewalk or right-of-way, the exterior storage or maintenance in a residential zone of metal storage bins or containers, including garbage bins and dumpsters, that are larger than one hundred twenty square feet, unless expressly permitted by law or a permit duly issued by the city.

    H.  Where visible from a public or private street, sidewalk or right-of-way, the exterior storage or maintenance of parts or machinery of any type or description unless specifically authorized by a city license or permit; building materials or merchandise unless specifically authorized by use permit; or construction equipment or garbage bins except while excavation, construction or demolition operations covered by an active building permit or other city permit are in progress on the subject or adjoining property.

    I.    The exterior storage of five or more used tires, or the storage of any number of used tires in a manner that allows any accumulation of water or creates a fire hazard.

    J.    The parking or storage of any vehicle, boat, trailer, camper, motor home or other mobile equipment, whether or not motorized, or portions or parts and components thereof, on property used or zoned for residential purposes, if either:

    1.   Located on any front lawn, front yard or street side yard, provided, however, that such parking or storage of a legally registered and operable vehicle, boat, trailer, camper, or motor home shall be allowed in front or side street yards on required parking spaces or on paved driveways leading directly from approved and permitted curb cuts to required garages, carports or other required off-street parking spaces, if such vehicle, boat, trailer, camper or motor home is located totally on private property and does not extend into or block any public right-of-way; or

    2.   Located in any side or rear yard so as to prevent a three-foot-wide continuous fire access way from the front of the property.

    K.  The use of any trailer, camper or motor home for residential occupancy except on property zoned for mobile home parks or camping.

    L.   Any unmounted camper shell visible from a public street, sidewalk or right-of-way.

    M.  Land, the topography, geology or configuration of which, whether in natural state or as a result of grading operations, excavation or fill, causes erosion, subsidence, or surface water drainage problems of such magnitude as to be injurious or potentially injurious to the public health, safety and welfare or to adjacent properties.

    N.  Obstruction or encroachment upon any public property, including, but not limited to, any public street, sidewalk, highway, right-of-way, and park or building, without prior city consent. Such obstructions or encroachments include, but are not limited to, overgrown trees and shrub, building materials, merchandise or other personal property, and buildings or portions of buildings or structures protruding onto public property.

    O.  Use of property in a residential district for the purpose of performing major vehicle repair.

    P.   Use of property in a residential district for the purpose of performing minor vehicle repair or maintenance where any of the following conditions exists: (1) the repair is conducted on vehicles registered to persons not currently residing on the property; (2) the repair is conducted outside of a fully enclosed structure and results in a vehicle being inoperable for more than twenty-four hours; or (3) for a profit, except where such use constitutes a legal nonconforming use pursuant to the city zoning code.

    Q.  Maintenance of any combustible material or substance which because of its quantity, concentration or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may either cause or substantially contribute to an increase in mortality or serious illness or pose a significant present or potential hazard to human health or the environment if improperly managed.

    R.   Any condition recognized in law or in equity as constituting a public nuisance.

    S.   Any condition constituting a “substandard building” under Section 17920.3 of the California Health and Safety Code.

    T.   Any condition constituting an unsafe structure and equipment under Section 116 of the California Building Code for the abatement of unsafe structures and equipment as adopted by the city.

    U.  The making or continuing, or causing to be made and continued, of any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise that disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood or which causes discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable person of normal sensitiveness residing in the area.

    V.  The illegal sale of controlled substances and/or other illegal drugs and/or substances which creates a public nuisance as defined in Civil Code Sections 3479 and 3480 and Health and Safety Code Section 11570.

    W.  The illegal use of controlled substances and/or other illegal drugs and/or substances, or substances injurious to health that create a public nuisance as defined in Civil Code Sections 3479 and 3480 and Health and Safety Code Section 11570.

    X.  The frequent gathering, or coming and going, of people who have intent to purchase or use illegal drugs and/or controlled substances on the premises.

    Y.  The occurrence of prostitution, as defined in Penal Code Sections 11225 and 11230.

    Z.   The unlawful activities of a criminal street gang, as defined in Penal Code Sections 186.22, 186.22a and 186.25 and Health and Safety Code Section 11570.

    AA.  Any pay telephone installed, located, or maintained on unimproved property.

    BB. Any telephone that is used as an instrumentality for, or contributes substantially by its presence to, any of the following conditions:

    1.   Distribution of controlled substances as defined by the Health and Safety Code;

    2.   Criminal activity, including, but not limited to, prostitution or the solicitation of prostitution;

    3.   Consumption of alcoholic beverages on nearby outdoor public or private property except where outdoor consumption of alcoholic beverages is specifically authorized pursuant to a valid license issued by the Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control; or

    4.   Individuals remaining on public or private property under such circumstances that a reasonable person would conclude the individual so remaining does so with a purpose unrelated to the usual and ordinary use to which such property is put, does not have a bona fide intent to exercise a constitutional right, and is causing a public inconvenience or annoyance.

    CC. The firing or discharging of a firearm by any person on any premises within the city, except as otherwise authorized by law.

    DD.  The existence of any property condition or use of any property which is unlawful or declared to be a public nuisance pursuant to any other provision in the West Sacramento Municipal Code. This subsection shall be construed to place an affirmative duty on property owners and occupants to maintain and use their property in conformity with all applicable codes. The city shall have the power to require property owners and occupants to bring their property and the use thereof into compliance with applicable codes, regardless of whether or not the building is occupied.

    EE. Insufficient exterior lighting that impairs the public health and safety, including, but not limited to, lighting that has not been installed or maintained pursuant to the manufacturer’s specifications.

    FF. Yard Sales.

    1.   Yard sales, unless the sales comply with all of the following standards:

    a.   The yard sale consists solely of the sale of personal property accumulated by the seller during the course of the seller’s ordinary residential living;

    b.   Any individual seller, household, home address, group, or family shall only be allowed three sales in any one calendar year;

    c.   Each sale shall last no more than two consecutive days, with each day beginning no earlier than eight a.m. and ending no later than five p.m.;

    d.   Only personal property may be sold and no new or secondhand goods obtained for purposes of resale are permitted to be sold;

    e.   Signs shall be permitted in accordance with the city’s Sign Ordinance, Chapter 17.33 and the Temporary Offsite Real Property Sign Ordinance, Chapter 17.39 of the municipal code;

    f.    No live animals, food, tobacco products, alcoholic beverages, weapons, controlled substances, or other illegal items or items requiring permits for sale shall be sold or offered for sale; and

    g.   All personal property offered for sale shall be arranged so that fire, police, health and other officials may have access for inspection at all times during the sale. Personal property offered for sale shall not be displayed or stored on adjoining public sidewalks, streets, or other public rights-of-way. (Ord. 19-11 § 4; Ord. 13-7 § 4; Ord. 12-11 § 3; Ord. 08-20 § 3; Ord. 03-1 § 2)

 

19.05.002 Unlawful conduct declared.
    A.  It is unlawful and a violation of this code for any person to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, or convert or demolish, equip, use or occupy or maintain any building or structure deemed to be in violation of this chapter or cause or allow the same to be done in violation of this chapter or contrary to any notice, order, permit or entitlement issued by the city manager or the building official.

    B.   A person shall be charged with a separate offense for each day during any portion of which such person commits, continues, maintains, or permits a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 12-11 § 3; Ord. 03-1 § 2)

 

Article II. Summary Abatement
19.05.003 Summary abatement.
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the contrary, whenever it is determined that a public nuisance as defined by this chapter is so imminently dangerous to life or other property that such condition must be immediately corrected or isolated, the city manager may institute the following procedures:

    A.  Notice. The city manager shall attempt to make contact through a personal interview with the property owner or the person, if any, occupying or otherwise in real or apparent charge and control the building or property at issue. In the event contact is made, the city manager shall notify such person or persons of the danger involved and require that such condition be immediately removed, repaired or isolated so as to preclude harm to any person or property.

    B.   Abatement. In the event the city manager is unable to make contact as required by this section or if the appropriate persons after notification by the city manager do not take action as specified by such official within seventy-two hours or a lesser period if deemed necessary, then the city manager may take all steps necessary to remove or isolate such imminently dangerous condition or conditions with the use of city forces or a contractor retained pursuant to the provisions of this chapter; provided, however, that summary abatement shall be limited solely to those matters which are imminently dangerous to life or other property, and additional abatement, if necessary, shall utilize the provisions of Article III of this chapter.

    C.   Recovery of Costs. The city manager shall keep an itemized account of the costs incurred by the city in removing or isolating such condition or conditions, including, but not limited to, administrative costs and relocation costs, if any, paid by the city. Such costs may be recovered to the same extent and in the same manner that abatement costs are recovered pursuant to Article VI of this chapter. (Ord. 12-11 § 3; Ord. 04-5 § 3; Ord. 03-1 § 2)

 

Article III. Abatement Notices, Orders and Hearings
19.05.004 Notice to abate.
    The city manager may initiate abatement proceedings if conditions in violation of this chapter are found to exist. The abatement process is initiated by giving the property owner advance notice of the abatement proceedings. The city manager shall issue a written notice to abate (“notice”), which shall contain a statement of the action required of the owner. The action required may be as follows:

    A.  Repair. If the city manager determines that a dwelling or building must be repaired, then the notice shall order the dwelling, building or portion thereof to be repaired, that all required permits be secured therefore, and the repair work shall be completed within the time specified on the notice, or within such time that city manager shall determine is reasonable under all the circumstances.

    B.   Repair or Demolish. The owner shall have the choice between repairing or demolishing; however, if the owner chooses to repair, the city manager shall require that the building be brought into compliance with this chapter, and all applicable laws, codes and regulations, according to a written, reasonable and feasible schedule for expeditious repair. If the owner chooses to demolish the building, all required permits for demolition must be secured within the time specified on the notice, and the demolition to be completed within such time as the city manager shall determine is reasonable under all circumstances.

    C.   Vacation of Property. If the city manager has determined that the dwelling, building or portion thereof is in such condition as to make it imminently dangerous to the life, health, property, or safety of its occupants the public or adjacent property, the notice shall require that the dwelling building or portion thereof, shall be vacated within a time specified on the notice as determined by the city manager to be reasonable under all of the circumstances. The city manager shall not require the vacating of the building unless the city manager concurrently requires expeditious demolition or repair to comply with the provisions of this chapter. If vacation of the dwelling building or portion thereof is required by the city manager, the city manager shall provide the property owner written notice of the relocation procedures set forth in Article VII of this chapter.

    D.  Boarding Against Entry. If an offending dwelling or building is vacant, open and accessible, the city manager shall require the property owner to board the building or portion thereof, and that it remain secured against entry. If a condition exists to the extent that the building or portion thereof cannot be boarded, the city manager may also require fencing or other remedies to secure the property against entry. This action shall occur in accordance with the specifications for the boarding of open and accessible properties issued by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, or such similar plans and specifications for boarding open and accessible properties in a manner designed to adequately protect against entry without creating any unreasonable risks to the life, health, property, safety, or welfare of the public.

    E.   Eliminate Risk of Hazardous Materials. If, following an inspection of a building or any portion thereof, the city manager determines that there is reasonable cause to believe that, because of the presence of friable asbestos or other hazardous material (as defined by the Health and Safety Code or other applicable provisions of state or federal law), that there is a serious risk to the life, health, property, safety, or welfare of its occupants, the general public, or the adjacent neighborhood, then the city manager may order the owner to take all steps necessary to eliminate the risk within the time specified on the notice. To confirm the elimination of the risk, the owner of the building or portion thereof shall, at his or her expense and within the same time certain as established in the notice, obtain the services of a qualified health professional acceptable to the city manager to perform a comprehensive site assessment and prepare a written report to the city manager confirming that a health risk no longer exists.

    F.   Securing Real Property. Whenever the city manager determines that any real property is used for the dumping or disposal of any object or material in a manner that violates provisions of this chapter or other provisions of the city municipal code, the city manager may order the owner to do any or all of the following to secure the property against further disposal or dumping:

    1.   Erect fencing and locking gates to the city’s specifications;

    2.   Install barricades to the city’s specifications; or

    3.   Establish security patrols at regular intervals to ensure the integrity of any required fences and locking gates.

    G.  Removing Pay Telephones. Whenever the city manager determines that pay telephones are used in violation of this chapter, the city manager may order the owner to remove the pay telephone and to refrain from installing another pay phone in a different location on the property or on contiguous property for a period of one year from the date of removal. (Ord. 12-11 § 3; Ord. 04-5 § 3; Ord. 03-1 § 2)

 

19.05.005 Service of notice to abate.
    A.  In General. Whenever the city manager finds any property to contain a public nuisance as declared by this chapter, he or she shall notify the owner of such property in writing by issuing a notice to abate (“notice”) in a form developed by the city manager. The notice shall state the conditions that constitute the public nuisance, and shall order the owner to abate said conditions within thirty days after the date of service of notice. The notice may provide for a shorter period of time in which to abate the public nuisance in the event that:

    1.   The condition which constitutes the public nuisance is not one which makes the property substandard housing as defined by Health and Safety Code Section 17920.3; or

    2.   Prior notices to abate the same condition have been sent within ninety days prior to the most recently issued notice and the condition has not been abated.

    All notices relating to the abatement of a pay telephone shall also be sent to the telephone vendor, if known. No notice shall be issued with respect to the use of pay telephones in violation of Section 19.05.001(BB) of this chapter unless the city manager has first made reasonable efforts to work with the property owner to correct the nuisance conditions by allowing the owner to take voluntary measures such as blocking incoming calls, adding lighting, changing the location of the telephone on the property, and/or making the telephone temporarily inoperative.

    B.   Substandard Housing. Whenever the condition that constitutes a nuisance is a substandard residential building, as defined by Health and Safety Code Section 17920.3, then the notice shall be sent not only to the owner, but also to any mortgagee, insurer or beneficiary under any covenant, deed of trust or other regulatory document of public record. The notice shall state the conditions which render the building unfit for human habitation and shall order the building or the affected portion of it vacated, and further order that it be either repaired or demolished within thirty days after the date of notice. If the city manager determines that the conditions can be corrected or abated by repair, the notice shall state the required repairs.

    If such building is encumbered by a mortgage or deed of trust of public record, and the owner does not comply with the notice on or before the expiration of thirty days after its mailing and posting, the mortgagee or beneficiary may, within fifteen days after the expiration of said thirty-day period, comply with the requirements of the notice, in which event the cost to the mortgagee or beneficiary in so doing shall be added to and become a part of the lien secured by the mortgage or deed of trust and shall be payable as provided by Title 25 of the Code of California Regulations, Section 54.

    C.   Manner of Giving Notice.

    1.   General. The notice shall be delivered by certified U.S. mail, postage prepaid and return receipt requested, U.S. mail delivery confirmation, U.S. mail signature confirmation, or such other delivery method that is reasonably calculated to provide actual notice to the property owner. The names and addresses of owners appearing on the assessment roll shall be conclusively deemed to be the proper persons and addresses for the purpose of mailing such notices. Service is deemed complete at the time of the deposit of the document in the U.S. mail.

    The city manager, in his or her discretion, may, but shall not be required to, provide additional notice by (a) posting a copy of the notice conspicuously on the property or parts thereof to be abated; (b) delivering, by mail, certified or otherwise, or personal delivery of additional copies of the notice to any known occupants of the property; and/or (c) by any other notice procedure deemed appropriate by the city manager and reasonably calculated to provide actual notice to the intended recipient. Such additional notice shall not impact the conclusive effect of the notice given to the property owner as provided in this subsection.

    2.   Substandard Housing. Whenever the condition which constitutes a public nuisance also renders a building substandard, as defined by Health and Safety Code Section 17920.3, then at least one copy of the notice shall be posted conspicuously on the building alleged to be substandard; and an additional copy shall be delivered by certified U.S. mail, postage prepaid and return receipt requested; U.S. mail delivery confirmation; U.S. mail signature confirmation; or such other delivery method that is reasonably calculated to provide actual notice to the owner as the person’s name and address appear on the last equalized assessment roll, and to any mortgagee or beneficiary on any note or deed of trust of record. If the address of a mortgagee or beneficiary is unknown, then that fact shall be stated on the copy so mailed, and the notice shall be sent to the mortgagee or beneficiary addressed to him or her at Yolo County, California.

    3.   Notice to Vacate. If the city manager orders that a building or portion be vacated, the city manager shall post at or upon the front entrance of the building a notice in substantially the following form:

 

DO NOT ENTER
UNSAFE TO OCCUPY
IT IS A MISDEMEANOR TO OCCUPY
THIS BUILDING, OR TO REMOVE OR
DEFACE THIS NOTICE

 

[SPECIALIST/OFFICER]

NUISANCE ABATEMENT CODE

CITY OF WEST SACRAMENTO

 

    4.   Affidavits. The person sending such notice to abate shall file an affidavit under penalty of perjury with the city clerk certifying the time, date and manner in which notice was given and shall also file with the city clerk any receipt card returned in acknowledgment of the notice. The affidavit shall be maintained in the files of the nuisance abatement program, which shall be accessible to the city clerk.

    D.  Effect of Failure to Serve or Failure to Receive Notice. The failure of the city manager to serve any person with a notice to abate, or any other notices required herein to be served, shall not invalidate any proceedings hereunder as to any other persons duly served or relieve any such person from any duty or obligation imposed on him or her by the provisions of this chapter. The failure of any person served pursuant to this chapter to actually receive, read, and/or review any such notices and/or orders shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this chapter.

    E.   Effect of Appearance in Administrative Proceedings. Any person who appears, either personally or by representative, in any administrative proceedings pursuant to this chapter waives any defects in the service of any notice(s) under this chapter unless such alleged defect in notice is the sole basis for contesting the validity of any proceedings taken under this chapter.

    If a person appears and contests only defects in notice, pursuant to this subsection, and the reviewing administrative officer or body determines notice to be sufficient and in compliance with this chapter, then the person contesting notice, at his or her/its request, shall be entitled to a continuance of the hearing of not more than thirty days in order to prepare for a hearing on the merits. (Ord. 12-11 § 3; Ord. 04-5 § 3; Ord. 03-1 § 2)

 

19.05.006 Notifying residential tenants of notice to abate.
    Tenants in a residential building shall be provided a copy of any notice served under this chapter concerning any violation which affects the health and safety of the occupants and which violates Civil Code Section 1941.1, any order declaring the property to be substandard, the city’s decision to repair or demolish, or the issuance of a building or demolition permit following the abatement order. Copies may be provided either by first class mail to each affected residential unit or, at the discretion of the city manager, by posting a copy in a prominent place on the property.

    The failure of a tenant to receive the notice to abate or other notices required by this chapter shall not affect in any manner the validity of any proceeding taken under this chapter. (Ord. 12-11 § 3; Ord. 03-1 § 2)

 

19.05.007 Notice of hearing on failure to comply with notice to abate.
    In the event the owner fails, neglects or refuses to comply with the notice to abate, the city manager shall serve the owner with an “order to show cause” which shall order such person to either abate the conditions specified in the notice to abate within the time determined by the city manager and specified in the order, or to appear before a hearing officer, at a stated date, time and place, not less than seven days from the date of the order, to show cause, if any, why the conditions should not be abated by the city at the owner’s expense. The order to show cause shall be served and an affidavit filed with the city clerk in the manner specified in Section 19.05.005. (Ord. 12-11 § 3; Ord. 04-5 § 3: Ord. 03-1 § 2)

 

19.05.008 Meeting with city manager.
    Persons charged with a violation of the Nuisance Abatement Code or other applicable laws are encouraged to meet with the city manager and/or the appropriate department head or designee prior to requesting a hearing to seek resolution of the matter. Such a meeting may be requested before or after the request for a hearing is filed but the holding of such meeting shall not be required by this code and a request for the meeting shall not extend the time for filing the request for hearing. (Ord. 12-11 § 3; Ord. 04-5 § 3: Ord. 03-1 § 2)

 

19.05.009 Form of order to show cause.
    The order to show cause shall be in substantially the following form:

 

 

NOTICE TO ABATE NUISANCE AND ORDER TO SHOW CAUSE

 

Hearing Date: ______________________

Time: ________________________________

Location: _____________________________

An initial determination has been made that there exists upon the building, structure, lot or property located at _____________________________, West Sacramento, California, condition(s) constituting a public nuisance(s) under Section ___________, Subdivision(s) ______________________________ of the West Sacramento Municipal Code.

The conditions constituting the nuisance are __________________.

The methods of abatement available are _____________________.

You have previously received a written Notice to Abate dated _______ requiring you to abate these conditions and have failed to do so.

YOU ARE HEREBY ORDERED to either:

(a)

ABATE THE ABOVE CONDITION(S) by repairing, replacing, removing, destroying or otherwise remedying the condition(s) to the satisfaction of the undersigned within _____ calendar days of the date of this Order;

OR, alternatively,

(b)

TO APPEAR AND SHOW CAUSE, if any, before the Hearing Officer at __________________ located at ___________________, West Sacramento, CA _______________, on ______________ at ____________ o’clock _.m., why these condition(s) should not be abated by the City and the expenses of doing so be charged to you as a personal debt and/or made a special assessment and lien upon the property.

 

All persons having an interest in said matters are notified to attend the hearing, and their testimony and evidence will be given due consideration.

WARNING!

 

 

(a)

If you do not either abate the conditions or attend the hearing, you will have waived your right to a hearing regarding the existence of the nuisance. In that case, the City will abate the nuisance and the expenses of doing so will be made a special assessment and lien upon the property. In addition, you may be cited for violations of the West Sacramento Municipal Code and subject to fines.

 

 

(b)

Once the City abates vehicles or other property, they may be destroyed or otherwise disposed of as provided by law.

 

 

(c)

In accordance with Revenue and Taxation Code Sections 17274 and 24436.5, a tax deduction may not be allowed for interest, taxes, depreciation or amortization paid or incurred in the taxable year if these conditions are not abated.

Dated: ______________

__________________________________________

Code Enforcement Officer

(Ord. 04-5 § 3: Ord. 03-1 § 2)

 

Article IV. Hearing on Order to Show Cause for Noncompliance with Notice to Abate
19.05.010 Conduct of hearing.
    A hearing officer shall conduct the hearing on the order to show cause. The hearing officer is authorized to take testimony and in the course of so doing is authorized to administer oaths or affirmations pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure Section 2093. Hearings need not be conducted according to the technical rules relating to evidence and witnesses; however, the person(s) to whom the order to show cause was directed shall have the right to present testimony and documentary and physical evidence on his or her/its behalf and shall have the right to cross-examine any witnesses and rebut any evidence presented against him/her/it. The city manager shall have the burden of proving the existence of a public nuisance, or other violations alleged, by a preponderance of the evidence. (Ord. 12-11 § 3; Ord. 03-1 § 2)

 

19.05.011 Failure to appear at hearing.
    Failure of the owner or responsible party to either abate the conditions specified in the order to show cause or to appear at the hearing on the order to show cause after notice has been served shall be deemed a waiver of the right to a hearing and an admission by such owner or responsible party of the existence of the nuisance conditions as specified. In the event of an owner’s failure to appear, the hearing officer shall proceed to consider the evidence as presented by the city manager. Notwithstanding anything in this chapter to the contrary, there shall be no right to appeal a decision and/or and order of abatement issued following such failure to appear. (Ord. 12-11 § 3; Ord. 03-1 § 2)

 

19.05.012 Relief from order issued following a failure to appear.
    The hearing officer shall have discretion to, and in the furtherance of justice may, relieve any person of any decision or order of abatement entered as a result of a person’s failure to appear at a hearing upon a written finding, based on evidence submitted by the person seeking such relief, that the failure to appear was the result of mistake, surprise, inadvertence or excusable neglect. Any application for such relief shall be submitted to the hearing officer by the person seeking such relief no later than seven days after the date of any decision or order of abatement issued following a person’s failure to appear at the hearing. After the passage of seven days after the date of any such decision or order of abatement issued after a person’s failure to appear, the hearing officer shall have no power or authority to grant the person relief from any such decision or order of abatement pursuant to this subsection or otherwise. The hearing officer shall schedule a timely request for relief under this section for a hearing no later than thirty days after the application for relief. If relief from the decision or order of abatement is granted pursuant to this subsection, the hearing officer shall schedule and hold a hearing on the merits no later than thirty days after the granting of such relief. (Ord. 03-1 § 2)

 

19.05.013 Order of abatement and notice of right to appeal.
    Upon the conclusion of the hearing on the order to show cause, the hearing officer shall determine whether the activity or the property, or any part thereof as maintained constitutes a public nuisance. If the hearing officer finds that a public nuisance does not exist, it shall dismiss the proceedings. If the hearing officer finds that a public nuisance does exist and that there is sufficient cause to order the abatement of the public nuisance the hearing officer shall issue an order of abatement, which shall contain findings of fact and shall direct and order the public nuisance abated within the time and in the manner set forth in the order. If the hearing officer consists of more than one individual, then the determinations made pursuant to this subsection shall be made by majority vote. Except in the circumstance when an order of abatement has been issued following a person’s failure to appear at a hearing, and where no relief to such person has been granted pursuant to Section 19.05.011 of this chapter the order of abatement shall include notification of the right to appeal and shall be served in the manner set forth in Section 19.05.005.

    In deciding whether to order abatement of the nuisance by requiring either repair or demolition of any residential building the hearing officer shall:

    A.  Give preference to repair of the building whenever it is economically feasible to do so without having to repair more than seventy-five percent of the dwelling, as determined by the hearing officer; and

    B.   Shall give full consideration to the needs for housing as expressed in the city’s housing element.

    An order of abatement issued under the Nuisance Abatement Code shall run with the land, and shall be binding on any subsequent owners, lessees, successors in interest, or persons who acquire any interest in the property. The owner of any property against which an order of abatement has been issued shall notify any prospective purchaser, lessees, successors, or persons who propose to acquire any interest in the property of the order of abatement, of its application as against the property, and of the terms of this section, prior to entering into any contract or agreement for the sale or lease of any interest in the property. (Ord. 04-5 § 3: Ord. 03-1 § 2)

 

19.05.014 Appeal of order of abatement.
    A.  The hearing officer’s decision and any order of abatement issued by the hearing officer pursuant to this chapter may be appealed in writing to the appeals board by any interested person, by filing with the city clerk a written appeal. This appeal must be filed no later than fifteen days after the date of service of the hearing officer’s decision and must contain the following information:

    1.   A specific identification of the property that is the subject of the nuisance abatement proceeding.

    2.   A caption reading: “appeal of [name of appellant(s)].”

    3.   A brief statement setting forth the legal interest of each of the appellants in the building or the land involved in the order of abatement.

    4.   A statement in ordinary and concise language of the specific order or action protested together with the contentions of the appellant and any material facts supporting the contentions of the appellant.

    5.   The address of each person appealing.

    6.   The signatures of all parties named as appellants.

    7.   The verification of at least one appellant as to the truth of the matter stated in the appeal.

    B.   An appeal shall be deemed filed upon receipt by the city clerk’s office and the payment of any appeal fee, which may be established by resolution of the city council. Except as otherwise provided by this code or other law, the filing of an appeal pursuant to this section shall stay the hearing officer’s decision. The city clerk shall set a date on which the appeals board shall hear the appeal which shall be no later than thirty days from the date the appeal was filed. Written notice of the time and place of the appeal hearing shall be given at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing to each appellant and to all interested persons, either by causing a copy of such notice to be delivered to the appellant personally or by mailing a copy thereof by certified U.S. mail postage prepaid and return receipt requested U.S. mail delivery confirmation, U.S. mail signature confirmation, or such other delivery method that is reasonably calculated to provide actual notice to the intended recipient at the address shown on the appeal. Mailed service of the notice shall be deemed complete at the time of deposit in the U.S. mail. Continuances of the hearing may be granted for good cause in the sole discretion of the appeals board.

    C.   The failure to file an appeal to the appeals board, pursuant to this chapter, shall render the decision and any order of abatement of the hearing officer final and conclusive, shall be deemed a failure to exhaust administrative remedies, and shall act as a complete bar to any legal proceeding challenging the city’s abatement of the public nuisance.

    D.  At the time of the appeal hearing the appeals board shall permit any interested person to present written or oral arguments relating to the appeal based upon the record presented at the hearing on the order to show cause. The appeals board shall not permit the introduction of any further evidence unless a showing is made by the offering party that the evidence could not reasonably have been presented to the hearing officer at the time and place of the prior hearing. Additionally, the appeals board may permit the presentation of evidence if the evidence is reasonably calculated to show that there has been substantial change in the condition of the property since the time of the prior hearing. Thereafter, based upon the prior administrative record, the evidence that may be presented pursuant to the provisions of this section, and the written or oral arguments of interested persons, the appeals board shall determine whether the property, in its then condition, constitutes a public nuisance within the meaning of this chapter.

    E.   If the appeals board finds such nuisance conditions do not exist, it shall dismiss the proceeding. If the appeals board finds that a public nuisance exists, it shall issue an order of abatement requiring the abatement thereof. The order of abatement shall take the form of a written decision briefly setting forth the findings of facts relied upon in making the order, the conditions constituting the nuisance, the manner in which the nuisance may be abated, and the date by which the nuisance must be abated.

    F.   The decision and any order of abatement of the appeals board shall be final and conclusive on the date it is issued. The decision shall be served in the manner set forth in Section 19.05.005. The decision shall include notification that any action to judicially review said decision and order of abatement must be commenced not later than ninety days following the date of the decision and order of abatement pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6. (Ord. 04-5 § 3; Ord. 03-1 § 2)

 

Article V. Abatement by City
19.05.015 Abatement by city.
    A.  If a nuisance is not completely abated by the owner in the time and manner set forth in any final order of abatement, the nuisance shall be abated by city forces or by private contractors retained by the city for this purpose. Subject to applicable state and/or federal law, entry upon the property to which the order of abatement relates is expressly authorized for such purposes.

    B.   No person shall obstruct, impede or interfere with any officer, employee, contractor or authorized representative of the city whenever such person is engaged in the abatement work authorized or directed pursuant to this chapter, or is performing any necessary act preliminary to or incidental to such work. (Ord. 03-1 § 2)

 

19.05.015.5 Imposition of costs by hearing officer and creation of special assessments to secure payments.
    A.  In any administrative proceeding to abate a nuisance, the hearing officer shall be authorized to impose upon the property owner the cost incurred by the city in abating the nuisance, including any incidental expenses. The term incidental expenses shall include, but not be limited to, personnel costs, both direct and indirect, attorneys’ fees, costs incurred in documenting the nuisance, the actual expenses and costs of the city in inspecting property and work, in preparation of notices, specifications and contracts and in reinspecting property, the costs of printing and mailing the notices required hereunder, and any administrative or recording costs charged by the Yolo County Recorder.

    B.   Pursuant to Government Code Section 38773.5, payment of the city’s costs and expenses imposed by the hearing officer may be secured by placing a special assessment against the property. The city manager is authorized to impose special assessments for amounts under ten thousand dollars. Special assessments for amounts of ten thousand dollars or more may be imposed by resolution of the city council. If the city manager or city council elects to secure payment of the city’s costs to abate the nuisance upon the owner by placing an assessment against the property, notice of the assessment shall be provided to the property owner by certified mail pursuant to Government Code Section 38773.5. The notice shall specify that the property may be sold after three years by the tax collector for unpaid delinquent assessments. Assessments imposed pursuant to this section may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of municipal taxes shall be applicable to the special assessment. (Ord. 08-1 § 1; Ord. 04-5 § 3)

 

Article VI. Abatement Costs
19.05.016 Payment and collection of costs of enforcement and abatement.
    In addition to any other remedy available to the city, the city may impose and collect nuisance abatement costs pursuant to this section.

    A.  The city manager shall keep an itemized account of the costs incurred in the abatement of any nuisance under this chapter and any fee, cost, or charge incurred as described in Government Code Section 54988. All costs incurred by the city, including incidental expenses, of abating the nuisance, whether abated by city forces, the owner, or otherwise, shall become a civil debt of the owner and other responsible parties and shall be billed to the owner and become due and payable forty-five days after service of an invoice in the manner described by Section 19.05.005. The term “incidental expenses” shall include, but not be limited to, personnel costs both direct and indirect, attorneys’ fees, costs incurred in documenting the nuisance, the actual expenses and costs of the city in inspecting property and work, in preparation of notices, specifications and contracts and in re-inspecting property, the costs of printing and mailing the notices required hereunder, and any administrative or recording costs charged by the Yolo County Recorder.

    B.   If payment of the billed costs is not received by the city within forty-five days of service of the invoice, the city manager shall prepare a written report, which shall be filed by the city clerk. The report shall describe the outstanding nuisance abatement fees, costs or charges due, and the amount thereof.

    C.   The city clerk shall publish notice of the report’s filing and of the time and place of hearing on the report, prior to the date set for the hearing. The notice shall be published at least once a week for two weeks. Not less than ten days before the hearing, the city clerk shall also mail written notice of the hearing to each property owner whose property or parcel is identified as being subject to nuisance abatement fees costs, or charges setting forth individually each property and each of the services and charges due for that property.

    D.  At the time stated in the notice, the city council shall hear and consider all objections or protests, if any, to the report concerning the nuisance abatement costs, charges or fees. Thereafter, the city council may adopt, revise, change, reduce or modify any cost, charge or fee or overrule any or all objections thereto. The city council shall then make its determination on the amounts identified in the report and the city council’s determination shall be final.

    E.   Following the city council’s hearing, the city clerk shall file with the finance director a copy of the report, signed by the city clerk, stating the city council has adopted the report. The city clerk shall request the finance director to include the amount of nuisance abatement fees, costs, or charges on the bills for taxes levied against the properties identified in the report. (Ord. 12-11 § 3; Ord. 04-5 § 3: Ord. 03-1 § 2)

 

19.05.017 Recovery of attorneys’ fees.
    Subject to the limitations imposed by this section, the prevailing party in an action or administrative proceeding to abate a nuisance may recover reasonable attorneys’ fees from the adverse party. Recovery of attorneys fees by the prevailing party is limited to those individual actions or proceedings in which the city elects, at the initiation of that individual action or proceeding, to seek recovery of attorneys’ fees. In no action or administrative proceeding shall an award of attorneys’ fees to a prevailing party exceed the amount of reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the city in the action or proceeding. (Ord. 04-5 § 2)

 

Article VII. Relocation Pursuant to Notice to Vacate
19.05.018 Relocation procedures.
    When the city manager determines that a dwelling unit must be vacated and is not habitable, or is in such a condition as to declare it imminently dangerous to life, limb, health, property or safety of its tenants the general public or adjacent property the property owner will be responsible for:

    A.  Paying costs associated with the relocation of affected tenants. These costs will include one of the following:

    1.   The immediate payment, by cashier’s check or money order, or the greater of:

    a.   Two months fair market value rent for a comparable, legal residential rental dwelling that is decent, safe and sanitary, and without pending enforcement action; or

    b.   Two months of the tenant’s actual rent at the time of displacement. Fair market rent shall be determined based on the most current Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development schedule. The payment required by this section shall be made directly to the property owner/manager of the relocation dwelling. The property owner is also responsible for reasonable moving and storage costs; or,

    2.   Other arrangements of equal benefit as the arrangements set forth above, which are agreeable to the primary tenant whose signature appears on the lease agreement (if any) as evidenced by a written agreement between the tenant and property owner and executed by same. Such an agreement shall, at a minimum, contain each of the following components:

    a.   The names of all legal occupants or tenants of the dwelling being vacated and the name of the adult person designated as the head of household;

    b.   The specific address of the dwelling, including a unit number, which the tenant must vacate;

    c.   A statement of the amount of the relocation payment or other benefit conferred on the tenant;

    d.   If the tenant will not receive a relocation payment, an express statement of waiver from each affected adult tenant and a statement describing the alternative arrangement of equal benefit to be provided to the tenant; and

    e.   The address(es) to which the tenant(s) will relocate.

    3.   When a tenant is required to vacate a dwelling unit with less than thirty days’ notice, the payment required by this article shall also include the immediate payment of one additional month’s fair market rent or the provision of alternative decent, safe and sanitary legal housing for thirty days after the tenant vacates, whichever the tenant prefers.

    4.   “Immediate payment” means payment delivered on or before the tenant vacates the dwelling unit.

    5.   Payments required under this article are in addition to and separate from the refund of any security deposit or other payment required by law.

    B.   Establishing Proof of Compliance. The property owner shall provide or cause to be provided to the city manager, a copy of the cashier’s check(s) or money order(s) necessary for relocation and receipt signed by the new property owner/manager. Or, in the alternative, a copy of the fully executed agreement between the property owner and tenant evidencing an alternative arrangement pursuant to this section. The property owner shall provide the required documents to the city manager within five days of the date the tenant vacates the property.

    C.   Right of First Refusal. A tenant evicted or required to vacate a residential structure under this article shall be given the right of first refusal to reoccupy the same dwelling unit from which the tenant was displaced, or a comparable dwelling unit within the same building, once the dwelling unit has been made habitable.

    1.   The property owner shall, at the time the tenant vacates, provide written notice advising the tenant of the right of first refusal. The notice shall include a current address and telephone number that can be used by the tenant to contact the owner.

    2.   It is the tenant’s responsibility to provide the owner with contact information consisting of the tenant’s current address to be used for future notification, and to provide updated contact information to the owner if there is any change in the information.

    3.   Thereafter, when the dwelling unit or building becomes habitable, the property owner shall give written notice to the tenant advising the tenant that a dwelling unit is ready for occupancy. The written notice shall be made by certified mail, return receipt requested and a copy shall be provided to the city manager.

    4.   If the property owner cannot locate a previous tenant after two attempts over a period of two weeks, the property owner shall be deemed to have complied with the right of first refusal provision of this article, and the tenant’s right of first refusal is forfeited.

    5.   “Right of first refusal” means the right of a tenant to re-occupy the dwelling unit formerly occupied by the tenant at the same rental rate for a period of six months, or a comparable dwelling unit in the same building, once the dwelling unit has been made habitable.

    D.  Exceptions. The property owner is not required to provide relocation if, based upon written documentation submitted by the property owner and other interested parties including affected tenants, and following a hearing as provided in this section, the hearing officer finds in writing that:

    1.   The tenant is more than thirty days in default of rent at the time the dwelling is to be vacated (except a tenant lawfully withholding rent for correction of unsafe or hazardous conditions); or

    2.   The tenant refuses to vacate after timely payment of the relocation benefit; or

    3.   The tenant has caused or substantially contributed to the conditions giving rise to the need for abatement; or

    4.   The building becomes unsafe or hazardous due to unforeseen events or natural disasters that are beyond the control of the property owner and the owner’s action or inaction did not contribute to the impact on the building.

    E.   Request for Determination of Exception—Notice to Affected Tenants.

    1.   A property owner may request a hearing before the hearing officer to determine whether one or more of the exceptions set forth above apply. Any such request must be made in writing to the city manager within seven days following receipt of the notice to abate a code violation. The property owner shall simultaneously provide affected tenants with a copy of the request for a hearing, together with copies of any written materials provided in support of the request, and, once ascertained, shall also promptly notify any such tenants of the date and time of the hearing. Following the hearing, a written determination of the hearing officer shall be provided by first class mail and/or certified mail to the property owner and to any interested person who submitted written documentation or a written request for a copy of the determination. The determination of the hearing officer may be appealed to the appeal board pursuant to Section 19.05.014. Notwithstanding any other provision of the city’s code or other law, the filing of a request for exception or the taking of an administrative appeal from a hearing officer’s determination on the request for exception shall not stay the property owner’s obligations under this article.

    2.   Failure to request a hearing for a determination of exception within the time set forth in this section shall be deemed a waiver by the property owner of the right to an exception.

    F.   Failure to Perform. If the property owner is responsible for relocation and fails to comply with the obligations set forth in this article, a certificate of nuisance and/or a lien for the actual costs of relocation and enforcement actions may be assessed against the property. Nothing herein shall be construed to obligate the city to provide any relocation assistance.

    G.  Private Right of Enforcement. Affected tenants may bring an action against the property owner to enforce the obligations set forth in this article. (Ord. 12-11 § 3; Ord. 04-5 § 3: Ord. 03-1 § 2)

 

Article VIII. Additional Enforcement Measures
19.05.019 Fine and imprisonment.
    Violations of this code are hereby declared to be infractions except that notwithstanding any other provision of this code or state law, any such violation may, in the discretion of the prosecuting attorney, be charged and prosecuted as a misdemeanor. A conviction of an infraction shall only be punishable by fine as follows: upon a first conviction, a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars by a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars for the second conviction within one year, and by a fine of not exceeding five hundred dollars for any subsequent conviction for within one year. Any person convicted of a misdemeanor shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars, or by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or both. Each person in violation of this code shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which a violation of any provision of this code is committed, continued or permitted by any such person, and shall be punished accordingly. (Ord. 03-1 § 2)

 

19.05.020 Administrative citation.
    The city manager is authorized to issue a notice of administrative violation under the circumstances more fully described in Chapter 19.20 of this code. (Ord. 12-11 § 3; Ord. 03-1 § 2)

 

19.05.021 Recordation of certificate of nuisance.
    Upon issuance of an order of abatement, the city manager is authorized to record a “certificate of nuisance” against the property on which the public nuisance exists declaring the existence of the nuisance and describing the public nuisance. In any case where such a certificate has been recorded and the nuisance is later abated, a notice shall be promptly recorded declaring the nuisance abated. (Ord. 12-11 § 3; Ord. 03-1 § 2)

 

19.05.022 Treble abatement costs.
    Upon entry of a second or subsequent civil or criminal judgment within a two-year period finding that a property owner is responsible for a condition that may be abated in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, except for conditions abated pursuant to Section 17980 of the Health and Safety Code, a court may order the owner to pay treble the costs of the abatement, as authorized by Government code Section 38773.7. Costs of abatement shall include, without limitation by reason of enumeration, all administrative costs of the city. (Ord. 03-1 § 2)

 

19.05.023 Recovery of civil penalties.
    The city manager may seek such civil penalties and other relief as may be awarded under the provisions under the unfair competition laws commencing at Section 17200 of the Business and Professions Code. (Ord. 12-11 § 3; Ord. 03-1 § 2)

 

19.05.024 Franchise Tax Board deduction denial.
    The city manager may seek a court order that the owner not claim any deduction with respect to state taxes for interest, taxes, expenses, depreciation or amortization paid in association with the cited dwelling in accordance with the provisions of Health and Safety Code Section 17980.7(b) and Revenue and Taxation Code Sections 17274 and 24436.5. (Ord. 12-11 § 3; Ord. 03-1 § 2)

 

19.05.025 Penalties for maintaining substandard housing.
    Under the state housing law, a person convicted of maintaining a substandard building for two or more times within a five-year period may be punished by a fine not exceeding five thousand dollars and imprisonment not exceeding six months. Under certain circumstances, a repeat offender may be punished by imprisonment of not less than six months and not more than one year. (Ord. 03-1 § 2)

Chapter 19.10 ABANDONED, WRECKED DISMANTLED OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLES
Article I. General Provisions
19.10.001 Purpose.
    The provisions of this chapter are intended to provide a procedure for the abatement of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles, and are enacted under the authority granted by the state of California, under Section 22660 of the Vehicle Code.

    It is the intent of the city council to provide that the abatement of public nuisances consisting of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled and inoperative vehicles or parts thereof on private or public property, except highways, may be carried on either concurrently with or separately from the abatement of other conditions, if any, constituting a public nuisance on any property within the city. (Ord. 03-1 § 2)

 

19.10.002 Remedies cumulative.
    Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the city from taking other such enforcement actions, as it deems appropriate in accordance with this code, or any other applicable law. (Ord. 03-1 § 2)

 

Article II. Violations
19.10.003 Violations declared.
    It is unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any person:

    A.  To abandon a vehicle upon public or private property without the express or implied consent of the owner or person in lawful possession or control of the property.

    B.   To move a vehicle to any other private property upon which storage is not permitted or onto any public highway or other public property for purposes of storage after notification has been given by the city to remove any abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle or motor vehicle accessories from any private property.

    C.   Who owns or has possession, custody, or control of any vehicle to place the vehicle upon any street, alley, or city parking lot for more than a consecutive period of seventy-two hours. (Ord. 03-1 § 2)

 

19.10.004 Exceptions.
    The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any vehicle(s) or part thereof which:

    A.  Is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property; or

    B.   Is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer or licensed automobile wrecking yard, provided such business does not otherwise constitute a nuisance as described in this code and is not unsightly or otherwise detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare. (Ord. 03-1 § 2)

 

Article III. Notice of Abatement
19.10.005 Notice of intention to abate.
    When the city manager determines, pursuant to an inspection conducted according to this code, that the conditions existing on the property constitute a violation of this chapter, the city manager shall issue a notice of the city’s intent to abate the vehicle(s) or parts thereof as a public nuisance, after the expiration of ten days from the date of service of the notice.

    A.  Content of Notice. This notice shall contain:

    1.   The street address and such other description as are required to identify the property on which the vehicle(s) or parts thereof is located;

    2.   The identity of the vehicle(s) or parts thereof to be abated;

    3.   A statement that the city manager has found the vehicle(s) or parts thereof to be a public nuisance as specified in this code with a special citation to the applicable section hereof, and to other sections of the city municipal code if applicable, including sufficient detail to provide the owner with information as to the conditions constituting the alleged nuisance;

    4.   A statement of the action required to be taken as determined by the city manager, and that such action is to be completed within ten days after the mailing of the notice;

    5.   A statement providing for a hearing by the hearing officer upon written request to the city manager by the owner of the property on which the vehicle or parts thereof, is located or by the owner of the vehicle, or parts thereof, within ten days after the date of the notice;

    6.   A statement that failure either to take the action required or to request a hearing within the specified time shall be deemed a waiver of such rights, and that the city manager may proceed to abate the nuisance.

    The notice shall also include the following language:

 

    As to any vehicle(s) or parts thereof listed herein, you may file with the hearing officer a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence on your property of the vehicle(s) or parts thereof listed, together with your reasons for such denial, or you may request a hearing without submitting a sworn written statement.

    A sworn statement shall be construed as a request for a hearing at which you may, but need not, appears in person. You will be provided with the date, time, and place of any such hearing. At the hearing, your sworn written statement, and/or any evidence presented by you or on your behalf, will be considered by the hearing officer in determining whether the cost of removing said vehicle(s) or parts thereof will be assessed against your property as a lien in the event that removal of the vehicle(s) or parts thereof is undertaken by the city.

    You need not file a sworn statement if you request a hearing and attend the hearing, but you may file a statement if you wish to do so. Such sworn statement will be considered only as to vehicle(s) or parts thereof, and will not be considered as to the existence of any other condition on your property which may be found to constitute a nuisance in this or any other proceeding.

 

    B.   Service of Notice. The notice shall be delivered by certified U.S. mail, postage prepaid and return receipt requested; U.S. mail delivery confirmation; U.S. mail signature confirmation; or such other delivery method that is reasonably calculated to provide actual notice to the owner of the property on which the vehicle is found as shown on the latest equalized assessment roll of the county of Sacramento using such address as may be shown by said assessment roll or such other address as may be known by the city manager, and to the last registered and legal owner(s) of record, unless the vehicle(s) or parts thereof is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership.

    The city manager, in his or her discretion, may, but is not required to, provide additional notice by posting a copy of the notice conspicuously on the vehicle(s) or parts thereof to be abated.

    The failure of any owner or other person to receive the notice to abate or other notices required by this chapter shall not affect in any manner the validity of any proceeding taken under this chapter.

    C.   Exception to Issuing Notice. No notice of intention of abatement shall be required for the removal of a vehicle or parties thereof where both the owner of the land on which the vehicle or parts are located and the owner of the vehicle(s) signed releases authorizing removal and waiving further interest in the vehicles. (Ord. 12-11 § 3; Ord. 03-1 § 2)

 

19.10.006 Failure to abate nuisance or request hearing on notice of intent to abate.
    If the person(s) to whom a notice of intent to abate has been issued pursuant to this chapter fails to either abate the nuisance or request a hearing within the time set forth in this chapter, such failure shall render the notice of intent to abate final, and the notice shall have the same force and effect as an order of abatement. Additionally, the person(s) to whom the notice was directed shall be deemed to have failed to exhaust his, her or its administrative remedies, and such failure to exhaust administrative remedies shall act as a complete bar to any legal proceeding challenging the city’s abatement of the public nuisance. (Ord. 03-1 § 2)

 

Article IV. Hearing on Notice of
Intention to Abate
19.10.007 Hearing notice.
    Whenever the owner of the property on which the vehicle(s) or parts thereof is located or the owner of the vehicle(s) or parts thereof requests a hearing, the city manager shall issue to that person a hearing notice allowing him or her to appear before the hearing officer to show cause, if any, why the vehicle(s) or parts thereof is not a public nuisance and should not be abated by the city. The hearing notice indicating the time, place and date of the hearing shall be served upon the requesting party either personally or by delivering a copy by certified U.S. mail, postage prepaid and return receipt requested; U.S. mail delivery confirmation; U.S. mail signature confirmation; or such other delivery method that is reasonably calculated to provide actual notice to the requesting party, not less than five days prior to the hearing date.

    Notice of the hearing shall also be given to the nearest office of the California Highway Patrol and shall identify the vehicle(s) or part(s) thereof proposed for removal. This notice shall be mailed not less than five days prior to the hearing. (Ord. 12-11 § 3; Ord. 03-1 § 2)

 

19.10.008 Hearing.
    The hearing will be conducted, and a decision rendered thereon, in the same manner as set forth in Chapter 19.05 of this code, except that any order of abatement issued by the hearing officer shall require that abatement of the nuisance be physically completed five days after issuance of the order of abatement, or, in the alternative, within such time as the hearing officer, taking into consideration any recommendations by the city manager, shall determine to be reasonable under all of the circumstances.

    If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle was placed on the land without the consent of the landowner and that he or she has not subsequently acquiesced to its presence, then the hearing officer shall not assess costs of administration or removal of the vehicle against the property upon which the vehicle is located or otherwise attempt to collect those costs from the owner of the property. (Ord. 12-11 § 3; Ord. 03-1 § 2)

 

19.10.009 Appeal.
    The hearing officer’s decision and any order of abatement issued by the committee pursuant to this chapter may be appealed in writing to the appeals board by any interested person, by filing with the city clerk a written appeal not later than five days following the decision and any order of abatement. The appeal shall in all other respects proceed in the same manner as an appeal pursuant to the provisions of Article 4 of Chapter 19.05 of this code.

    The failure to file an appeal to the appeals board, pursuant to this chapter, shall render the decision and any order of abatement of the hearing officer final and conclusive, shall be deemed a failure to exhaust administrative remedies, and shall act as a complete bar to any legal proceeding challenging the city’s abatement of the public nuisance. (Ord. 03-1 § 2)

 

19.10.010 Judicial review.
    The decision and any order of abatement of the appeals board shall be final and conclusive on the date it is issued. Copies of the decision shall be forthwith delivered to the parties personally or delivered by certified U.S. mail, postage prepaid and return receipt requested; U.S. mail delivery confirmation; U.S. mail signature confirmation; or such other delivery method that is reasonably calculated to provide actual notice. The decision shall include notification that any action to judicially review said decision and order of abatement must be commenced not later than ninety days following the date of the decision and order of abatement, pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6. (Ord. 03-1 § 2)

 

Article V. Enforcement of Order of Abatement
19.10.011 General.
    After any order of abatement made pursuant to this chapter shall have become final, no person to whom any such order is directed shall fail, neglect or refuse to obey any such order. (Ord. 03-1 § 2)

 

19.10.012 Failure to obey order.
    If, after any order of abatement made pursuant to this chapter has become final, the person to whom such order is directed shall fail, neglect or refuse to obey such order, the city manager may institute any appropriate action to abate such conditions on the subject property that constitute the public nuisance. (Ord. 12-11 § 3; Ord. 03-1 § 2)

 

19.10.013 Failure to complete work.
    Whenever the required abatement is not completed within the time so specified in the order, the city manager may, in addition to any other remedy herein provided, cause the nuisance to be abated, so as to put the property in such a condition that no violation of this chapter exists. (Ord. 12-11 § 3; Ord. 03-1 § 2)

 

19.10.014 Extension of date for completion.
    A.  Upon receipt of an application from the person required to conform to the order by a date fixed in the order, and an agreement by such person that he or she or it will comply with the order if allowed additional time, the city manager may, in his or her discretion, grant an extension of time, not to exceed an additional one hundred twenty days, within which to complete such abatement, if the city manager determines that such an extension of time will not create or perpetuate a situation imminently dangerous to life or property.

    B.   The authority of the city manager to extend time is limited to the physical abatement of the nuisance or for such other purposes as may be reasonably required by the circumstances of the case, but such extension will not in any way affect or extend the time to appeal the order. (Ord. 12-11 § 3; Ord. 03-1 § 2)

 

Article VI. Removal of Abandoned, Wrecked, Dismantled or Inoperative Vehicles and Transfer of Title
19.10.015 Removal.
    In the event the city manager must cause to be removed a vehicle ordered abated pursuant to this chapter, the city manager may cause the vehicle or parts thereof to be taken to a licensed scrap yard or to a licensed automobile dismantler’s yard. (Ord. 12-11 § 3; Ord. 03-1 § 2)

 

19.10.016 Transfer of title after removal.
    The licensed dismantler or owner of the commercial enterprise who receives possession of the vehicle from the city shall be deemed to be the sole owner of the vehicle by reason of the involuntary transfer made pursuant to the law. (Ord. 03-1 § 2)

 

19.10.017 Prohibited use of transferred vehicle.
    After a vehicle has been removed pursuant to this article, it shall not thereafter be reconstructed or made operable, unless it is a vehicle which qualifies for either horseless carriage license plates or historical vehicle license plates, pursuant to Vehicle Code Section 5004. (Ord. 03-1 § 2)

 

19.10.018 Reporting requirements.
    A licensed dismantler or commercial enterprise acquiring vehicles removed pursuant to this chapter shall be excused from the reporting requirements of Section 11520 of the Vehicle Code and any fees and penalties which would otherwise be due the Department of Motor Vehicles are waived pursuant to Section 22660 of the Vehicle Code; provided that a copy of the order made pursuant to Article 5 is retained in the business records of the dismantler or commercial enterprise. (Ord. 03-1 § 2)

 

Article VII. Costs of Abating Vehicles
19.10.019 Costs of abating vehicles.
    The city manager shall keep an account of the costs and expenses of abatement under this article and shall submit a statement of such costs to the person or persons served with the notice of intention to abate. Such person shall be liable to the city for any and all costs and expenses set forth in the statement. These costs may be assessed against the property as a lien or made a personal obligation of the owner as provided in Chapter 19.05 of this code.

    Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the costs of abating any abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle(s) or parts thereof, including the actual tow costs, plus an administrative fee covering direct and indirect overhead to be set by resolution of the city council, is the joint and several personal obligation of the property owner and the last registered owner; provided, however, that a property owner who establishes lack of responsibility for the presence of the vehicle or parts on the property as permitted by this chapter shall not be personally liable for the costs; and provided, further, the last registered owner who can satisfy the requirements of Vehicle Code Section 22545(b) shall not be personally liable for the costs. The city manager shall take the appropriate steps to collect the costs from those who are liable including, but not limited to, the procedures set forth in Chapter 19.05 of this code. (Ord. 12-11 § 3; Ord. 03-1 § 2)

 

Article VIII. Notice to Department of Motor Vehicles
19.10.020 Notice to the Department of Motor Vehicles.
    Within five days after the date of removal of the vehicle or parts thereof, notice shall be given to the Department of Motor Vehicles identifying the vehicle or part thereof removed. There shall also be transmitted to the Department of Motor Vehicles any evidence of registration available, including, but not limited to, the registration card, certificates of ownership, or license plates. (Ord. 03-1 § 2)

Chapter 19.15 CODE ENFORCEMENT FEES
Article I. Code Enforcement Fees
19.15.001 Fees listed.
    The following constitute the fees payable to the city by the owner of a building or property covered by this code:

    A.  Reinspection Fee. Following issuance of a notice to abate for a violation of the provisions of this code, upon reinspection of a building or property to determine whether corrective action has been satisfactorily completed, and upon a determination that corrective action has not been successfully completed by the time of such reinspection, for each reinspection there shall be a reinspection fee levied against the owner(s) in an amount established by resolution of the city council. There shall be no inspection fee charged for an inspection caused by any service request if no violation is discovered.

    B.   Notice to Abate Fee. Where a violation continues to exist following the first reinspection as provided herein, there shall be a fee levied against the owner(s) in an amount established by resolution of the city council. Reinspections occurring thereafter to determine whether corrective action has been satisfactorily completed shall be charged to the owner(s) in the amount of the reinspection fee described above for each subsequent inspection required to determine compliance with this code.

    C.   Building Permit Fee. Where issuance of a building permit is required under the building code in order to complete work required by a notice to abate, which has been issued under this code, such permit shall be obtained from the city’s building official, and the fee therefor shall be paid to the city in the same amount as would be applicable under the current fee schedule for city building permits.

    D.  Building Permit Surcharge. Where a building permit is required under the building code to complete work required by a notice to abate issued under this code, there shall be imposed in addition to the building permit fee, a building permit surcharge in an amount established by resolution of the city council.

    E.   Hourly Rate. Where the city manager finds that additional costs of enforcement are not otherwise recovered by the fees levied by this code in association with a building or property found to constitute a violation, the additional cost of enforcement be levied at the hourly rate established by resolution of the city council, rounded to the nearest hour for each city official involved.

    F.   Contract Administrative Fee. For all private contracts entered by the city manager for work authorized under this code, in addition to the contract price, there shall also be authorized as an additional cost of enforcement charged to the owner(s), fifteen percent of the contract price as a contract administrative fee.

    G.  Small Claims Collection Fee. For any amounts due and unpaid, and which are referred to the city finance manager for collection under this code, a fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council shall be levied to cover costs of small claims court filing and administration.

    H.  Appeal Fee. The fee for all appeals taken under this code shall be in an amount established by resolution of the city council.

    I.    Late Fee. If a fee has not been received by the date upon which it is due under this code, there shall be imposed a late fee of twenty-five percent per annum of the fee, but not to exceed the sum of one hundred dollars.

    J.    Notice Fee. The owner shall be charged for the city’s postage or mileage costs for sending or posting notices required to be given pursuant to this code.

    K.  The fees set forth in Section 19.15.001 may be waived or reduced by the hearing officer, appeals board, or city council, in that sequence, upon a showing of cause. (Ord. 12-11 § 3; Ord. 03-1 § 2)

 

Article II. Housing Stock Conservation Fee
19.15.002 Findings.
    A.  It is imperative to establish enforceable minimum standards for residential buildings and to provide a program for enforcing these standards that is self-supporting.

    B.   Service request initiated enforcement actions are insufficient to provide the essential level of abatement of substandard housing conditions needed by this community.

    C.   Violators of the state housing law must bear the largest feasible share of the cost of housing code enforcement.

    D.  Rental property owners derive a substantial benefit from a housing code enforcement program and should therefore contribute to a portion of program costs.

    E.   Residents of rental property also benefit from a housing code enforcement program and should therefore contribute to program costs indirectly through the cost of renting such holdings.

    F.   It is necessary to establish an operating fund, which is separate from the city’s general fund, for the purpose of implementing a housing code enforcement program and operating it on an ongoing basis. It is necessary that this source of funds be predictable and reliable for the efficient and continued operation of such a program. The imposition of a housing stock conversation fee is an appropriate means to accomplish this purpose.

    G.  It is recognized that the majority of rental housing property owners comply with the state housing law and applicable city ordinances, and that only a relatively small percentage violates these laws. And while it is the intent of this code that this group of violators should pay for as much of the cost of a housing code enforcement program as is practical and feasible, it is also recognized that the collection of enforcement fees and penalties from violators can be a protracted and costly process, and that reliance thereupon as the sole source to fund such a program is inherently speculative and unrealistic. Therefore, while the primary source of revenue for this housing code enforcement program is intended to come from the collection of enforcement fees and penalties from violators, the housing stock conservation fee is intended to make up program costs deficiencies. The reliance of such a program on the city’s general fund for its costs of operation shall be minimized to the greatest extent possible. (Ord. 03-1 § 2)

 

19.15.003 Housing stock conservation fee.
    City council may by resolution establish a housing conservation fee to be imposed on all owners of residential rental property and hotel rooms in an amount not to exceed the cost of providing the services described in Section 19.15.001. The owner of residential housing shall not allow or cause a tenant to occupy any rental dwelling unit unless the property owner has first paid the required housing stock conservation fee. (Ord. 03-1 § 2)

Chapter 19.20 ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES
19.20.001 Issuance of a notice of administrative violation.
    Whenever the city manager determines that a violation of the Nuisance Abatement Code, or other provisions of the city code, or applicable laws has occurred or is occurring, the city manager shall have the authority to issue a notice of administrative violation to any responsible party. (Ord. 12-11 § 3; Ord. 03-1 § 2)

 

19.20.002 Administrative violations, general provisions.
    A.  Where multiple violations have occurred or are occurring, each violation of the Nuisance Abatement Code or other applicable laws shall be subject to a separate penalty.

    B.   A code enforcement officer/police officer shall not have the authority to void any notice of administrative violation until after a meeting with the officers’ supervisor as provided for in Section 19.20.010. If a notice of administrative violation is voided, the city manager shall provide written justification for such action to the city manager. (Ord. 12-11 § 3; Ord. 03-1 § 2)

 

19.20.003 Penalties for administrative violations.
    Any one of the following penalties shall be available to redress violation of the Nuisance Abatement Code, or other provisions of the city code, or applicable laws:

    A.  Revocation and/or suspension of licenses or permits, conditional use permits or other entitlements issue by the city of West Sacramento;

    B.   The placement of requirements for corrective action on permits, licenses or entitlements issued by the city of West Sacramento as a condition to avoid revocation of the permit, license or entitlement;

    C.   Monetary penalties as set forth in Section 19.20.012 of this chapter; and,

    D.  The issuance of a compliance order setting forth corrective action. (Ord. 03-1 § 2)

 

19.20.004 Standards for imposition of administrative penalties.
    The following factors shall be considered in determining the appropriate penalties for any administrative violation:

    A.  The knowing violation of the Nuisance Abatement Code, or other provisions of the city code, or other applicable laws;

    B.   A final determination of prior violations of the Nuisance Abatement Code or other applicable laws within twelve months of the date of the most recently issued notice of administrative violation. Violations of a similar nature shall be given additional weight in evaluating the appropriate penalties as provided for in Section 19.20.012;

    C.   Efforts by the person/entity found to have violated the Nuisance Abatement Code or other applicable laws to take remedial action upon notice of a violation;

    D.  Any financial gain realized by a responsible party as a result of an administrative violation;

    E.   The extent to which the violation undermines the purpose of the ordinance violated;

    F.   The number of other violations existing at the time of the issuance of the notice of administrative violation;

    G.  The costs incurred by the city for remedial action taken by the city manager;

    H.  The degree and permanence of harm to health, safety and/or the environment caused by the violation, including, but not limited to, any loss of life to person or animal; and;

    I.    The amount it would have cost the responsible party to comply with the law. (Ord. 12-11 § 3; Ord. 03-1 § 2)

 

19.20.005 Guidelines for exercising administrative enforcement authority.
    Administrative enforcement of the provisions of the Nuisance Abatement Code and other applicable laws shall be limited to cases where: (1) specific bona fide service requests have been received; or (2) where the city manager has sufficient evidence to support the issuance of a notice of administrative violation. No notice to abate or notice of administrative violation shall be issued pursuant to a service request until the city manager has conducted an independent investigation and determined that there is good cause to believe that a violation of the Nuisance Abatement Code or other applicable laws has occurred. The city manager shall keep a record of all service requests. (Ord. 12-11 § 3; Ord. 03-1 § 2)

 

19.20.006 Notice to abate and stop order.
    Whenever a violation is discovered which can be corrected and the responsible party has not been issued a notice to abate or notice of administrative violation for the same violation within the past twelve months, the code enforcement officer shall issue a notice to abate in order to notify the responsible party of the violation and to order that the violation be corrected within a reasonable time. Unless a different period is specifically set forth in the notice to abate or the notice of administrative violation, ten days shall be considered a reasonable time to correct any violation. If the violation is related to a permit, license or other city approval of a project, the notice to abate may be accompanied by a stop order, which orders the responsible party to immediately stop any and all work on the project that is subject to the permit, license or approval until the violation is corrected. The notice to abate shall be served in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 19.05 of this code. (Ord. 03-1 § 2)

 

19.20.007 Notice of administrative violation.
    A notice of administrative violation may be issued under any of the following circumstances:

    A.  When the violation cannot be corrected;

    B.   When the violation can be corrected, a notice to abate has been served, and the specified time has passed without adequate correction of the violation;

    C.   When a stop order has been issued and has not been complied with by the responsible party;

    D.  When the same violation has been committed by the same responsible party within the past twelve month and a notice to abate or notice of administrative violation has been served on the responsible party within that same twelve month period; and,

    E.   Continuing violations relating to plumbing, electrical, or other similar structural or zoning issues. (Ord. 03-1 § 2)

 

19.20.008 Service of notice of administrative violation.
    Any notices required under this chapter shall be served by personal delivery to the responsible party or by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the responsible party. If the responsible party is not present for personal delivery, if certified mail is refused, or if the location of a responsible party cannot be determined after diligent efforts, notices may be posted in a conspicuous place on the affected property for a period of ten days and by mailing first class to the last known address. When there is no affected property, such alternative service shall be accomplished by publication of any notices in a newspaper of general circulation that is most likely to give actual notice to the responsible party two times in a ten-day period and by mailing first class to the last known address.

    A.  Form and Content. The notice of administrative violation shall be in writing and shall set forth the facts constituting the violation, including the date and location of the violation, the specific provisions of the law which have been violated, the proposed penalties for the violation as specified in Section 19.20.003 of this chapter, and the rights that the responsible party has to appeal the notice of administrative violation, and the name and signature of the city representative issuing the notice.

    When a notice of administrative violation is served for the conditions described in Section 19.20.007(E) of this chapter, the notice shall also include the following information:

    1.   A statement of the actions required to correct the violation;

    2.   The time period after which administrative monetary penalties will begin to accrue if compliance with the notice has not been achieved.

    B.   Effective Date of Service. Service of a notice of administrative violation by personal delivery shall be effective on the date such delivery occurs. Service by mail in any of the manners provided herein shall be effective as of the date the notice of administrative violation is placed in the mail. (Ord. 03-1 § 2)

 

19.20.009 Preservation of status quo pending hearing.
    Any compliance obligations that may be imposed as the result of a notice to abate, a stop order or notice of administrative violation shall be stayed if a timely request for hearing is filed and until a final decision after the hearing is completed unless an emergency situation affecting the safety or preservation of life or property exists. The neighborhood enhancement specialist shall provide written justification for invoking an emergency situation exception under this section to the responsible party within twenty-four hours of taking the action to correct the emergency situation. (Ord. 03-1 § 2)

 

19.20.010 Mediation.
    The parties may, but are not required, to agree to mediation between the city manager and any responsible party either before or after any hearing, which mediation shall be presided over by an impartial mediator.

    The purpose of the mediation shall be to provide an opportunity for the city manager and a responsible party to reach mutual agreement upon steps to achieve compliance with the Nuisance Abatement Code and/or other applicable laws. If the parties agree to mediation, the city manager shall appoint a volunteer mediator to assist in the resolution of the dispute. However, if a trained volunteer mediator is not available, the parties, upon mutually agreeable terms, may appoint an agreed upon mediator. The hearing may be postponed until completion of the mediation if both parties agree to the postponement. The city will solicit members of the community to act as volunteer mediators and shall provide them with training in mediation skills. Mediators will not receive compensation but shall be recognized publicly for their service to the community. If the city manager and the responsible party reach agreement on a compliance plan, that agreement shall be placed in writing and shall be signed by the city manager, the responsible party and the mediator. If the terms of the agreement are violated, the city manager shall serve a notice of administrative violation as provided for in this chapter. (Ord. 12-11 § 3; Ord. 03-1 § 2)

 

19.20.011 Determining the amounts of monetary penalties.
    Except as provided below, the amounts of the penalties for violations of Nuisance Abatement Code and applicable laws shall be set forth in the schedule of fines established by resolution of the city council.

    A.  Increased Fines for Repeat Violations. The schedule of fines shall specify any increased fines for repeat violations of the same provisions by the same person within one year from the date of issuance of a prior notice of administrative violation for such violation.

    B.   Charges for Late Payment. Any responsible party who fails to pay to the city any fine imposed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter on or before the date that fine is due shall also be liable for the payment of any applicable late payment charges set forth in the schedule of fines.

    C.   Maximum Monetary Penalty Amounts. Pursuant to Government Code Section 36901, the hearing officer may impose administrative penalties for violations, which would not otherwise be deemed infractions under this code, in a maximum amount not to exceed one thousand dollars per day for each ongoing violation, except that the total administrative penalty shall not exceed one hundred thousand dollars exclusive of administrative costs, interest and restitution for compliance reinspections, and for any related series of violations. (Ord. 03-1 § 2)

 

19.20.012 When monetary penalties are due.
    Monetary penalties levied against a responsible party are due at the following times:

    A.  If an appeal is not filed in relation to the notice of administrative violation pursuant to Section 19.20.015 of this chapter, the monetary penalty set out in the notice shall be due and payable thirty days after service of the notice.

    B.   If an appeal is filed pursuant to Section 19.20.015 and there is no appeal of the hearing decision to a court pursuant to Section 19.20.022 of this chapter, any monetary penalty imposed shall be due and payable ninety days after either: (1) the date of service of the hearing officer’s decision; (2) an order by the hearing officer dismissing the appeal; or (3) the date the appeal request is withdrawn by the responsible party, whichever occurs latest. The amount of penalty payable shall be the amount set by the hearing officer in a decision after hearing, or the amount set forth in the notice of administrative violation if there is no hearing decision.

    C.   If there is judicial review of the hearing officer’s decision pursuant to Section 19.20.023 of this chapter, any monetary penalty imposed shall be due and payable thirty days after the date of the final court order in relation to that review. The amount due shall be the amount ordered by the hearing officer unless a court modifies the amount of monetary penalty.

    D.  For notices of administrative violation issued pursuant to Section 19.20.007(E) of this chapter, the monetary penalties are due and payable thirty days after the issuance of the hearing officer’s decision. (Ord. 03-1 § 2)

 

19.20.013 Place for payment of monetary penalties.
    All monetary penalties shall be paid to the city and delivered to the city finance department. A copy of the notice of administrative violation, or the decision of the hearing officer or the court decision establishing the amount of the monetary penalty shall accompany all payments. The finance department shall prepare a receipt documenting the payment of the monetary penalty and shall forward one copy of the receipt to the city manager and one copy of the receipt to the city clerk. The city clerk shall thereafter verify that the penalty has been paid in full. If the penalty has been paid in full, the city clerk shall so note in the records pertaining to the administrative violation. If the penalty has not been paid in full, the city clerk shall notify the city manager and responsible party in writing. (Ord. 12-11 § 3; Ord. 03-1 § 2)

 

19.20.014 Appeal.
    A.  Any recipient of a notice of administrative violation issued pursuant to Section 19.20.007(A)—(D) of this chapter, may contest the charges contained therein by submitting a written appeal request to the city clerk within thirty days from the date of service of the notice. The written appeal request must be submitted together with an advance deposit of the monetary penalty or with notice that a request for a hardship waiver has been filed pursuant to Section 19.20.017 herein.

    B.   The written appeal request shall contain the following information:

    1.   A brief statement of the material facts which the appellant claims support his or her/its contention that an administrative monetary penalty is not warranted or that the amount of the administrative monetary penalty is not warranted; and

    2.   An address at which the appellant agrees to receive notice, by first class postage prepaid mail, of any additional proceedings relating to the imposition of the administrative monetary penalties. (Ord. 03-1 § 2)

 

19.20.015 Appeal hearing.
    Any appeal hearing shall be set no sooner than twenty days following the filing of a request for an appeal hearing in accordance with the provisions herein and no more than sixty days from the date such request is filed. The hearing will be conducted in the manner set forth in Section 19.05.009 of this code. (Ord. 03-1 § 2)

 

19.20.016 Hardship waiver.
    Any responsible party who intends to request a hearing to contest the order imposing administrative fines and who is financially unable to make the advance deposit of the fine as required by Section 19.20.015 herein, may file a written request for a hardship waiver with the hearing officer on a form provided by the city. The form must be submitted to the hearing officer within ten days of the date of service of the order imposing administrative fines. The form must be submitted together with a sworn affidavit and supporting documents, demonstrating to the satisfaction of the hearing officer that the responsible party is financially unable to deposit the full amount of the fine in advance of the hearing.

    The requirement of depositing the full amount of the fine in advance of the hearing shall be stayed unless the hearing officer makes a written determination, based upon documented facts and findings, not to issue the hardship waiver. If the hearing officer determines not to issue a hardship waiver, the responsible party shall submit the required deposit to the city within ten days of service of the hearing officer’s decision or within thirty days from the date of service of the order imposing administrative fines, whichever occurs later. (Ord. 03-1 § 2)

 

19.20.017 Decision on appeal.
    Following the hearing specified in Section 19.20.016, the hearing officer shall serve written notice of his or her determination on the responsible party by first class postage prepaid mail to the address provided in the written appeal submitted pursuant to Section 19.20.015. (Ord. 03-1 § 2)

 

19.20.018 Suspending administrative penalties.
    A hearing officer may, in his or her discretion and by written decision, suspend the imposition of applicable penalties for any period of time during which:

    A.  The responsible party has filed for necessary permits;

    B.   Such permits are required to achieve compliance; and

    C.   Such permit applications are actively pending before the city, state or other appropriate governmental agency. (Ord. 03-1 § 2)

 

19.20.019 Correction of violation.
    If the responsible party gives written notice to the city manager that the violation has been corrected and if the city manager finds, upon final inspection, that compliance has been achieved, the city manager shall deem the date the written notice was postmarked or personally delivered to the city manager or the date of the final inspection, whichever first occurred, to be the date the violation was corrected. If no written notice is provided to the city manager, the violation will be deemed corrected on the date of the final inspection.

    If the city manager determines that compliance has been achieved after the hearing officer has issued a decision ordering compliance, the city manager shall file a report with the hearing officer indicating that compliance has been achieved. If the city manager does not file the required correction report, a violator who believes that compliance has been achieved may request a compliance hearing before the hearing officer by filing a request for a hearing with the city clerk. The hearing shall be noticed and conducted in the same manner as set forth in Section 19.20.018 of this chapter. The hearing officer shall determine if, and when, was achieved. (Ord. 12-11 § 3; Ord. 03-1 § 2)

 

19.20.020 Collection of administrative penalties and costs.
    A.  Administrative penalties and costs assessed by the hearing officer shall be due, as specified in 19.20.013, or by the date specified in the hearing officer’s order. Administrative penalties and costs assessed by the hearing officer are a debt owed to the city and, in addition to all other means of enforcement, may be enforced by means of a lien against the real property on which the violation occurred. Failure to pay the specified penalties and costs may be enforced as:

    1.   A personal obligation of the responsible party; and/or

    2.   If the violation is in connection with real property, a lien upon the real property.

    B.   The lien shall remain in effect until all of the administrative penalties, interest and administrative costs are paid in full. The city may collect the assessed administrative penalties and administrative costs by use of all available legal means, including recordation of a lien in accordance with Section 19.05.016 of this code. (Ord. 03-1 § 2)

 

19.20.021 Judicial review of the hearing officer’s decision.
    Pursuant to Government Code Section 53069.4, an appeal of the hearing officer must be taken within twenty days after service of the hearing officer’s decision. (Ord. 03-1 § 2)

 

19.20.022 Civil action to collect penalties and costs.
    In the event a civil action is commenced by the city to collect the administrative penalties and costs, the city shall be entitled to recover reasonable costs, inclusive of attorneys’ fees, relating to the action. (Ord. 03-1 § 2)

 

19.20.023 Interest.
    Administrative penalties shall accrue interest at the same annual rate as any civil judgment. Interest shall accrue commencing on the 26th day following service of the hearing officer’s written decision. (Ord. 03-1 § 2)

Title 20 YOLO HABITAT CONSERVATION PLAN/NATURAL COMMUNITIES CONSERVATION PLAN
Chapter 20.04 General Provisions

Chapter 20.04 General Provisions
20.04.010 Purpose.
    The Yolo Habitat Conservation Plan/Natural Communities Conservation Plan (“Yolo HCP/NCCP”) has been developed to provide for the conservation of twelve sensitive species and the natural communities and agricultural land on which they depend, and to provide a streamlined permitting process to address the effects a range of future anticipated activities on those species. The Yolo HCP/NCCP was developed by the county of Yolo and the cities of Davis, Woodland, Winters, and West Sacramento (with the University of California, Davis, in an ex officio capacity) through the Yolo County Habitat/Natural Community Conservation Plan Joint Powers Agency, known and referred to informally as the Yolo Habitat Conservancy (“Conservancy”).

    The purpose of this title is to provide for implementation of the Yolo HCP/NCCP in a manner that achieves, among other things, the following objectives: (a) to protect, enhance, and restore natural communities and cultivated lands, including rare and endangered species habitat, and provide for the conservation of covered species within Yolo County; (b) to replace the current system of separately permitting and mitigating individual projects with a conservation and mitigation program, set forth in the Yolo HCP/NCCP, that comprehensively coordinates the implementation of permit requirements through the development of a countywide conservation strategy, including identification of priority acquisition areas in riparian zones or other locations with important species habitat; (c) to provide for additional habitat conservation that is otherwise unlikely to take place in Yolo County and benefit both listed species and project proponents by ensuring a more efficient, effective approach to mitigation; and (d) to ensure that the Conservancy, in its capacity as the implementing entity for the Yolo HCP/NCCP, collects the local development mitigation fees necessary to assist with plan implementation and all of the related objectives set forth above. (Ord. 18-9 § 2)

 

20.04.020 Incorporation by reference.
    The Yolo HCP/NCCP is incorporated by reference as though fully set forth herein. Complete copies of the Yolo HCP/NCCP and related documents are available at the offices of the city clerk and the Conservancy, online at the city of West Sacramento website and at www.yolohabitatconservancy.org. (Ord. 18-9 § 2)

 

20.04.030 Definitions.
    The definitions set forth in this section shall govern the application and interpretation of this title. Words and phrases not defined in this section shall be interpreted so as to give this title its most reasonable application.

    A.  “Building Permit” includes, in connection with a covered activity only, a full structural building permit as well as a partial permit, such as a foundation-only permit, grading permit, or any other permit or approval authorizing a ground-disturbing activity in furtherance of a covered activity.

    B.   “Conservancy” refers to the Yolo Habitat Conservancy, a joint powers agency consisting of the County of Yolo and the cities of Davis, Woodland, Winters, and West Sacramento (with the University of California, Davis, in an ex officio capacity). The formal, legal name of the joint powers agency is the Yolo County Habitat/Natural Community Conservation Plan Joint Powers Agency.

    C.   “Covered activity” and “covered activities” mean the activities and projects described in Chapter 3 of the Yolo HCP/NCCP proposed for implementation within the plan area and not otherwise exempted from the requirements of the Yolo HCP/NCCP.

    D.  “Covered species” means the species, listed and non-listed, which are identified in Chapter 1 of the Yolo HCP/NCCP and described in Appendix A to the Yolo HCP/NCCP. Covered species are those at-risk species that are covered by the take permits issued by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and the California Department of Fish and Wildlife.

    E.   “Implementing agreement” means that agreement made and entered into by and between the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, the California Department of Fish and Wildlife, the Conservancy, the County of Yolo, and the cities of Davis, West Sacramento, Winters, and Woodland, that defines the parties’ respective roles and responsibilities and provides a common understanding of the actions that will be undertaken to implement the HCP/NCCP.

    F.   “Mitigation fees” means any fees adopted by the Conservancy, and any amendments thereto, that apply (unless exempted) to covered activities within the plan area in accordance with Chapter 8 of the Yolo HCP/NCCP and documents cited or relied on therein.

    G.  “Plan area” means the geographic area covered by the Yolo HCP/NCCP, as described in Chapter 1 (Introduction) and depicted in Figure 1-1 thereof. The plan area includes the county of Yolo in its entirety, including the entire city of West Sacramento, consisting of approximately 653,549 acres and also includes 1,174 acres along the south bank of Putah Creek in Solano county designated as the “extended plan area for riparian restoration” in Figure 1-1. This area is included in the plan area only for the purpose of providing additional sites for riparian restoration to support the covered species.

    H.  “Planning permit(s)” means any discretionary permit that authorizes a ground-disturbing activity for a covered activity, including, but not limited to, building permits, grading permits, installation permits, encroachment permits, or any other discretionary permit, excluding actions of general application such as general plan amendments, zoning and rezoning, annexation, specific plans, and other area or regional land use actions.

    I.    “Project applicant(s)” means a person or entity applying for a planning permit for a project authorizing a ground-disturbing activity for a covered activity, including any person or entity that is a “third party participant” within the meaning of Section 3.32 of the implementing agreement.

    J.    “Take” has the meaning set forth in the Federal Endangered Species Act and its implementing regulations, as well as impacts to plants identified as covered species. “Take” shall also have the meaning set forth in California Fish and Game Code Section 86 (i.e., to hunt pursue, catch, capture, or kill or attempt to hunt, pursue, catch, capture, or kill).

    K.  “Take Permits” means the Federal Incidental Take Permit issued by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service to the Conservancy, the county, and each of the four cities based on the Yolo HCP/NCCP pursuant to Section 10(a)(1)(B) of the Federal Endangered Species Act, and shall also include related state permits and approvals provided for in Section 86 of the California Fish and Game Code with regard to activities subject to the California Endangered Species Act (Fish and Game Code Section 2050 et seq.) and the California Natural Community Conservation Planning Act (Fish and Game Code Sections 2800 through 2835).

    L.   “Yolo HCP/NCCP” means the Yolo Habitat Conservation Plan/Natural Communities Conservation Plan. (Ord. 18-9 § 2)

 

20.04.040 Application to covered activities.
    As set forth in Section 8.1 of the implementing agreement, all project applicants for covered activities within the plan area shall comply with the conditions set forth in Chapter 4 of the Yolo HCP/NCCP to avoid, minimize, and mitigate the take of covered species resulting from covered activities. Each planning permit application for a covered activity within the plan area shall include details on the manner and timing for project compliance with the Yolo HCP/NCCP in the form and manner required by the city manager or designee. Applicable conditions of approval on covered activities from Chapter 4 of the Yolo HCP/NCCP as well as other measures required to implement the Yolo HCP/NCCP conservation strategy shall be included in each planning permit approval for a covered activity. (Ord. 18-9 § 2)

 

20.04.050 Mitigation fees.
    A.  As a condition of each approval for a covered activity, the mitigation fees shall be paid in full by the project applicant to the city prior to issuance by the city of a building permit. The mitigation fees paid by project applicants shall be transferred (along with mitigation fee payments provided for public agency projects) to the Conservancy on a quarterly basis, or more frequently if requested by the Conservancy. Mitigation fees shall be paid to the city prior to the issuance of the first building permit if more than one building permit is required for the project.

    B.   If the Conservancy, pursuant to the terms of the Yolo HCP/NCCP, authorizes another manner of compensation in lieu of the mitigation fees (such as a conveyance of land in lieu of mitigation fees pursuant to the implementing agreement and the Yolo HCP/NCCP), the project applicant shall provide the city with written documentation from the Conservancy of compliance with such alternative manner of payment and the dollar equivalent amount of such alternative manner of compensation.

    C.   In the event the city determines a project requiring a planning permit is exempt from payment of the mitigation fees, whether because it is not a covered activity or for other appropriate reasons, no mitigation fees shall be required for the project.

    D.  The city may collect the mitigation fees on behalf of the Conservancy if authorized to do so by the Conservancy. Any appeals relating fee determinations shall be heard by the city pursuant to the process established for hearing appeals of the planning permit associated with the fee determination.

    E.   On at least a quarterly basis through and including December of each calendar year, the city shall provide the Conservancy with information regarding applications and approvals for take authorization under the Yolo HCP/NCCP, including take associated with projects that are exempt from the fees and/or conditions of the Yolo HCP/NCCP. The quarterly reporting shall also include the same information regarding public agency projects and associated take. (Ord. 18-9 § 2)

 

20.04.060 Service fees.
    The city may collect duly adopted service fees from project applicants to compensate for the city’s costs associated with its administration and implementation of the Yolo HCP/NCCP and related permitting process. The amount and method of calculation of the service fees shall be set by resolution of the city council. Any such fees shall be in addition to, and not a deduction from, the mitigation fees adopted by the Conservancy. (Ord. 18-9 § 2)

 

20.04.070 Authorized take coverage.
    Upon payment in full of the mitigation fees and approval of planning permits incorporating all applicable Yolo HCP/NCCP conditions of approval, the project applicant shall receive authorized take coverage for the covered activity in accordance with the terms of the HCP/NCCP, the implementing agreement, and the take permits. (Ord. 18-9 § 2)

 

20.04.080 Guidelines.
    The city may adopt guidelines to assist with the implementation and administration of all aspects of this title. (Ord. 18-9 § 2)

 

20.04.090 Interpretation.
    In the event of a conflict between any term or requirement of this title, the Yolo HCP/NCCP, the implementing agreement or the take permits, the terms or requirements of the take permits shall govern. (Ord. 18-9 § 2)

 

20.04.100 Operative date.
    This title shall be operative upon the occurrence of all of the following: amendment to the Conservancy’s joint powers agreement authorizing the Conservancy to levy mitigation fees; the Conservancy’s actual adoption of the mitigation fees; the full execution of the implementing agreement; the adoption of the Yolo HCP/NCCP and implementing ordinances by each of the cities and the county; and the issuance of the take permits by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and the California Department of Fish and Wildlife. (Ord. 18-9 § 2)

Appeals Handbook
Overview
Title 1. General Provisions
Title 2. Administration and Personnel
Title 3. Revenue and Finance
Title 5. Business Licenses and Regulations
Title 8. Health and Safety
Title 10. Vehicles and Traffic
Title 12. Streets, Sidewalks and Public Places
Title 13. Public Services
Title 15. Buildings and Construction
Title 16. Subdivisions
Title 17. Zoning
Title 18. Floodplain Management
Title 19. Nuisance Abatement Code

Overview
 

The topics in this handbook are organized according to their location in the Municipal Code.

 

For general appeals procedures, requirements and time limits, see Chapter 1.08. These rules apply in varying degrees to most of the appeals processes that are governed by the city.

 

There is an Index at the end of this handbook to enable the user to find the appeals procedures by topic.

Title 1. General Provisions
Chapter 1.08. APPEAL AND HEARING PROCEDURE
 

Summary: The City’s general appeals procedures are codified in Chapter 1.08 of the Municipal Code. Unless specifically stated otherwise in code provisions or ordinances related to a particular subject, the rules of Chapter 1.08 govern all appeals processes. The following table summarizes Chapter 1.08. The text of Chapter 1.08 is reproduced in its entirety, following the table.

 

GENERAL APPEALS PROVISIONS

Municipal Code §

Filing Time Limit

Within 15 days of the date of the notice of the decision.

1.08.020

Filing Fee

Established by resolution of the City Council.

1.08.020

Application

File in writing with City Clerk, stating facts in sufficient detail to notify interested parties of nature of appeal. Application shall include name and address of applicant and interested parties (if needed).

1.08.030

Hearing Schedule

Within 10 days after the filing of a valid application, the City Clerk or designee shall set a subsequent date for a hearing.

1.08.050

Notice

Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given to the applicant and all other known interested parties and shall state which City body or officer will hear the applicant’s appeal. The notice shall be mailed at least 5 days before the hearing date.

1.08.050

Evidence

Submit written evidence to the City Clerk at least 10 days prior to the hearing.

1.08.070

Decision

The decision of the City body or officer hearing the appeal may be rendered at the conclusion of the hearing, or the Hearing Officer may take the matter under submission.

1.08.090

Findings of Fact

Written findings of fact supporting the decision will be provided only if a request is submitted, in writing, to the City Clerk prior to the hearing.

1.08.090

Judicial Review

Judicial review of the City’s final decision is governed by California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6: “Any such petition shall be filed not later than the 90th day following the date on which the decision becomes final.”

1.08.100

Notes

The City Clerk has 7 days to notify the applicant if the appeal is untimely or insufficient; they have 5 days from that notification to rectify insufficiencies.  There may be exceptions to time limits for filing, fees, hearing schedule, etc. noted in various sections of the code which supersede Chapter 1.08.

1.08.040

 

Chapter 1.08

APPEAL AND HEARING PROCEDURE*

 

Sections:

1.08.010       Generally.

1.08.020       Time for appeal—Filing fee.

1.08.030       Application for appeal.

1.08.040       Appeal hearing.

1.08.050       Notices.

1.08.060       Hearing procedure.

1.08.070       Written evidence and testimony.

1.08.080       Reserved.

1.08.090       Findings and decision.

1.08.100       Judicial review.

 

*  Prior ordinance history: Ords. 89-14, 90-14 and 95-1.

 

1.08.010           Generally.

    Except as provided in Article VI of Chapter 2.20, or any other appeals process which has been adopted and not repealed by the city, an appeal from the decision of a board, commission, agency, department or other city body shall conform to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 04-14 § 2 (part))

 

1.08.020           Time for appeal—Filing fee.

    Unless otherwise required by statute or ordinance, an appeal from an action of a board, commission, agency, department or other city body must be appealed within fifteen days of the date of the notice of the decision to the appellant. The filing fee for appeals will be set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 04-14 § 2 (part))

 

1.08.030           Application for appeal.

    A.  An appeal shall be initiated by written application filed with the city clerk within the time required. The application shall set forth specific facts in sufficient detail to notify interested parties, including the city, of the nature of the appeal, and to place all interested parties on notice as to how the proposed action may affect their interests so that they may formulate their defense or opposition without being subject to surprise. The application shall contain the name and address of the applicant and, to the extent known by the applicant, the names and addresses of all interested parties.

    B.   An order, rule, regulation or action adopted or enforced by any of the city boards or commission may be appealed to the city council by action of the mayor or any city councilmember when he or she considers the matter of sufficient general public interest to warrant city council review. The mayor or councilmember desiring such review shall file an appeal with the city clerk pursuant to the procedures set forth above. No filing fee will be required for any such appeal. The mayor or councilmember calling for the appeal is not precluded from participating in the appeal review simply because he/she appealed the matter. (Ord. 04-14 § 2 (part))

 

1.08.040           Appeal hearing.

    Within seven days of the time the application for appeal is filed with the city clerk, the clerk shall inform the applicant if the application is not timely or is insufficient. If it is timely but not sufficient, the applicant shall have five days from the date of the city clerk’s notice to refile a sufficient application or shall have waived the right to appeal. (Ord. 04-14 § 2 (part))

 

1.08.050           Notices.

    A.  Within ten days after the filing of a valid application, the city clerk or his/her designee shall set a subsequent date for a hearing thereon. In most situations the hearing will be no later than forty-five days after the filing of a valid application. Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given to the applicant and all other known interested parties and shall state which city body or officer will hear the applicant’s appeal. The notice shall be mailed at least five days before the hearing date.

    B.   Where a party, after notice has been given, fails to appear, a hearing may proceed in the absence of the party and the city body or officer hearing the appeal may decide the matter. (Ord. 04-14 § 2 (part))

 

1.08.060           Hearing procedure.

    A.  Hearings pursuant to this chapter shall be informal. The formal rules of evidence and discovery shall not apply. All necessary parties shall be offered a reasonable opportunity to present all relevant facts, applicable laws evidence and analysis demonstrating the merits of their claim or appeal. The parties will be given opportunity to present such facts, laws, evidence and analysis in a deliberate, regular and orderly manner. The city council shall adopt an administrative policy which shall set forth the policies and procedures for conducting hearings in accordance with this chapter and applicable law. This policy may be amended from time to time.

    B.   Any member of the city body hearing the appeal and any city officer hearing the appeal who has a financial interest, as defined by Government Code Section 87103, or on whom a decision will have a material financial effect as defined by two California Code of Regulations, Section 18702, shall disqualify himself or herself or be disqualified by the other members. An interested member may participate in a decision in which his or her participation is legally required in compliance with two California Code of Regulations, Section 18701. Only members who have heard the whole matter may participate in the decision. Where the city officer who is to hear the appeal is disqualified, the appeal shall be heard by an alternate appointed by the city manager.

    C.   The city clerk or clerk of the city body or officer hearing the appeal shall cause all testimony to be tape-recorded and shall receive and mark all exhibits. Any party may provide and pay the compensation of a certified court reporter.

    D.  The city body or officer hearing the appeal may order the hearing continued from time to time, except that a hearing on an application for a conditional use permit required by Section 17.46.040 may be continued only at the applicant’s request. (Ord. 04-14 § 2 (part))

 

1.08.070           Written evidence and testimony.

    Any appellant or applicant may submit written material or comments on any appeal. Written comments are not required to be read into the record. Persons who wish to submit written comments, testimony or evidence on any agenda item must provide such written material to the city clerk at least ten days prior to the hearing. Material received by the deadline shall be included in the administrative record. Staff may provide responses to the written material.

    Written evidence or testimony submitted after the noticed deadline will only be accepted in the record with the approval of the city body or officer hearing the appeal. If evidence is accepted into the record after the noticed deadline, the city body or officer hearing the appeal may continue the hearing but is not obligated to do so. (Ord. 04-14 § 2 (part))

 

1.08.080           Reserved.

 

1.08.090           Findings and decision.

    The city body or officer hearing the appeal shall make written findings of fact to support its decision if a request for such findings is submitted in writing to the city clerk prior to the commencement of the hearing. The decision of the city body or officer hearing the appeal may be rendered at the conclusion of the hearing, or the hearing officer may take the matter under submission. In either circumstance the decision shall be provided in writing to the parties, and shall be the final decision of the city. (Ord. 04-14 § 2 (part))

 

1.08.100           Judicial review.

    Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6 shall govern judicial review of all final decisions of the city, whether pursuant to this chapter or otherwise. At the time of making the final decision, the city body or officer making the decision shall notify the claimant that the time for seeking judicial review of the decision is governed by Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6. (Ord. 04-14 § 2 (part))

Title 2. Administration and Personnel
Chapter 2.20. BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
 

APPEALS OF PLANNING COMMISSION DECISIONS

Municipal Code §

Authority/Jurisdiction

The City Council hears appeals of the Planning Commission decisions.

2.20.200

General Provisions

See Chapter 1.08 for additional provisions governing: Application, Hearing, Notice, Evidence, Findings of Fact, and Judicial Review.

 

Filing Time Limit

Within 15 days. Note: Time limits may differ for specific appeals processes, such as that for tentative maps. Please refer to the specific subject to verify timelines and other regulations.

2.20.200

Filing Fee

$100.00 or as established by resolution of the City Council.

 

Notes

Upon receipt of the notice of appeal, the City Clerk shall cause the record of proceedings before the Planning Commission to be transmitted to the City Council.

2.20.200

Certain Planning Commission actions require special noticing and/or a hearing before the Commission or the Council upon appeal, including, but not limited to: CUPs, Development Agreements, General Plan Amendments, Negative Declarations, Variances and Zoning/Zoning Ordinances. The City Clerk will handle public hearing or special noticing requirements for these items.

2.20.160

2.20.190

A Planning Commission deadlock is considered a denial; if that denial is appealed, there is no fee for the hearing before the City Council.  The City Council may remand the issue back to the Planning Commission.

 
Title 3. Revenue and Finance
Chapter 3.28. TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX
 

APPEALS OF TAX ADMINISTRATOR DECISIONS

Municipal Code §

Authority/Jurisdiction

The City Council hears appeals of Tax Administrator decisions.

3.28.110

General Provisions

See Chapter 1.08 for additional provisions governing: Application, Hearing, Notice, Evidence, Findings of Fact, and Judicial Review.

 

Filing Time Limit

Within 15 days after the service or mailing of the determination of the tax due.

3.28.110

Filing Fee

$100.00 or as established by resolution of the City Council.

 

Decision

The decision of the City Council is final.

 

Notes

 

Title 5. Business Licenses and Regulations
Chapter 5.04. BUSINESS LICENSES GENERALLY
 

APPEALS OF BUSINESS LICENSE DENIALS AND REVOCATIONS

Municipal Code §

Authority/Jurisdiction

Denials by the Fire Department and Building Division will be heard by the Code Appeals Board; denials by the Community Development Director will be heard by the Planning Commission; denials by the Public Works Director, the Police Department or the Finance Department will be heard by the Hearing Officer.

5.04.230

General Provisions

See Chapter 1.08 for additional provisions governing: Application, Hearing, Notice, Evidence, Findings of Fact, and Judicial Review.

 

Filing Time Limit

Within 15 days of notice of decision from Business License Officer.

5.04.240

Filing Fee

$100.00 for appeals heard by the Code Appeals Board and Planning Commission; $50.00 for appeals heard by the Hearing Officer.

 

Decision

The decision of the City Council is final. The Code Appeals Board will hear appeals of Hearing Officer decisions. The City Council will hear appeals of Planning Commission decisions.

 

Notes

The Hearing Officer may revoke or suspend any business license issued.

5.04.330

SECOND APPEAL

Note: Second appeals are applicable only to Hearing Officer or Planning Commission decisions.

 

Authority/Jurisdiction

The Board of Appeals hears appeals of the Hearing Officer’s decisions.  The City Council hears appeals of Planning Commission decisions.

 

General Provisions

See Chapter 1.08 for additional provisions governing: Application, Hearing, Notice, Evidence, Findings of Fact, and Judicial Review.

 

Filing Time Limit

Within 15 days of notice of decision.

 

Filing Fee

$50.00

 

Decision

The decision of the Board of Appeals is final.  The decision of the City Council is final.

2.20.290

Notes

 

 

Section 5.04.220        TRAVELING MERCHANT, HAWKERS, PEDDLERS, ITINERANT VENDORS & TAXICAB DRIVERS

 

APPEALS OF BUSINESS LICENSING OFFICER DECISIONS

Municipal Code §

Authority/ Jurisdiction

Denials by the Fire Department and Building Division will be heard by the Board of Appeals; denials by the Community Development Director will be heard by the Planning Commission; denials by the Public Works Director, the Police Department or the Finance Department will be heard by the Hearing Officer.

 

General Provisions

See Chapter 1.08 for additional provisions governing: Application, Hearing, Notice, Evidence, Findings of Fact, and Judicial Review.

 

Filing Time Limit

Within 15 calendar days after the date of any denial or cancellation.

5.04.350

Filing Fee

$100.00 for appeals heard by the Board of Appeals and Planning Commission.  $50.00 for appeals heard by the Hearing Officer.

 

Decision

The decision of the Hearing Officer may be appealed to the Board of Appeals. The decision of the Board of Appeals is final.

2.20.290(C)

Notes

 

 

SECOND APPEAL

Note: Second appeals are applicable only to Hearing Officer or Planning Commission decisions.

 

Authority/Jurisdiction

The Board of Appeals hears appeals of the Hearing Officer’s decisions.  The City Council hears appeals of Planning Commission decisions.

 

General Provisions

See Chapter 1.08 for additional provisions governing: Application, Hearing, Notice, Evidence, Findings of Fact, and Judicial Review.

 

Filing Time Limit

Within 15 days of notice of decision.

 

Filing Fee

$50.00 or as established by resolution of the City Council.

 

Decision

The decision of the Board of Appeals is final; the decision of the City Council is final.

2.20.290

Notes

 

 

 

 

Chapter 5.08. BINGO
 

APPEALS OF POLICE CHIEF DECISIONS

Municipal Code §

Authority/Jurisdiction

The Hearing Officer hears appeals of the Police Chief’s decisions concerning bingo games.

5.08.120(B)

General Provisions

See Chapter 1.08 for additional provisions governing: Application, Hearing, Notice, Evidence, Findings of Fact, and Judicial Review.

 

Filing Time Limit

Within 15 calendar days after the date of any denial, suspension or revocation. At least one week prior to the date of the hearing on the appeal, the City Clerk shall notify the appellant and Police Chief of the date and place of the hearing.

5.08.120(A), (B)

Filing Fee

$50.00 or as established by resolution of the City Council.

 

Evidence

Both sides may present evidence.

5.08.120

Decision

The decision of the Hearing Officer is final.

5.08.120(C)

Notes

 

 

 

 

Chapter 5.24. MOBILE ICE CREAM VENDORS
 

APPEALS OF LICENSE SUSPENSION ORDER

Municipal Code §

Authority/Jurisdiction

The Hearing Officer hears appeals of the Business License Officer’s decision.

5.24.150

General Provisions

See Chapter 1.08 for additional provisions governing: Application, Hearing, Notice, Evidence, Findings of Fact, and Judicial Review.

 

Filing Time Limit

Within 15 calendar days after the mailing date of any denial, suspension or revocation.

5.24.090

Filing Fee

$100.00 or as established by resolution of the City Council.

 

Decision

The decision of the Hearing Officer is final.

5.24.150

Notes

Title 8. Health and Safety
Chapter 8.08. REFUSE
 

APPEALS OF RATES AND FEES DECISIONS BY THE CITY MANAGER

Municipal Code §

Authority/Jurisdiction

The City Council shall hear appeals on rates and fees determinations by the City Manager.

8.08.240

General Provisions

See Chapter 1.08 for additional provisions governing: Application, Hearing, Notice, Evidence, Findings of Fact, and Judicial Review.

 

Filing Time Limit

Within 7 days after the receipt of the City Manager’s written decision.

8.08.240

Filing Fee

$100.00 or as established by resolution of the City Council.

 

Decision

The decision of the City Council is final.

8.08.240

Notes

 

 

 

APPEALS OF NOTICE OF VIOLATION

Municipal Code §

Authority/Jurisdiction

The Hearing Officer shall hear appeals of notices of violations.

8.08.310(B)

General Provisions

See Chapter 1.08 for additional provisions governing: Application, Hearing, Notice, Evidence, Findings of Fact, and Judicial Review.

 

Filing Time Limit

Within 15 days after the receipt of the City Manager’s written decision.

Ch. 1.08

Filing Fee

$100.00 or as established by resolution of the City Council.

 

Decision

The decision of the Hearing Officer is final.

8.08.310(B)

Notes

 

 

 

 

Chapter 8.11. ALARM SYSTEMS
 

APPEALS OF DENIAL OF RECONSIDERATION FOR DETERMINATIONS BY THE CHIEF OF POLICE

Municipal Code §

Authority/Jurisdiction

A Hearing Officer shall hear appeals on the denial of reconsideration for determinations by the Chief of Police.

8.11.080

General Provisions

See Chapter 1.08 for additional provisions governing: Application, Hearing, Notice, Evidence, Findings of Fact, and Judicial Review.

 

Filing Time Limit

Within 15 days from the mailing of the notice of decision by the Chief of Police.

8.11.080

Filing Fee

$100.00 or as established by resolution of the City Council.

 

Application

Contains copies of relevant applications, renewals and requests submitted to the Chief of Police and all notices and decisions received from the Chief of Police.

8.11.080

Decision

The decision of the Hearing Officer is final.

8.11.080

Notes

 

 

 

 

Chapter 8.24. TREE PRESERVATION
 

APPEALS OF DECISIONS BY THE TREE ADMINISTRATOR

Municipal Code §

Authority/Jurisdiction

The Hearing Officer shall hear appeals on tree permit decisions or stop work orders by the Tree Administrator.

8.24.130

General Provisions

See Chapter 1.08 for additional provisions governing: Application, Hearing, Notice, Evidence, Findings of Fact, and Judicial Review.

 

Filing Time Limit

Within 48 hours of posting of the stop work order.

8.24.120

Filing Fee

$50.00 or as established by resolution of the City Council.

 

Decision

The decision of the Hearing Officer may be appealed to the Board of Appeals. 

2.20.290(C)

Notes

If the Tree Administrator fails to make a decision on an application within 30 days, there is no charge for the appeal hearing.

8.24.080(D)

SECOND APPEAL

 

 

Authority/Jurisdiction

The Board of Appeals hears appeals of the Hearing Officer’s decisions.

 

General Provisions

See Chapter 1.08 for additional provisions governing: Application, Hearing, Notice, Evidence, Findings of Fact, and Judicial Review.

 

Filing Time Limit

Within 15 days of notice of decision.

 

Filing Fee

$50.00 or as established by resolution of the City Council.

 

Decision

The decision of the Board of Appeals is final.

2.20.290

Notes

 

 

 

 

Chapter 8.28. AGRICULTURE, RIGHT TO FARM
 

APPEALS OF AGGRIEVED PARTIES

Municipal Code §

Authority/Jurisdiction

The Hearing Officer shall hear cases submitted by the parties involved.

8.28.050(A)

General Provisions

See Chapter 1.08 for additional provisions governing: Application, Hearing, Notice, Evidence, Findings of Fact, and Judicial Review.

 

Filing Time Limit

Within 30 days of the date of the occurrence of the particular activity giving rise to the controversy or of the date the party became aware of the occurrence.

8.28.050(B)

Filing Fee

$50.00 or as established by resolution of the City Council.

 

Notes

Upon receipt of a written grievance, the city’s Hearing Officer shall investigate the facts of the controversy but must, within 30 days, hold a meeting to consider the merits of the matter. At the time of the meeting both parties shall have an opportunity to present what each considers to be pertinent facts. No party bringing a complaint to the city’s Hearing Officer for settlement or resolution may be represented by counsel unless the opposing party is also represented by counsel.

8.28.050(C)

Decision

Within 20 days after the meeting, the Hearing Officer shall render a written decision to the parties.  A decision of the Hearing Officer shall be advisory only, nonbinding, but final in all other respects notwithstanding other provisions of this code.  The advisory decision of the Hearing Officer is final.

8.28.050(C)

8.28.050(D)

 

 

Chapter 8.40. POLLUTION AND ANCHORAGE OF VESSELS
 

APPEALS OF PERMIT REVOCATION BY THE POLICE DEPARTMENT

Municipal Code §

Authority/Jurisdiction

The Hearing Officer shall hear appeals on permit revocations by the Police Department.

8.40.130

General Provisions

See Chapter 1.08 for additional provisions governing: Application, Hearing, Notice, Evidence, Findings of Fact, and Judicial Review.

 

Filing Time Limit

Within 15 days from the date of the decision of the Police Department.

1.08.020

Filing Fee

$50.00 or as established by resolution of the City Council.

 

Decision

The decision of the Hearing Officer may be appealed to the Board of Appeals. 

2.20.290(C)

Notes

 

 

SECOND APPEAL

 

 

Authority/Jurisdiction

The Board of Appeals hears appeals of the Hearing Officer’s decisions.

 

General Provisions

See Chapter 1.08 for additional provisions governing: Application, Hearing, Notice, Evidence, Findings of Fact, and Judicial Review.

 

Filing Time Limit

Within 15 days of notice of decision.

 

Filing Fee

$50.00

 

Decision

The decision of the Code Appeals Board is final.

2.20.290

Notes

Title 10. Vehicles and Traffic
Chapter 10.40. INTERSTATE TRUCK TERMINAL ACCESS RATES
 

APPEALS OF DECISIONS BY THE DIRECTOR OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT

Municipal Code §

Authority/Jurisdiction

The City Council shall hear appeals on decisions by the Director of Community Development.

10.40.080

General Provisions

See Chapter 1.08 for additional provisions governing: Application, Hearing, Notice, Evidence, Findings of Fact, and Judicial Review.

 

Application

Filed with the City Council in writing, stating whether there was an error or abuse of discretion by the City Manager or the decision is not supported by the evidences in the record.

10.40.080

Filing Time Limit

Within 15 days after the receipt of the decision by the City Manager.

10.40.080

Filing Fee

$100.00 or as established by resolution of the City Council.

 

Hearing

Within 5 days of the filing of an appeal, the City Manager shall transmit to the City Clerk the terminal application, the sketches of the revoked route and all other data filed therewith, the written decision, and all other relevant documentation. The City Council, at its next regular meeting, will then reconsider the City Manager’s decision and either affirm or reverse it.

10.40.080

Decision

The decision of the City Council is final.

10.40.080

Notes

Title 12. Streets, Sidewalks and Public Places
Chapter 12.04. PARADES AND ASSEMBLAGES
 

APPEALS OF PERMIT DENIAL OR CONDITIONS BY THE BUSINESS LICENSE OFFICER

Municipal Code §

Authority/Jurisdiction

Denials by the Fire Department and Building Division will be heard by the Board of Appeals; denials by the Community Development Department will be heard by the Planning Commission; denials by the Police Department and Finance Department will be heard by the Hearing Officer.

1.08.100

12.04.110

General Provisions

See Chapter 1.08 for additional provisions governing: Application, Hearing, Notice, Evidence, Findings of Fact, and Judicial Review.

 

Filing Time Limit

Within 15 days of the date of the notice of the decision of the department.

1.08.020

Filing Fee

$100.00 if heard by the Planning Commission or City Council; $50 if heard by the Hearing Officer or as established by resolution of the City Council.

 

Decision

The decision of the Hearing Officer may be appealed to the Board of Appeals; the decision of the Board of Appeals is final.  The decision of the Planning Commission may be appealed to the City Council.

2.20.290(C)

Notes

 

 

SECOND APPEAL

 

 

Authority/Jurisdiction

The Board of Appeals hears appeals of the Hearing Officer’s decisions.  The City Council hears appeals of Planning Commission decisions.

 

General Provisions

See Chapter 1.08 for additional provisions governing: Application, Hearing, Notice, Evidence, Findings of Fact, and Judicial Review.

 

Filing Time Limit

Within 15 days of notice of decision.

 

Filing Fee

$50.00

 

Decision

The decision of the Code Appeals Board is final; the decision of the City Council is final.

2.20.290

Notes

 

 

 

 

Chapter 12.08. SPECIAL EVENTS
 

APPEALS OF DECISIONS OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE

Municipal Code §

Authority/Jurisdiction

The City Council shall hear appeals on decisions by the Chief of Police for special events.

12.08.090

General Provisions

See Chapter 1.08 for additional provisions governing: Application, Hearing, Notice, Evidence, Findings of Fact, and Judicial Review.

 

Filing Time Limit

Within 5 days after the notice of decision by the Chief of Police.

12.08.090, 12.08.140, 12.08.180

Filing Fee

$100.00 or as established by resolution of the City Council.

 

Decision

The decision of the City Council is final.

 

Notes

Appeal fee must be paid with application and will be returned if a request for waiver is granted.

12.08.100(B)

 

 

Chapter 12.12. PARKS AND COMMUNITY SERVICE FACILITIES
 

APPEALS OF PERMIT DECISIONS BY THE PARKS COMMISSION

Municipal Code §

Authority/Jurisdiction

The City Parks Commission shall hear appeals on permit revocations or denials.

12.12.120

General Provisions

See Chapter 1.08 for additional provisions governing: Application, Hearing, Notice, Evidence, Findings of Fact, and Judicial Review.

 

Filing Time Limit

Within 3 days after the notice of decision to revoke or deny the permit.

12.12.120

Filing Fee

$100.00 or as established by resolution of the City Council.

 

Decision

The decision of the Parks and Community Services Commission may be further appealed to the City Council per the procedures in Ch. 1.08.

12.12.120

Notes

 

 

SECOND APPEAL

 

 

Authority/Jurisdiction

The City Council hears appeals of Parks and Community Services Commission decisions.

 

General Provisions

See Chapter 1.08 for additional provisions governing: Application, Hearing, Notice, Evidence, Findings of Fact, and Judicial Review.

 

Filing Time Limit

Within 15 days of notice of decision.

 

Filing Fee

$50.00

 

Decision

The decision of the City Council is final.

 

Notes

Title 13. Public Services
Chapter 13.04. WATER SERVICE SYSTEM
 

APPEALS OF REVIEW OF BILLS BY THE FINANCE DIRECTOR

Municipal Code §

Authority/Jurisdiction

The City Council shall hear appeals on decisions by the Finance Director.

13.04.740

13.04.876

General Provisions

See Chapter 1.08 for additional provisions governing: Application, Hearing, Notice, Evidence, Findings of Fact, and Judicial Review.

 

Filing Time Limit

Within 15 calendar days after receipt of the notice of suspension or revocation of certificate.

13.04.1030(A)

Filing Fee

$100.00 or as established by resolution of the City Council.

 

Decision

The decision of the City Council shall be final and binding on all parties.

13.04.740

Notes

 

 

 

APPEALS OF BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION

Municipal Code §

Authority/Jurisdiction

The Hearing Officer shall hear requests for a hearing to show cause (of competence of certificate).

13.04.1030(A)

General Provisions

See Chapter 1.08 for additional provisions governing: Application, Hearing, Notice, Evidence, Findings of Fact, and Judicial Review.

 

Filing Time Limit

Within 15 calendar days after receipt of the notice of suspension or revocation of certificate.

13.04.1030(A)

Filing Fee

$50.00 or as established by resolution of the City Council.

 

Decision

The Hearing Officer shall issue a written notice of decision within 5 working days following the hearing. 

13.04.1030(C)

Notes

 

 

SECOND APPEAL

 

 

Authority/Jurisdiction

The Board of Appeals hears appeals of the Hearing Officer’s decisions. The City Council hears appeals of Planning Commission decisions.

 

General Provisions

See Chapter 1.08 for additional provisions governing: Application, Hearing, Notice, Evidence, Findings of Fact, and Judicial Review.

 

Filing Time Limit

Within 15 days of notice of decision.

 

Filing Fee

$50.00 or as established by resolution of the City Council.

 

Decision

The decision of the Board of Appeals is final.

2.20.290

Notes

 

 

 

 

Chapter 13.08. SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM
 

APPEALS OF REIMBURSEMENT AGREEMENT APPLICATION DECISION

Municipal Code §

Authority/Jurisdiction

The City Council shall hear appeals on decisions by the City Manager and Engineer-consultant.

13.08.205

13.08.470

General Provisions

See Chapter 1.08 for additional provisions governing: Application, Hearing, Notice, Evidence, Findings of Fact, and Judicial Review.

 

Filing Time Limit

Within 15 days of the date of the notice of decision of the City Manager.

1.08.020

Filing Fee

$100.00 or as established by resolution of the City Council.

 

Decision

The decision of the City Council shall be final and binding to all parties.

13.08.470

Notes

 

 

 

APPEALS OF SERVICE SUSPENSION OR TERMINATION

Municipal Code §

Authority/Jurisdiction

The City Manager shall hear appeals on decisions by the City to suspend or terminate service.

13.08.605

General Provisions

See Chapter 1.08 for additional provisions governing: Application, Hearing, Notice, Evidence, Findings of Fact, and Judicial Review.

 

Filing Time Limit

Within 15 days of the suspension or termination.

13.08.605

Filing Fee

$100.00 or as established by resolution of the City Council.

 

Decision

The decision of the City Manager is final.

13.08.605

Notes

 

 

 

 

Chapter 13.09. WASTEWATER DISCHARGE AND PRETREATMENT
 

APPEALS OF WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT RECONSIDERATION PETITIONS BY THE PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR

Municipal Code §

Authority/Jurisdiction

The City Council shall hear appeals on reconsideration petitions by the Public Works Director.

13.09.320

General Provisions

See Chapter 1.08 for additional provisions governing: Application, Hearing, Notice, Evidence, Findings of Fact, and Judicial Review.

 

Filing Time Limit

Within 15 days of the notice of action on the petition for reconsideration.

13.09.320(B)

Filing Fee

$100.00 or as established by resolution of the City Council.

 

Decision

The decision of the City Council is final.

13.09.320(B)

Notes

The permit shall not be stayed pending the appeal.

13.09.320(D)

 

APPEALS OF WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION

Municipal Code §

Authority/Jurisdiction

The City Council shall hear appeals on decisions by the Director of Public Works.

13.09.360

General Provisions

See Chapter 1.08 for additional provisions governing: Application, Hearing, Notice, Evidence, Findings of Fact, and Judicial Review.

 

Filing Time Limit

Within 15 days of the suspension or termination.

13.09.360

Filing Fee

$100.00 or as established by resolution of the City Council.

 

Decision

The decision of the City Council is final.

13.09.360

Notes

 

 

 

APPEALS OF INDUSTRIAL USER VIOLATIONS

Municipal Code §

Authority/Jurisdiction

The City Council shall hear appeals on decisions by the Hearing Officer.

13.09.570

General Provisions

See Chapter 1.08 for additional provisions governing: Application, Hearing, Notice, Evidence, Findings of Fact, and Judicial Review.

 

Filing Time Limit

Within 30 days of the Hearing Officer’s decision.

13.09.570

Filing Fee

$100.00 or as established by resolution of the City Council.

 

Decision

The decision of the City Council is final.

 

Notes

Title 15. Buildings and Construction
Chapter 15.04. MOBILE HOMES
 

APPEALS OF SITE PLAN APPROVAL DECISIONS BY THE COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR

Municipal Code §

Authority/Jurisdiction

The Planning Commission shall hear appeals on decisions by the Community Development Director.

15.04.130

General Provisions

See Chapter 1.08 for additional provisions governing: Application, Hearing, Notice, Evidence, Findings of Fact, and Judicial Review.

 

Filing Time Limit

Within 15 days of the date of the notice of decision of the Community Development Director.

1.08.020

Filing Fee

$100.00 or as established by resolution of the City Council.

 

Decision

The decision of the Planning Commission may be appealed to the City Council.

 

Notes

 

 

SECOND APPEAL

 

 

Authority/Jurisdiction

The City Council hears appeals of Planning Commission decisions.

 

General Provisions

See Chapter 1.08 for additional provisions governing: Application, Hearing, Notice, Evidence, Findings of Fact, and Judicial Review.

 

Filing Time Limit

Within 15 days of the date of the notice of decision of the Planning Commission.

1.08.020

Filing Fee

$50.00

 

Decision

The decision of the City Council is final.

 

Notes

 

 

 

 

Chapter 15.08. GRADING
 

APPEALS OF PERMIT APPLICATION COMPLETENESS DECISIONS BY THE CITY MANAGER

Municipal Code §

Authority/Jurisdiction

The Board of Appeals shall hear appeals on decisions by the City Manager.

15.08.130

General Provisions

See Chapter 1.08 for additional provisions governing: Application, Hearing, Notice, Evidence, Findings of Fact, and Judicial Review.

 

Filing Time Limit

Within 15 days of the date of the City Manager’s written determination.

15.08.130

Filing Fee

$100.00 or as established by resolution of the City Council.

 

Decision

The decision of the Board of Appeals is final.

2.20.290(C)

Notes

 

 

 

APPEALS OF PERMIT SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION DECISIONS BY THE CITY MANAGER

Municipal Code §

Authority/Jurisdiction

The Board of Appeals shall hear appeals on decisions by the City Manager.

15.08.160

General Provisions

See Chapter 1.08 for additional provisions governing: Application, Hearing, Notice, Evidence, Findings of Fact, and Judicial Review.

 

Filing Time Limit

Within 15 days of the date of the City’s written determination.

15.08.160

Filing Fee

$100.00 or as established by resolution of the City Council.

 

Decision

The decision of the Board of Appeals is final.

2.20.290(C)

Notes

 

 

 

 

Chapter 15.10. AFFORDABLE HOUSING—REDEVELOPMENT PROJECT AREA
 

APPEALS OF AFFORDABLE HOUSING AGREEMENT DENIALS BY THE CITY MANAGER

Municipal Code §

Authority/Jurisdiction

The City Council shall hear appeals on decisions by the City Manager.

15.10.100

General Provisions

See Chapter 1.08 for additional provisions governing: Application, Hearing, Notice, Evidence, Findings of Fact, and Judicial Review.

 

Filing Time Limit

Within 15 days of the date of the notice of decision of the City Manager.

1.08.020

Filing Fee

$100.00 or as established by resolution of the City Council.

 

Decision

The decision of the City Council is final.

 

Notes

No appeal shall be filed under this chapter for the purpose of seeking City Council review of the underlying merits of the residential project.

15.10.100

 

 

Chapter 15.40. RELATING TO AFFORDABLE HOUSING
 

APPEALS OF AFFORDABLE HOUSING AGREEMENT DENIALS BY THE CITY MANAGER

Municipal Code §

Authority/Jurisdiction

The City Council shall hear appeals on decisions by the City Manager.

15.40.090

General Provisions

See Chapter 1.08 for additional provisions governing: Application, Hearing, Notice, Evidence, Findings of Fact, and Judicial Review.

 

Filing Time Limit

Within 15 days of the date of the notice of decision of the City Manager.

1.08.020

Filing Fee

$100.00 or as established by resolution of the City Council.

 

Decision

The decision of the City Council is final.

 

Notes

No appeal shall be filed under this chapter for the purpose of seeking City Council review of the underlying merits of the residential project.

15.40.090

 

 

Chapter 15.50. 200 YEAR FLOOD PROTECTION
 

APPEALS OF DECISIONS OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR

Municipal Code §

Authority/Jurisdiction

The City Council shall hear appeals on decisions by the Floodplain Administrator.

15.50.070

General Provisions

See Chapter 1.08 for additional provisions governing: Application, Hearing, Notice, Evidence, Findings of Fact, and Judicial Review.

 

Filing Time Limit

Within 15 days of the date of the notice of decision of the Floodplain Manager.

1.08.020

Filing Fee

$100.00 or as established by resolution of the City Council.

 

Decision

The decision of the City Council is final.

 

Notes

Title 16. Subdivisions
Chapter 16.16. MERGER OF PARCELS AND LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTS
 

APPEALS OF UNMERGER DECISIONS BY THE PLANNING COMMISSION

Municipal Code §

Authority/Jurisdiction

The Planning Commission shall hear appeals.

16.16.130

General Provisions

See Chapter 1.08 for additional provisions governing: Application, Hearing, Notice, Evidence, Findings of Fact, and Judicial Review.

 

Filing Time Limit

Within 15 days of the date of the notice of decision of the Zoning Administrator.

1.08.020

Filing Fee

$100.00 or as established by resolution of the City Council.

 

Decision

The decision of the Planning Commission can be appealed to the City Council.

16.12.020

Notes

 

 

SECOND APPEAL

 

 

Authority/Jurisdiction

The City Council shall hear appeals of Planning Commission decisions.

16.12.020

General Provisions

See Chapter 1.08 for additional provisions governing: Application, Hearing, Notice, Evidence, Findings of Fact, and Judicial Review.

 

Filing Time Limit

Within 15 days of the date of the notice of decision of the Planning Commission.

1.08.020

Filing Fee

$50.00 or as established by resolution of the City Council.

 

Decision

The decision of the City Council is final.

 

Notes

 

 

 

 

Chapter 16.20. TENTATIVE MAPS
 

APPEALS OF PLANNING COMMISSION ACTION

Municipal Code §

Authority/Jurisdiction

The City Council shall hear appeals on decisions by the Planning Commission.

16.20.060

General Provisions

See Chapter 1.08 for additional provisions governing: Application, Hearing, Notice, Evidence, Findings of Fact, and Judicial Review.

 

Filing Time Limit

Within 10 days of the date of the decision.

16.20.060(A)

Filing Fee

$100.00 or as established by resolution of the City Council.

 

Decision

The City Council may sustain, modify, or reject any ruling of the planning commission and may make any findings which are consistent with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act or this chapter.

16.20.060(C)

Notes

The hearing must be held within 30 days, however if there is no regular meeting scheduled that will accommodate required notices, statute allows for 60 days.

 

 

 

Chapter 16.24. VESTING TENTATIVE MAPS
 

APPEALS OF DENIAL FOR ONE YEAR EXTENSION

Municipal Code §

Authority/Jurisdiction

The City Council shall hear appeals on decisions by the Planning Commission.

16.24.080

General Provisions

See Chapter 1.08 for additional provisions governing: Application, Hearing, Notice, Evidence, Findings of Fact, and Judicial Review.

 

Filing Time Limit

Within 15 days of the date of the decision.

16.24.060

16.24.080(C)(3)

Filing Fee

$100.00 or as established by resolution of the City Council.

 

Decision

The City Council shall deny a request for extension unless it finds that changes to any city ordinances, policies, or standards that were adopted subsequent to the time of the filing of the vesting tentative map are not necessary to protect the public health, safety or welfare.

16.24.080

Notes

 

 

 

 

Chapter 16.30. DIGITAL SUBMISSION OF FINAL AND PARCEL MAPS
 

APPEALS OF PARCEL MAP SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS DUE TO HARDSHIP

Municipal Code §

Authority/Jurisdiction

The City Engineer and Community Development Director shall hear appeals for the waiver of requirements due to hardship.

16.30.090

General Provisions

See Chapter 1.08 for additional provisions governing: Application, Hearing, Notice, Evidence, Findings of Fact, and Judicial Review.

 

Filing Time Limit

Within 15 days of the date of the notice of decision of the City Engineer or Community Development Director.

1.08.020

Filing Fee

$100.00 or as established by resolution of the City Council.

 

Notes

 

 

SECOND APPEAL

If the City Engineer and Community Development Director deny the request for a waiver, appeals may be made to the City Council.

16.30.090

Authority/Jurisdiction

The City Council shall hear appeals on decisions by the Planning Commission.

16.30.090

General Provisions

See Chapter 1.08 for additional provisions governing: Application, Hearing, Notice, Evidence, Findings of Fact, and Judicial Review.

 

Filing Time Limit

Within 15 days of the date of the notice of decision of the Planning Commission.

1.08.020

Filing Fee

$100.00 or as established by resolution of the City Council.

 

Decision

The decision of the City Council is final.

 

Notes

 

 

 

 

Chapter 16.32. TENTATIVE PARCEL MAPS
 

APPEALS OF PLANNING COMMISSION ACTIONS

Municipal Code §

Authority/Jurisdiction

The City Council shall hear appeals on tentative parcel map decisions.

16.32.060

General Provisions

See Chapter 1.08 for additional provisions governing: Application, Hearing, Notice, Evidence, Findings of Fact, and Judicial Review.

 

Filing Time Limit

Within 10 days of the date of the notice of the decision of the Planning Commission.

1.08.020

Filing Fee

$100.00 or as established by resolution of the City Council.

 

Decision

The City Council may sustain, modify, or reject any ruling of the planning commission and may make any findings which are consistent with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act or this chapter.

16.20.060

Procedures

See Section 16.20.060.

16.32.060

Notes

 

 

 

 

Chapter 16.64. CONDOMINIUM CONVERSIONS
 

APPEALS OF TENTATIVE MAP SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS

Municipal Code §

Authority/Jurisdiction

The Planning Commission shall hear appeals of decisions on requirements of the Community Development Director.

16.64.300(O)

16.64.380

General Provisions

See Chapter 1.08 for additional provisions governing: Application, Hearing, Notice, Evidence, Findings of Fact, and Judicial Review.

 

Filing Time Limit

Within 15 days of the notice of decision of the Community Development Department.

16.64.380

Filing Fee

$100.00 or as established by resolution of the City Council.

 

Procedure

Pursuant to Section 17.14.060.

16.64.390

Decision

The decision of the Planning Commission is final unless appealed to the City Council.

16.64.380

Notes

 

 

SECOND APPEAL

 

 

Authority/Jurisdiction

The City Council shall hear appeals of decisions by the Planning Commission.

 

General Provisions

See Chapter 1.08 for additional provisions governing: Application, Hearing, Notice, Evidence, Findings of Fact, and Judicial Review.

 

Filing Time Limit

Within 15 days of the action by the Planning Commission.

16.64.380

Filing Fee

$50.00 or as established by resolution of the City Council.

 

Decision

The decision of the City Council is final.

 

Notes

Title 17. Zoning
Chapter 17.15. APPEALS
 

APPEALS GENERALLY—TITLE 17

Municipal Code §

General Provisions

Except where otherwise provided, any decision provided for in this title may be appealed in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 1.08.

17.15.010

 

 

Chapter 17.14. ZONING ADMINISTRATOR
 

APPEALS OF ZONING ADMINISTRATOR ACTIONS

Municipal Code §

Authority/Jurisdiction

The Planning Commission shall hear appeals of any decisions by the Zoning Administrator.

17.14.060

General Provisions

See Chapter 1.08 for additional provisions governing: Application, Hearing, Notice, Evidence, Findings of Fact, and Judicial Review.

 

Filing Time Limit

Within 15 days of the date of the notice of decision of the Zoning Administrator.

1.08.020

Filing Fee

$100.00 or as established by resolution of the City Council.

 

Decision

The decision of the Planning Commission may be appealed to the City Council.

 

Notes

 

 

SECOND APPEAL

 

 

Authority/Jurisdiction

The City Council shall hear appeals of decisions by the Planning Commission.

 

General Provisions

See Chapter 1.08 for additional provisions governing: Application, Hearing, Notice, Evidence, Findings of Fact, and Judicial Review.

 

Filing Time Limit

Within 15 days of the date of the notice of decision of the Planning Commission.

1.08.020

Filing Fee

$50.00 or as established by resolution of the City Council.

 

Decision

The decision of the City Council is final.

 

Notes

 

 

 

 

Chapter 17.32. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
 

APPEALS OF DECISIONS BY THE HAZARDOUS MATERIALS DIVISION/COMMITTEE

Municipal Code §

Authority/Jurisdiction

The City Council shall hear appeals on determinations for the storage of toxic or hazardous materials by the Hazardous Materials Division/Committee.

17.32.030

General Provisions

See Chapter 1.08 for additional provisions governing: Application, Hearing, Notice, Evidence, Findings of Fact, and Judicial Review.

 

Filing Time Limit

Within 15 days of the date of the notice of decision of the Fire Chief.

1.08.020

Filing Fee

$100.00 or as established by resolution of the City Council.

 

Decision

The decision of the City Council is final and will be set forth in written findings.

17.32.030

Notes

 

 

 

 

Chapter 17.64. VARIANCES
 

APPEALS OF APPLICATION REJECTION BY THE PLANNING COMMISSION

Municipal Code §

Authority/Jurisdiction

The City Council shall hear appeals of Planning Commission decisions.

 

General Provisions

See Chapter 1.08 for additional provisions governing: Application, Hearing, Notice, Evidence, Findings of Fact, and Judicial Review.

 

Filing Time Limit

Within 15 days of the notice of application rejection.

1.08.020

Filing Fee

$100.00 or as established by resolution of the City Council.

 

Decision

The decision of the City Council is final.

 

Notes

Sections 17.62.030, 17.64.020 and 17.65.020 refer to 17.64.060 which states:  “No variance which has been approved by the planning commission or zoning administrator shall become valid prior to the expiration of the fifteen-day appeal period, as set forth in Section 1.08.020, or the final action on an appeal to the City Council.”

 

 

 

Chapter 17.67. TRANSPORTATION MANAGEMENT PLANS
 

APPEALS OF DECISIONS BY THE TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS MANAGEMENT ADMINISTRATOR

Municipal Code §

Authority/Jurisdiction

Decisions of the Transportation Systems Management Administrator shall be appealed to the Planning Commission.

17.67.048

17.67.054

General Provisions

See Chapter 1.08 for additional provisions governing: Application, Hearing, Notice, Evidence, Findings of Fact, and Judicial Review.

 

Filing Time Limit

Within 15 days of the date of the notice of decision of the TSM Administrator.

1.08.020

Filing Fee

$100.00 or as established by resolution of the City Council.

 

Decision

The decision of the Planning Commission may be appealed to the City Council.

 

Notes

 

 

SECOND APPEAL

 

 

Authority/Jurisdiction

The City Council shall hear appeals of decisions by the Planning Commission.

 

General Provisions

See Chapter 1.08 for additional provisions governing: Application, Hearing, Notice, Evidence, Findings of Fact, and Judicial Review.

 

Filing Time Limit

Within 15 days of the date of the notice of decision of the Planning Commission.

1.08.020

Filing Fee

$50.00 or as established by resolution of the City Council.

 

Decision

The decision of the City Council is final.

 

Notes

 

 

 

 

Chapter 17.69. DESIGN REVIEW
 

APPEALS OF DESIGN REVIEW DECISIONS

Municipal Code §

Authority/Jurisdiction

The City Council shall hear appeals on design review decisions.

17.69.080

General Provisions

See Chapter 1.08 for additional provisions governing: Application, Hearing, Notice, Evidence, Findings of Fact, and Judicial Review.

 

Filing Time Limit

The applicant may file an appeal any time after the application is deemed complete. A project can be appealed by any party within 15 days of the date of the design review administrator action form.

17.69.080

Filing Fee

$100.00 or as established by resolution of the City Council.

 

Decision

The decision of the City Council is final.

 

Notes

Title 18. Floodplain Management
Chapter 18.28. APPEALS
 

APPEALS OF DETERMINATIONS BY THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR

Municipal Code §

Authority/Jurisdiction

The Planning Commission shall hear appeals on determinations by the Floodplain Administrator.

18.28.010

General Provisions

See Chapter 1.08 for additional provisions governing: Application, Hearing, Notice, Evidence, Findings of Fact, and Judicial Review.

 

Filing Time Limit

Within 15 days after such action by the Floodplain Administrator.

18.28.010(A)

Filing Fee

$100.00 or as established by resolution of the City Council.

 

Hearing

With the approval of the applicant, the hearing may be set at the same meeting at which the Planning Commission shall consider the development application.

18.28.010(C)

Procedure

The appeals shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures set forth in Chapter 1.08.

18.28.030

Decision

The Planning Commission will either announce its findings or prepare formal written findings and its decision.

18.28.020

Notes

 

 

SECOND APPEAL

 

 

Authority/Jurisdiction

The City Council shall hear appeals on determinations by the Planning Commission.

18.28.040

General Provisions

See Chapter 1.08 for additional provisions governing: Application, Hearing, Notice, Evidence, Findings of Fact, and Judicial Review.

 

Filing Time Limit

Within 15 days after such action by the Planning Commission.

18.28.040

Filing Fee

$50.00 or as established by resolution of the City Council.

 

Decision

The decision of the City Council is final.

 

Notes

 

 

 

 

Chapter 18.32. INSPECTIONS AND NOTICE OF VIOLATIONS
 

APPEALS OF DECISIONS BY THE PLANNING COMMISSION

Municipal Code §

Authority/Jurisdiction

The City Council shall hear appeals on decisions on a notice of violation by the Planning Commission.

18.32.060

General Provisions

See Chapter 1.08 for additional provisions governing: Application, Hearing, Notice, Evidence, Findings of Fact, and Judicial Review.

 

Filing Time Limit

Within 15 days of the date of the notice of decision of the Planning Commission.

1.08.020

Filing Fee

$100.00 or as established by resolution of the City Council.

 

Hearing

The hearing shall be conducted in the same mode and manner as provided for hearings on appeals for initial permit decisions.

18.32.060

Decision

The decision of the City Council is final.

 

Notes

Title 19. Nuisance Abatement Code
Chapter 19.05. PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
 

APPEALS OF DECISIONS ON NUISANCE ABATEMENT ORDERS BY THE HEARING OFFICER

Municipal Code §

Authority/Jurisdiction

The Appeals Board shall hear appeals on decisions on nuisance abatement orders issued by the Hearing Officer.

19.05.014

General Provisions

See Chapter 1.08 for additional provisions governing: Application, Hearing, Notice, Evidence, Findings of Fact, and Judicial Review.

 

Filing Time Limit

Within 15 days of the date of service of the Hearing Officer’s decision.

19.05.014

Filing Fee

$100.00 or as established by resolution of the City Council.

 

Evidence

The Appeals Board shall not permit the introduction of any further evidence unless a showing is made by the offering party that the evidence could not reasonably have been presented to the Hearing Officer at the time and place of the prior hearing. Additionally, the Appeals Board may permit the presentation of evidence if the evidence is reasonably calculated to show that there has been substantial change in the condition of the property since the time of the prior hearing. Thereafter, based upon the prior administrative record, the evidence that may be presented pursuant to the provisions of this section, and the written or oral arguments of interested persons, the Appeals Board shall determine whether the property, in its then condition, constitutes a public nuisance within the meaning of this chapter.

19.05.014

Decision

If the Appeals Board finds that a nuisance condition does not exist, it shall dismiss the proceeding. If the Appeals Board finds that a public nuisance exists, it shall issue an order of abatement requiring the abatement thereof. The decision shall be final and conclusive.

19.05.014

Notes

There is no right to appeal for failure to appear at the hearing on the order to show cause (to abate).

19.05.011

The fees set forth in Section 19.15.001 may be waived or reduced by the Hearing Officer, Appeals Board or City Council, in that sequence, upon a showing of cause.

19.15.001(K)

 

APPEALS OF DECISIONS ON EXCEPTIONS BY THE HEARING OFFICER

Municipal Code §

Authority/Jurisdiction

The Appeals Board shall hear appeals on decisions on exceptions issued by the Hearing Officer.

19.05.018

General Provisions

See Chapter 1.08 for additional provisions governing: Application, Hearing, Notice, Evidence, Findings of Fact, and Judicial Review.

 

Procedure

The determination may be appealed pursuant to Section 19.05.014.

19.05.018

Filing Time Limit

Within 15 days of the date of the notice of the decision of the Hearing Officer.

1.08.020

Filing Fee

$100.00 or as established by resolution of the City Council.

 

Decision

The decision of the Board of Appeals is final.

2.20.090(C)

Notes

 

 

 

 

Chapter 19.10. ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLES
 

APPEALS OF DECISIONS ON NUISANCE ABATEMENT ORDERS BY THE HEARING OFFICER

Municipal Code §

Authority/Jurisdiction

The Appeals Board shall hear appeals on decisions on nuisance abatement orders issued by the Hearing Officer.

19.10.009

General Provisions

See Chapter 1.08 for additional provisions governing: Application, Hearing, Notice, Evidence, Findings of Fact, and Judicial Review.

 

Filing Time Limit

Within 5 days of the date of service of the Hearing Officer’s decision and order of abatement.

19.10.009

Filing Fee

$100.00 or as established by resolution of the City Council.

 

Procedure

Pursuant to Section 19.05.014.

19.10.009

Decision

The decision and order of abatement shall be final and conclusive.

19.10.010

Judicial Review

Within 90 days following the date of decision and order of abatement.

19.10.010

Notes

 

 

 

 

Chapter 19.20. ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES
 

APPEALS OF NOTICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE VIOLATION

Municipal Code §

Authority/Jurisdiction

The Hearing Officer shall hear appeals on a notice of administrative violation.

19.20.014

General Provisions

See Chapter 1.08 for additional provisions governing: Application, Hearing, Notice, Evidence, Findings of Fact, and Judicial Review.

 

Filing Time Limit

Within 30 days of the date of service of the notice.

19.20.014

Filing Fee

$50.00 or as established by resolution of the City Council.

 

Submittals

Appeal must contain an advance deposit of the monetary penalty or a notice that a request for hardship waiver has been filed.

19.20.014

Hearing

Any appeal hearing shall be set no sooner than 20 days following the filing of a request for an appeal hearing in accordance with the provisions herein and no more than 60 days from the date such request is filed.

19.20.015

Judicial Review

Within 20 days following the date of service of the decision by the Hearing Officer.

19.20.014

Notes

 

 