WOODSIDE, CALIFORNIA MUNICIPAL CODE 
____________ 
Republished September, 2018 
Local legislation current through Ord. 2018-593, effective April 26, 2018 
____________ 
 
TOWN OFFICIALS 
  
Mayor 
Daniel Yost 
____________ 
Mayor Pro Tempore 
Ned Fluet 
____________ 
Town Council 
Richard (Dick) Brown 
Brian Dombkowski 
Thomas H. Livermore 
Sean P. Scott 
Chris Shaw 
____________ 
Town Manager 
Kevin Bryant 
____________ 
Town Attorney 
Jean Savaree 
____________ 
Town Clerk 
Jennifer Li 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a republication of the general and permanent ordinances of the Town of Woodside, California. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1997 Code, as supplemented through April, 2018, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the Town Council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the 1997 Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1997 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The Code is made up of Titles with one or more chapters and various sections within each chapter catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
three tiers, 
The title, chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is three tier system incorporating the title, chapter, and section number. Each part is represented in the code section number. Title VII contains five chapter, each beginning with the number seven. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a period. The figure before the period refers to the title and chapter number, and the figure after the period refers to the position of the section within the chapter. For example, Section 70.01 is section .01, in Chapter 70 of Title VII. Under this system, each section is identified with its title and chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 70.05 and 70.06 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 70.05.5. New titles may be added between existing titles and new chapters may be placed at the end of the title embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new titles, chapters, or articles. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the dash are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the dash represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the dash indicates the number of the title and chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, when applicable, the letter immediately to the left of the dash indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
TITLE I 	10-1 
CHAPTER 10 	10-3 
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES 	TSO-1 
REFERENCES TO CALIFORNIA GENERAL LAWS 	SRT-1 
REFERENCES TO 1975 CODE 	SRT-1 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES 	CCT-1 
CODE INDEX 	I-1 
 
Index 
Each particular item has been placed under several headings, using the language generally used in the chapter, article and section titles of the Code. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Patience R. Gaia, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Dora Wong Seamans for her cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this republication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the Town readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the Town's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the Town of Woodside, California. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the Town of Woodside, California. 
© Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the Town of Woodside, California. 2018. 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE NO. 1997-486 
AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN COUNCIL OF THE TOWN OF WOODSIDE ADOPTING THE WOODSIDE MUNICIPAL CODE 
WHEREAS, THE California State Legislature has provided for the codification and publication of the permanent and general ordinances of cities and towns in Sections 50022.1—50022.10 of the Government Code; and 
WHEREAS, the American Legal Publishing Corporation, Cincinnati, Ohio, has compiled, edited and published a codification of the permanent and general ordinances of the Town of Woodside, California; and 
WHEREAS, there have been filed and there are now on file in the office of the Town Clerk, for public inspection, three (3) copies of a document entitled, "Woodside Municipal Code", together with three (3) copies of each of the secondary codes therein adopted by references; 
IT IS HEREBY ORDAINED by the Woodside Town Council as follows: 
Section 1. Adoption. 
Pursuant to the provisions of Sections 50022.1-50022.8 and 50022.10 of the Government Code, there is hereby adopted the "Woodside Municipal Code" (also referred to as the "Code") as published by American Legal Publishing Corporation, Cincinnati, Ohio, together with those secondary codes previously adopted by reference as authorized by the California State Legislature, save and except those portions of the secondary codes as are deleted or modified by the provisions of the "Woodside Municipal Code". 
Section 2. Title—Citation—Reference. 
This Code shall be known as the "Woodside Municipal Code" in any prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof or in any proceeding at law or equity. It shall be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, correcting or repealing all or any part or portion thereof as an addition to, amendment to, correction or repeal of the "Woodside Municipal Code". Further reference may be had to the titles, chapters, sections and subsections of the "Woodside Municipal Code" and such references shall apply to that numbered title, chapter, section or subsection as it appears in the Code. 
Section 3. Codification Authority. 
This Code consists of all the regulatory and penal ordinances and certain of the administrative ordinances of the Town of Woodside, California, codified pursuant to the provisions of Sections 50022.1—50022.8 and 50022.10 of the Government Code. 
Section 4. Reference Applies To All Amendments. 
Whenever a reference is made to this Code as the "Woodside Municipal Code" or to any portion thereof, or to any ordinance of the Town of Woodside, California, the reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions heretofore, now or hereafter made. 
Section 5. Title, Chapter and Section Headings. 
Title, chapter and section headings contained herein shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter or section hereof. 
Section 6. References to Specific Ordinances. 
The provisions of this Code shall not in any manner affect matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with, ordinances which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included within the Code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this Code. 
Section 7. Additional Changes to the Woodside Municipal Code. 
Attached hereto as Exhibit A, are modifications to the Code which are being adopted herein by reference. 
Section 8 Effect of Code on Past Actions and Obligations. 
Neither the adoption of this Code nor the repeal or amendment hereby of any ordinance or part or portion of any ordinance of the Town shall in any manner affect the prosecution for violations of ordinances, which violations were committed prior to the effective date hereof, nor be construed as a waiver of any license, fee, or penalty at said effective date due and unpaid under such ordinances, nor be construed as affecting any of the provisions of such ordinances relating to the collection of any such license, fee, or penalty, or the penal validity of any bond or cash deposit in lieu thereof required to be posted, filed or deposited pursuant to any ordinance and all rights and obligations thereunder appertaining shall continue in full force and effect. 
Section 9. Effective Date. 
This Code shall become effective on the date the ordinance adopting this Code as the "Woodside Municipal Code" shall become effective. 
Section 10. Constitutionality. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Code. The Town Council hereby declares that it would have passed this Code, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases had been declared invalid or unconstitutional, and if for any reason this Code should be declared invalid or unconstitutional, then the original ordinance or ordinances shall be in full force and effect. 
Section 11. 
This Ordinance shall be published and posted according to law and shall take effect and be in force from and after thirty (30) days after its passage and adoption. 
Introduced this 22nd day of April, 1997. 
PASSED AND ADOPTED as an Ordinance of the Town of Woodside at a regular meeting thereof held on the 27th day of May, 1997. 
AYES, COUNCILMEMBERS: Bohley, Greyson, McKae, Susk, Sinclair, Mayor Jackson. 
NOES, COUNCILMEMBERS: None. 
ABSENT, COUNCILMEMBERS: McSherry. 
ABSTAIN, COUNCILMEMBERS: None. 
	/s/ William Jackson, Jr. 
      Mayor of the Town of Woodside 
 	 
ATTEST: 
/s/ Ruth Swanson 
      Clerk of the Town of Woodside 	
 	 
 
TITLE I - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
   
CHAPTER 10. - GENERAL PROVISIONS  
Article I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 10.01 - Title of Code. 
This Code shall be known as the "Woodside Municipal Code." It shall be sufficient to refer to this Code as the Woodside Municipal Code in any prosecution for the violation of any provision hereof. It shall also be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, or repealing the provisions of this Code as an addition or amendment to, or a repeal of, the Woodside Municipal Code, or a portion thereof. 
(1975 Code, § 1-1.01)  
Sec. 10.02 - Authority. 
Except as otherwise provided in this Code, this Code consists of all the regulatory, penal, and administrative laws of general application of the Town of Woodside, codified pursuant to the authority set forth in Cal. Gov't Code Article 2 of Chapter 1 of Part 1 of Division 1 of Title 5. 
(1975 Code, § 1-1.02)  
Sec. 10.03 - Territorial jurisdiction. 
The provisions of this Code shall refer only to the omission or commission of acts within the territorial limits of the Town and to that territory outside the Town over which the Town has jurisdiction or control by virtue of the Constitution of the State or any law, or by reason of ownership or control of property. 
(1975 Code, § 1-3.06)  
Sec. 10.04 - Scope and interpretation. 
(A)  Unless the provisions of this Code otherwise specifically provide, or the context of this Code indicates to the contrary, the general provisions, rules of construction, and definitions set forth in this chapter shall govern the construction of this Code. The provisions of this Code and all proceedings under it are to be construed with a view to effect its objects and to promote justice. 
(1975 Code, § 1-3.01) 
(B)  Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the same rules of construction, definition, and application shall govern the interpretation of this Code as those governing the interpretation of state law.  
Sec. 10.05 - Effect of Code on past actions and obligations. 
Neither the adoption of this Code nor the repeal of any ordinance of the Town by this Code shall in any manner affect the prosecution for violations of ordinances, which violations were committed prior to the effective date of this Code, nor be construed as a waiver of any license or penalty on such effective date due and unpaid under such ordinances, nor be construed as affecting any of the provisions of such ordinances relating to the collection of any such license or penalty or the penal provisions applicable to any violation of such ordinances, nor to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit required to be posted, filed, or deposited pursuant to any ordinance, and all vested rights and obligations pertaining to such ordinances shall continue in full force and effect. 
(1975 Code, § 1-1.05)  
Sec. 10.06 - Application to future ordinances. 
All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation, shall apply to ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this Code unless otherwise specifically provided.  
Sec. 10.07 - Headings and captions. 
Title, chapter, article, and section headings contained in this Code shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify, or in any manner affect the scope, meaning, or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter, article, or section of this Code. Headings and captions used in this Code other than the title, chapter, and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section. 
(1975 Code, § 1-3.04)  
Sec. 10.08 - Definitions. 
(A)  General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, or ordinary and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their technical import. 
(B)  Specific terms. For the purpose of this Code, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
Calendar year. From January 1 through December 31 of any given year. 
Code, this Code or this Code of Ordinances. This Municipal Code as modified by amendment, revision, and adoption of new titles, chapters, or sections. 
Council. The Town Council of the Town of Woodside. 
County. San Mateo County, California. 
Day. The word day shall mean calendar day unless otherwise stated. Where the last day for filing an appeal falls on a weekend or holiday, then the term day shall include the business day next following that weekend or holiday. 
Fiscal year. From July 1 of any given year through June 30 of the following year. 
Goods. Includes wares and merchandise. 
May. The act referred to is permissive. 
Month. A calendar month. 
Oath. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words swear and sworn shall be equivalent to the words affirm and affirmed. 
Officer, office, employee, commission, or department. An officer, office, employee, commission, or department of this Town unless the context clearly requires otherwise. 
Operate. Carrying on, keeping, conducting, or maintaining. 
Owner. Applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner or joint owner of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
Person. Extends to and includes person, persons, firm, corporation, copartnership, trustee, lessee, receiver, public corporation, political subdivision, city (except the Town of Woodside), the County of San Mateo, any district in the County of San Mateo, the State of California, or the United States of America, or any department or agency of any thereof, unless this Code expressly provides otherwise. Whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms person or whoever as applied to any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof. 
Personal property. This term shall include money, goods, chattels, things in action, and evidences of debt. 
Preceding or following. Next before or next after, respectively. 
Property. Both real and personal property. 
Quarterly. When used to designate a period of time, shall mean the first three calendar months of any given year or any succeeding period of three calendar months. 
Real property. This term shall include lands, tenements, and hereditaments. 
Sale. Includes any sale, exchange, barter, or offer for sale. 
Section. A section of this Code, unless some other source is specifically mentioned. 
Shall. The act referred to is mandatory. 
Signature. The name of a person written with his/her own hand to signify that the writing which precedes accords with his/her wishes or intentions. 
State. The State of California. 
Street. This term shall include all streets, highways, avenues, boulevards, alleys, courts, private streets, places, squares, or other public ways in the Town which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property so designated in any law of this state. 
Subchapter. A division of a chapter, designated in this Code by a heading in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter, setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading. Not all chapters have subchapters. 
Tenant or occupant. Applied to a building or land, the terms shall include any person who occupies the whole or part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
Town, City, Municipal Corporation, or Municipality. The Town of Woodside, California. 
Written. Any representation of words, letters, or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
Year. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed. 
(1975 Code, §§ 1-3.13, 1-3.05) (Ord. 2003-520, effective 10-23-03)  
Sec. 10.09 - Rules of interpretation. 
(A)  And or or. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written "and/or," if the sense requires it. 
(B)  Acts by deputies. Whenever a power is granted to, or a duty is imposed upon, a public officer or employee, the power may be exercised or the duty may be performed by a deputy of such officer or employee or by a person otherwise duly authorized pursuant to law or ordinance, unless this Code expressly provides otherwise. 
(1975 Code, § 1-3.07) 
(C)  Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if applicable. 
(D)  General term. A general term following specific enumeration of terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.  
Sec. 10.10 - Severability; validity of Code. 
If any section, sentence, clause, or phrase of this Code is for any reason held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Code. The Council hereby declares that it would have adopted this Code and each section, sentence, clause, and phrase hereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, sentences, clauses, or phrases be declared unconstitutional. 
(1975 Code, § 1-1.07)  
Sec. 10.11 - Reference to ordinances; application to amendments. 
(A)  Whenever any reference in this Code is made to an ordinance, the reference shall apply to such ordinance of the Town unless this Code expressly provides otherwise. Whenever any reference is made to any portion of this Code, or to any ordinance of the Town, the reference shall apply to all amendments and additions made to this Code. 
(1975 Code, § 1-3.09) 
(B)  The provisions of this Code shall not in any manner affect deposits or other matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with, ordinances which are specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included within this Code, but such references shall apply to the corresponding provisions set forth in this Code. 
(1975 Code, § 1-1.06)  
Sec. 10.12 - References to offices. 
All provisions of this Code and all Town ordinances shall be interpreted to refer to the appropriate or designated officer or office of the Town, and whenever an ordinance, uniform code, statute, or other matter which is adopted by reference refers to any department, officer, employee, inspection, police, or other function, unless the context requires otherwise, all such references shall be to the appropriate or designated office, officer, department, agency, employee, or function of the Town. 
(1975 Code, § 1-1.04)  
Sec. 10.13 - Errors and omissions. 
If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly intended to express such intent, such spelling shall be corrected and such word or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of such error.  
Sec. 10.14 - Official time. 
The official time, as established by applicable state/federal laws, shall be the official time within this Town for the transaction of all municipal business. Whenever certain hours are named in this Code, they shall mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use in the Town. 
(1975 Code, § 1-3.13(m))  
Sec. 10.15 - Reasonable time. 
(A) In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time or notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt performance of such act or the giving of such notice. 
(B)  The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day be Sunday, it shall be excluded.  
Sec. 10.16 - Ordinances repealed. 
This Code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this Code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this Code.  
Sec. 10.17 - Provisions construed as restatements and continuations. 
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantially the same as existing ordinances relating to the same subject matter, shall be construed as restatements and continuations and not as new enactments. 
(1975 Code, § 1-3.02)  
Sec. 10.18 - Official notices. 
The following are hereby established as the official places for the posting of all ordinances, resolutions, notices, and other documents required by the law to be posted: 
(A)  Roberts of Woodside; 
(B)  The Woodside Library; and 
(C)  The United States Post Office, Woodside Branch. 
(1975 Code, § 2-4.01) (Ord. 1966-169, passed - -66)  
Sec. 10.19 - Writing; English language. 
Writing includes any form of recorded message capable of comprehension by ordinary visual means. Whenever any notice, report, statement, or record is required or authorized by this Code, such notice, report, statement, or record shall be made in writing in the English language unless this Code expressly provides otherwise. 
(1975 Code, § 1-3.08)  
Sec. 10.20 - Statute of limitations. 
When a limitation or period of time prescribed in any existing ordinance or statute for acquiring a right or barring a remedy, or for any other purpose, has begun to run before this Code goes into effect, the time which has already run shall be deemed a part of the time prescribed as such limitation. 
(1975 Code, § 1-3.12)  
Sec. 10.21 - Effective date. 
The provisions of this Code shall take effect upon the effective date of the ordinance adopting this Code by reference. 
(1975 Code, § 1-1.03)  
Sec. 10.22 - Repeal or modification of ordinance. 
(A)  Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus repealed or modified shall continue in force until the ordinance repealing or modifying it becomes effective, unless otherwise expressly provided. 
(B)  No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture, or penalty instituted, created, given, secured, or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal shall in any way be affected, released, or discharged, but may be prosecuted, enjoyed, and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force unless it is otherwise expressly provided. 
(C)  When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause, or provision shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the former ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it is expressly provided.  
Sec. 10.23 - Ordinances which amend or supplement Code. 
(A)  If the legislative body shall desire to amend any existing chapter or section of this Code, the chapter or section shall be specifically repealed and a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment, substituted in its place. 
(B)  Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing Code a new chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this Code, the proper number of such chapter or section. In addition to such indication thereof as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a caption or title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.  
Sec. 10.24 - Section histories; statutory references. 
(A)  As histories for the Code sections, the specific number and effective date of the original ordinance, and the most recent three amending ordinances, if any, are listed following the text of the Code section. 
Example: (Ord. 10, effective 5-13-60; Am. Ord. 15, effective 1-1-70; Am. Ord. 20, effective 1-1-80; Am. Ord. 25, effective 1-1-85) 
(B)  (1)  If a statutory cite is included in the history, this indicates that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the statute. 
Example: (Cal. Gov't Code 6250.1 et seq.) (Ord. 10, effective 1-17-80; Am. Ord. 20, effective 1-1-85) 
(2)  If a statutory cite is set forth as a "statutory reference" following the text of the section, this indicates that the reader should refer to that statute for further information. 
Example: 
Sec. 39.01 Public records available. 
  This Town shall make available to any person for inspection or copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state law. 
Statutory reference:   For provisions concerning the inspection of public records, see Cal. Gov't Code 6250.1 et seq. 
(C)  If a section of this Code is derived from the previous Code of Ordinances of the city published in 1975 and subsequently amended, the 1975 Code section number shall be indicated in the history by "(1975 Code, § )."  
Sec. 10.25 - Notice; proof of service. 
(A)  Whenever a notice is required to be given pursuant to the provisions of this Code, unless different provisions are otherwise specifically set forth in the text of the Code, such notice may be given either by personal delivery thereof to the person to be notified or by deposit in the United States mail in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid, addressed to such person to be notified at his/her last known business or residence address as the same appears in the public records of the Town or other records pertaining to the matter to which such notice is directed. Service by mail shall be deemed to have been completed at the time of deposit in the post office. 
(1975 Code, § 1-3.10) 
(B)  Proof of giving any notice required to be given pursuant to the provisions of this Code may be made by the certificate of any officer or employee of the Town or by affidavit of any person over the age of 18 years, which affidavit shows service in conformity with this Code or other provisions of law applicable to the subject matter concerned. 
(1975 Code, § 1-3.11)  
Sec. 10.26 - Maintenance of Code. 
(A)  At least three copies of this Code, duly certified by the Town Clerk, shall be maintained on file in his/her office as the official copies of the Code. Additional copies of the Code shall be distributed to the departments of the Town as shall be prescribed by the Town Manager. 
(B)  Upon the adoption of any amendment or addition to this Code, or upon the repeal of any of its provisions, the Town Clerk shall certify thereto and shall make an appropriate notation in the official volumes of this Code of the taking of such action, noting the number and date of the ordinance pursuant to which such action is taken. 
(C)  Duly certified copies of each ordinance making changes in the Code shall be filed in the office of the Town Clerk in books for such purpose, duly indexed for ready reference. 
(D)  At least annually the Town Clerk shall cause the loose leaf pages of this Code in which changes have been made to be reproduced, including the notation as to the ordinance number and date pursuant to which such change is adopted, and distributed in order that the loose leaf copies of the Code, prepared for the use and convenience of the officers and employees of the city and the general public, may be brought up-to-date. 
(1975 Code, § 1-1.09) (Am. Ord. 2000-506, effective 12-14-00)  
Secs. 10.27—10.29 - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DEVELOPER INDEMNIFICATION 
 
Sec. 10.30 - Purpose. 
(A)  The Town presently requires developers and other applicants for permits to develop real property to pay fees to mitigate the fiscal impact of processing applications. 
(B)  The costs associated with defending a legal action brought by a third party challenging the Town's approval of a permit or entitlement for development should be a cost burden of the real party-in-interest who is the applicant for such development and not the Town. 
(Ord. 2003-517, effective 5-8-03)  
Sec. 10.31 - Definitions. 
Developer. Any applicant for a permit or entitlement for development. 
Development. A land-use permit or entitlement under this Code and shall include determination under the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), including but not limited to general plan or zoning modification, use permit, variance, exception, site development, and site design permits, and building permits. 
(Ord. 2003-517, effective 5-8-03)  
Sec. 10.32 - Indemnity required. 
Any developer who receives approval from the Town for development shall, as a condition of such approval, indemnify, defend and hold harmless the Town, its officers, employees and agents, from any and all claims and lawsuits from third party(s) involving or related to the Town's approval of the developer's application for development. 
(Ord. 2003-517, effective 5-8-03)  
Secs. 10.33—10.39 - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - CODE COMPLIANCE; JUDICIAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE REMEDIES 
 
Sec. 10.40 - Purpose. 
(A)  The Town Council finds that compliance with this Code and applicable state codes throughout the Town is an important public service and enables the Town to better implement its general plan. Code compliance is vital to protection of the public's health, safety and quality of life. The Council finds that its citizens have a right to expect effective code compliance without confrontation between neighbors. The Council further finds that a comprehensive code compliance system that uses a combination of judicial and administrative remedies is critical to gain compliance with code regulations. 
(B)  The Council adopts the following basic principles to guide the Town's code compliance process: 
(1)  It is the sole responsibility of the property owner and his/her builder or contractor or other responsible person to understand and comply with all applicable provisions of this Code. 
(2)  The Town has a duty and responsibility to investigate and enforce Code violations in order to obtain compliance with Town Code provisions. 
(3)  When a Code violation is discovered, any related work activity will cease immediately. 
(4)  No Town official has the authority to waive the need for a permit required by the Town Code unless expressly given that right by the Town Code or court order. 
(5)  When a Code violation occurs, the person responsible shall be liable for the Town's costs of obtaining compliance with the Town's regulations. 
(Ord. 1994-477, effective 1-12-95)  
Sec. 10.41 - Authority to arrest. 
Every officer and employee of the Town having any duty to enforce any of the provisions of this Code or any other ordinance of the Town, or any rule, regulation, or order promulgated or issued pursuant to this Code, or to the provisions of any code adopted by reference by this Code, is hereby authorized, pursuant to Cal. Penal Code § 836.5, to arrest a person without a warrant whenever any such officer or employee has reasonable cause to believe that the person to be arrested has committed a misdemeanor or infraction in the presence of such officer or employee which is a violation of a provision of this Code, or any other ordinance of the Town, or any rule, regulation, or order promulgated or issued pursuant to this Code, or to the provisions of any code adopted by reference by this Code, which such officer or employee has a duty to enforce. 
(1975 Code, § 1-2.09) (Ord. 1984-318, effective 5-10-84)  
Sec. 10.42 - Notice of Code violations. 
(A)  In addition to any other remedy provided for violations of the provisions of this Code, or any other ordinance of the Town, or the provisions of any code adopted by reference by this Code, whenever the Town Manager or his/her designee (hereinafter referred to as "Town Manager") has knowledge of an alleged violation that relates in any way to the use or occupation of real property within the Town, he/she may provide a notice of code violation to the owner of the property upon which the alleged violation is located and, where different from the owner, to the person(s) responsible for causing or maintaining such alleged violation. Notice shall be provided to the property owner by mail at the address shown on the latest assessment roll or at any other address of the owner known to the Town Manager. In the event the owner's address is unknown, notice shall be conspicuously posted on or in front of the property, in a form to be approved by the Town Manager. Notice to any responsible person shall be by mail to the street address of the property or by posting the property. 
(B)  The notice shall specify the property address, the owner's name, any responsible party's name, and the nature of the alleged violation(s), including reference to the pertinent code section(s). The notice shall provide a list of corrections needed to bring the property into compliance, and a deadline or specific date to correct the violations. The notice shall also indicate the potential consequences should the property remain in violation, including, but not limited to: criminal prosecution, civil injunction, civil penalties, administrative costs, recordation of the notice, and withholding of future permits and inspections. The potential consequences listed should be commensurate with the nature and severity of the alleged violation. 
(C)  The notice shall also state that within 20 days after the date of the notice, the owner and/or any responsible person may request a meeting with the Town Manager to present evidence that a violation does not exist. If a meeting is requested, the Town Manager shall arrange to meet with the owner and/or responsible person as soon as possible, but not later than five working days after receipt of the request for a meeting. 
(Ord. 1994-477, effective 1-12-95; Am. Ord. 2016-574, effective 5-26-16)  
Sec. 10.43 - Notice of intent. 
In the event a meeting is not requested and the alleged violation has not been corrected or a corrective plan of action is not approved by the Town Manager within 20 days of notice or in the event that, after consideration of evidence, the Town Manager determines that a violation of one or more of the Town codes or ordinances in fact exists, the Town Manager shall issue a notice of intent to record the notice of code violation. A copy of the notice of intent shall be provided by personal delivery or certified mail to the property owner and to any responsible person. 
(Ord. 1994-477, effective 1-12-95; Am. Ord. 2016-574, effective 5-26-16)  
Sec. 10.44 - Appeal of decision of Town Manager; hearing. 
(A)  If the owner or the responsible person disagrees with the determination of the Town Manager, either party may appeal the decision to the Town Council by providing a written request to the Town Clerk or to the Town Manager, along with an appeal fee as set forth in the Town's fee and deposit schedule, not later than ten days after the date of the mailing of the notice of intent to record the notice of violation. 
(B)  The Town Council shall conduct a hearing to consider the action of the Town Manager and the arguments of the appellant. At least ten days prior to the hearing, the Town shall provide written notice to the affected property owner, any responsible person, and neighboring property owners within 500 feet of the subject property regarding the date and time of the hearing. The Town Council shall either affirm, modify, or reverse the decision of the Town Manager, and may attach conditions deemed necessary to assure compliance with Town regulations and to reimburse the costs of code compliance. The Council may, at its discretion, reimburse the appellant for the fee. In the event the Town Manager determination is reversed, the Town shall reimburse the appellant's appeal fee. 
(Ord. 1994-477, effective 1-12-95; Am. Ord. 2003-520, effective 10-23-03; Am. Ord. 2016-574, effective 5-26-16)  
Sec. 10.45 - Recorded notice of violation. 
If a hearing is not timely requested, or if no appeal is timely filed, or if directed by the decision of the Council on an appeal, the Town Manager may proceed with civil or criminal enforcement remedies, and shall record the notice of violation with the Office of the County Recorder of San Mateo County. The recorded notice of violation shall include the name of the property owner, the assessor's parcel number, and the parcel's legal description. A copy of the notice of violation shall be provided by certified mail to the property owner and any responsible person. 
(Ord. 1994-477, effective 1-12-95; Am. Ord. 2016-574, effective 5-26-16)  
Sec. 10.46 - Correction of violation. 
On the correction of any violation noticed pursuant to this section, the Town Manager shall issue a notice of release of code violation. A notice of release of code violation shall be issued and recorded by the Town Manager only if: 
(A)  All violations listed in the notice have been corrected; 
(B)  All necessary permits have been issued and finalized; and 
(C)  All civil penalties have been paid; and 
(D)  All administrative code compliance fees have been paid. 
(Ord. 1994-477, effective 1-12-95; Am. Ord. 2016-574, effective 5-26-16)  
Sec. 10.47 - Stop work notice; permits withheld. 
The Town shall cause a stop work notice to be issued for any work related to a code violation, and where a notice of violation has been recorded, shall withhold permits for any alteration, repair, or construction on the property, or any permits pertaining to the use and development of the real property or any structure on such property until a notice of release of code violation has been issued by the Town Manager. The Town may not withhold permits which are necessary to obtain a notice of release of code violation, or which are necessary to correct serious health and safety violations. 
(Ord. 1994-477, effective 1-12-95; Am. Ord. 2016-574, effective 5-26-16)  
Sec. 10.48 - Service of notice. 
(A)  Whenever a notice is required to be given under this section, the notice shall be served by any of the following methods unless different provisions are otherwise specifically stated to apply: 
(1)  Personal service or certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested. Simultaneously, the same notice may be sent by first class (regular) mail. If a notice that is sent by certified mail is returned unsigned, then service shall be deemed effective pursuant to regular mail, provided the notice that was sent by regular mail is not returned. 
(2)  Posting the notice conspicuously on or in front of the property. 
(B)  Service by certified or regular mail in the manner described above shall be effective on the date of mailing. The failure of any person with an interest in the property to receive any notice served in accordance with this section shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this Code. 
(Ord. 1994-477, effective 1-12-95)  
Sec. 10.49 - Performance bond requirement. 
As part of any civil court action, the Town has the authority to require a performance bond to ensure compliance with the Town Municipal Code, applicable state codes, or any judicial action. 
(Ord. 1994-477, effective 1-12-95)  
Sec. 10.50 - Mediation. 
(A)  The Council finds there may be a need for mediation as a means of dispute resolution to gain compliance with provisions of this Code and applicable federal and state codes. The Council further declares that mediation can be an effective technique to avoid disputes by developing consensus on controversial issues. Mediation can often resolve disputes in a more efficient and effective manner without the necessity of more formal administrative action or litigation. 
(B)  At any stage of a code compliance proceeding, including during a civil action, the matter may be referred to mediation by the Town, or by a court that has jurisdiction over the matter. 
(C)  The mediation shall be held before a neutral third party agreed to by the parties or appointed by the Presiding Judge of San Mateo County. 
(D)  The mediation shall occur within 60 days of the date of the referral. 
(E)  Mediation fees shall be equally paid by the parties involved. 
(Ord. 1994-477, effective 1-12-95)  
Sec. 10.51 - Code compliance cost recovery. 
(A)  Any property owner to whom a notice of violation is issued and recorded shall pay to the Town the costs of staff investigation and administration, as set forth in the Town's fee and deposit schedule. Such costs shall be based on the extent of staff work involved in abating the violation, and may include the costs of research, field investigation, notice, and administrative hearing costs. 
(B)  Any person against whom a civil or criminal complaint is filed shall pay to the Town the reasonable costs of staff investigation and administration, as set forth in the Town's fee and deposit schedule, unless the party after trial is deemed by the court to be the prevailing party. Such costs shall be based on the extent of staff work involved with abating the violation, and may include the costs of research, field investigation, notice and administrative hearing costs, and court costs. 
(C)  Code compliance administrative fees shall not be required where the violations on a property are corrected not later than the date of recordation of a notice of violation. 
(D)  No notice of violation shall be released by the Town and no civil or criminal complaint shall be dismissed by the Town until all applicable code compliance fees have been paid. Additionally, no permit shall be issued and no staff inspection shall be conducted for work on a property currently subject to a notice of violation or to a civil or criminal complaint, until such code compliance fees have been paid. 
(E)  Code compliance fees shall be required in addition to any other fees or penalties required by the Town Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 1994-477, effective 1-12-95)  
Sec. 10.52 - Fees, charges, licenses and taxes made a civil debt. 
The amount of any fee, service charge, utility charge, license, or tax of any nature whatsoever imposed by any provision of this Code shall be deemed a civil debt owing to the Town. An action may be commenced in the name of the Town in any court of competent jurisdiction for the collection of the amount of any such delinquent or unpaid fee, service charge, utility charge, license, or tax, together with any penalties applicable thereto as prescribed by this Code. The remedy prescribed by this section shall be cumulative, and the use of an action to collect such an amount as a debt by civil action shall not bar the use of any other remedy provided by this Code or by law for the purpose of enforcing the provisions thereof. 
(1975 Code, § 1-2.06)  
Sec. 10.53 - Collection of costs by Town. 
Wherever the Town Attorney is authorized or directed to commence or sustain any civil action or proceeding, either at law or in equity, to enforce any of the provisions of this Code or any other ordinance of the Town, or to enjoin or restrain any violation thereof, or otherwise to abate any public nuisance, or to collect any sums of money on behalf of the Town which have or will become due by reason of any violation of any such code or ordinance provisions, then the Town shall be entitled to collect all the costs and expenses of the same, including, without limitation, reasonable investigation costs, which shall be set by the court and made a part of any judgment in any such action or proceeding. 
(1975 Code, § 1-2.08) (Ord. 1980-294, effective 12-12-80; Am. Ord. 1997-486, effective 6-26-97)  
Secs. 10.54—10.59 - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - NUISANCE ABATEMENT 
 
Sec. 10.60 - Nuisance defined. 
A nuisance is anything which is injurious or threatening to health or safety, obstructs the customary free use or passage of any stream, park, street, public easement, or highway, is specifically declared by this Code or state law to be a nuisance, or obstructs the free use of property in a manner that interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property. Examples of a nuisance include but are not limited to: 
(A)  Any explosives, flammable liquids or hazardous materials which are stored in a manner or an amount contrary to state law or this Code; 
(B)  Any building or structure which is made, erected, altered, maintained, partially destroyed or abandoned contrary to state law or this Code; 
(C)  Any obstruction or excavation which interferes with the ordinary use of public streets, ways, alleys, thoroughfares, sidewalks, public easements, or public grounds unless otherwise permitted by law; 
(D)  Any accumulation of debris, garbage, refuse, weeds, overgrowth, livestock waste, or machine or equipment parts which constitute: 
(1)  A fire hazard; 
(2)  A hazard to pedestrian or vehicular traffic; 
(3)  A harborage for rats, vermin, or insect infestation; or 
(4)  Any other hazard to public health or safety. 
(E)  Any inoperative, abandoned, wrecked or dismantled vehicle; or 
(F)  Any swimming pool, pond, well, or other body or container of water polluted or otherwise maintained in an unhealthy or unsafe condition. 
(G)  A drainfield that fails and causes flow of effluent above ground. 
(Ord. 1994-477, effective 1-12-95)  
Sec. 10.61 - Notice of abatement. 
(A)  Whenever the Town Manager or his/her designee determines that a nuisance exists on private property, that Town Officer may serve notice as provided in Section 10.48 to abate the nuisance by certified mail upon the owner of the property and anyone known to the Town Officer to be in possession of the property. 
(B)  The notice shall specify the property address, describe the nuisance and instruct the owner and/or possessor to abate that condition or activity. The notice shall further inform the owner and the possessor that if the nuisance is not abated within 15 calendar days of service of the notice, the Town will abate the nuisance and require the owner and/or possessor to pay the cost of the abatement. Cost of abatement includes the cost for actual removal or correction of the nuisance plus reasonable administrative costs. Administrative costs are either actual administrative costs or 20 percent of the cost of actual removal or correction, whichever is less. 
(C)  If the owner and/or possessor fails to pay such cost, that cost may be collected by the Town Attorney, or be specially assessed to the parcel and shall be subject to the same collection procedures, including any lien, penalty and sale procedures that are provided for delinquent taxes. 
(D)  The notice shall further state that either the owner or the possessor, or both, may request a hearing to contest the abatement action and/or assessment of cost by filing a written request for a hearing within 15 days of service of the notice to abate with the Town officer who ordered the abatement. Failure to request this hearing within this time period shall waive any right to appeal the Town's action. 
(Ord. 1994-477, effective 1-15-95)  
Sec. 10.62 - Hearing and appeal. 
Upon a timely request for a hearing and providing that there is no immediate threat to public health and safety, the Town shall postpone any abatement action or assessment of cost until the owner and any possessor is given an opportunity to be heard and present evidence to the Town Council as to why the abatement and/or assessment should not proceed. The Town Clerk shall mail a notice of the date, time and place of the hearing to the owner and any possessor and all property owners within 500 feet of the subject property at least 15 days prior to the hearing date. After the hearing, the Council shall issue and serve a written notice upon the owner and any possessor of the property. The decision of the Council shall be final and conclusive in the matter. 
(Ord. 1994-477, effective 1-12-95)  
Sec. 10.63 - Abatement. 
(A)  If, after notice of abatement and no request for hearing is timely made under Section 10.61, and corrective action to abate the nuisance has not occurred within the time for requesting a hearing or any extension granted in writing by the Planning Director, then the Town Manager or his/her designee may order abatement to be done by Town personnel, or by a private licensed contractor. 
(B)  Town personnel or private contractors can enter on private property in a reasonable manner to abate the public nuisance. 
(Ord. 1994-477, effective 1-12-95)  
Sec. 10.64 - Notice of abatement lien. 
(A)  The Town Council hereby authorizes the Town Manager or his/her designee to file and record a notice of abatement lien on behalf of the Town in the event the owner and/or possessor of the property fail to pay the costs of abatement upon a 30-day written demand for payment. 
(B)  The notice of abatement lien shall identify and set forth the last known address of both the record owner and the possessor of the parcel. The notice shall further set forth the date upon which the abatement of the nuisance was ordered and the date the abatement was completed. Finally, the notice shall describe the real property subject to the lien and the amount of the cost of abatement. 
(C)  Recordation of a notice of abatement lien under this provision shall have the same effect as recordation of an abstract of a money judgment recorded under state law. The lien created shall have the same priority as a judgment lien on real property and shall continue in effect until released. An abatement lien created under this section may be released or subordinated in the same manner as any judgment lien on real property. 
(D)  The Town Council hereby authorizes the Town Manager or his/her designee to compromise, subordinate or settle any lien imposed under this section in the amount of $10,000.00 or less. 
(Ord. 1994-477, effective 1-12-95)  
Sec. 10.65 - Other remedies. 
Nothing in this chapter shall affect, prevent or prejudice any other remedy or penalty, civil or criminal, for the creation or maintenance of a nuisance. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the summary and immediate abatement of a nuisance upon the order of the Town Council or any Town officer as authorized by law if the Council or officer determines that the nuisance constitutes an immediate threat to the public health or safety. 
(Ord. 1994-477, effective 1-12-95)  
Sec. 10.66 - Zoning or site development code violations. 
(A)  The Town shall not pursue zoning or site development code violations for any structure or use which existed prior to August 12, 1980, regardless of its legality prior to that date. Notwithstanding the foregoing provision, however, the Town may pursue such violations where it determines that an imminent health and/or safety hazard exists from the violation. 
(B)  Administrative and abatement costs. Pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code § 38773.5, in any action, administrative proceeding, or special proceeding brought by the Town to abate a public nuisance due to a violation of the Woodside Municipal Code, pursuant to Section 10.99(A)(4), or pursuant to Section 10.40 et seq., or pursuant to Section 10.60 et seq., the prevailing party shall be entitled to reasonable attorney's fees. Recovery of attorney's fees shall be limited as follows: 
(1)  To those actions or proceedings where the Town has elected to recover attorney's fees at the initiation of such actions or proceedings. 
(2)  The amount of attorney's fees in any action, administrative action, or special proceeding awarded to a prevailing party shall not exceed the amount of reasonable attorney's fees incurred by the Town in the action or proceeding. 
(Ord. 1994-477, effective 1-12-95; Am. Ord. 1997-486, effective 6-26-97; Am. Ord. 1997-488, effective 7-10-97)  
Sec. 10.99 - General penalty. 
(A)  Violations misdemeanors or infractions. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of this Code or the provisions of any code adopted by reference by this Code. Any person violating any of such provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this Code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor or an infraction as designated by, and provided for, in Cal. Penal Code §§ 16, 17, and 19, and as expressly specified in Cal. Veh. Code § 40000. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this Code or the provisions of any code adopted by reference by this Code is committed, continued, or permitted by such person and shall be punishable accordingly. 
(2)  Any person convicted of a misdemeanor under the provisions of this Code shall be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000.00, or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(3)  Any person convicted of an infraction under the provisions of this Code shall be punished for a first conviction by a fine of not more than $100.00, for a second conviction within a period of one year by a fine of not more than $200.00, and for a third or any subsequent conviction within a period of one year by a fine of not more than $500.00. 
(4)  In addition to the penalties provided by this section, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Code, or the provisions of any code adopted by reference by this Code, or any subdivision, building, wiring, plumbing, or other similar activity in violation of the provisions of this Code shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be summarily abated by the Town in a civil action, and each day such condition continues shall be a new and separate offense. 
(1975 Code, § 1-2.01) (Ord. 1984-318, effective 5-10-84) 
(B)  Civil penalties. 
(1)  The Town Council finds that in addition to any other procedures, fines, or penalties, that where it is necessary for the Town to file a civil action in court to obtain compliance with Town codes or ordinances, the court may, in its discretion, assess a civil penalty of up to $5,000.00 against the violating parties in connection with the code enforcement action in the event the Town is the prevailing party. The court shall consider some or all of the following factors: 
(a)  The duration of the violation(s). 
(b)  The frequency or recurrence of the violation(s). 
(c)  The seriousness of the violation(s). 
(d)  The history of the violation(s). 
(e)  The person's conduct after issuance of the notice of violation. 
(f)  The good faith effort by the person to comply. 
(g)  The economic impact of the penalty on the person. 
(h)  The impact of the violation upon the community. 
(i)  Any other factors that justice may require. 
(2)  Any person or entity who commences development or begins construction of any improvement prior to obtaining a zoning approval, site development, subdivision, or building permit required by this Code shall pay a civil penalty to the Town equivalent to three times any and all fees required for the development or improvement plus the permit fee. The Planning Director may reduce or waive the administrative civil penalty fee in those cases where an application for permit is filed prior to staff awareness of a potential violation, and may reduce the fee by one-half where the Director determines that the applicant has not acted wilfully to violate the Code, provided that a complete permit application is submitted not later than ten days after staff has notified the owner of the violation. 
(Ord. 1994-477, effective 1-12-95) 
(C)  Change of misdemeanors to infractions. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, whenever the violation of any section contained in this Code is punishable as a misdemeanor, the prosecuting attorney having jurisdiction to prosecute such misdemeanor may specify that the offense is an infraction, and proceed with prosecution as an infraction. 
(1975 Code, § 1-2.11) (Ord. 1986-337, passed 7-10-86)  
TITLE III - ADMINISTRATION 
   
CHAPTER 30. - TOWN COUNCIL 
 
Sec. 30.01 - Regular meetings of Council. 
(A)  All regular meetings of the Council shall be held at Independence Hall in Woodside, California. Regular meetings of the Town Council shall be held on the second and fourth Tuesday of each month. All regular meetings shall commence at the hour of 7:00 p.m. 
(B)  In years of general municipal elections, for Town Council positions, no regular or special meeting of the Town Council shall be held 'immediately after said general municipal election', excepting for an emergency meeting, as defined in Government Code § 54956.5, until the said general municipal election results have been canvassed and certified. 
(C)  After January 1, 2018, the general municipal elections of the Town shall be consolidated with the statewide election date in accordance with Elections Code §§ 1301, 10000 to 10735, and 14050 to 14057, as amended. The terms for the local elected officials that are scheduled to end in 2017 and 2019 are hereby extended by 12 months. As used in this section, "12 months" means the period between the day upon which the term of office would otherwise have commenced and the first Tuesday after the second Monday in the 12th month before or after that day, inclusive. 
(1975 Code, § 2-1.01) (Ord. 1957-26, effective - -57; Am. Ord. 1966-168, effective - -66; Am. Ord. 1976-264, effective 6-10-76; Am. Ord. 1979-287, effective 10-11-79; Am. Ord. 1997-486, effective 6-26-97; Am. Ord. 2000-506, effective 12-14-00; Am. Ord. 2016-579, effective 1-12-17; Am. Ord. 2019-598 , § 1, effective 3-28-2019)  
Sec. 30.02 - Residency of Council Members in districts of representation. 
A person shall not be eligible to hold office as a member of the Council unless he/she resides within the geographical area making up the district from which he/she is elected or to which he/she is appointed by the Council. When a person has ceased to be a resident of the geographical area of the election district from which he/she was elected or appointed, the said office shall immediately become vacant, and the Town Council shall declare the office vacant and commence proceedings pursuant to Government Code § 36512 et seq., to fill the vacant office. 
(1975 Code, § 2-1.04) (Ord. 1978-281, effective 7-13-78; Am. Ord. 1997-486, effective 6-26-97)  
Sec. 30.03 - Procedure for filling vacancies on the Town Council. 
(A)  Purpose. From time to time vacancies occur during the term of a Town Council Member that require the Town Council pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code § 36512(b) to fill the vacancy either by appointment or special election. There is no opportunity to both provisionally fill the vacancy by appointment and then hold a special election at a convenient general election date. Pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code § 36512(c) if the Town Council adopts an ordinance providing that all such vacancies during the term of a Council Member shall be filled by special election, then the said Code allows for an interim appointment pending the special election, and provides more flexibility in setting election dates. 
(B)  Filling a vacancy. When a vacancy occurs in the elective office of Town Council Member, during the term thereof, the vacancy shall be filled by special election. 
(1)  The special election shall be called within 30 days of the occurrence of the vacancy. 
(2)  The Town Council may appoint a person who is qualified to hold the office, and that person shall hold the office until the time of the special election. 
(3)  The special election shall be held on the date of the next regularly established election, or regularly established general municipal election to be held throughout the Town, not less than 114 days from the call of the special election. 
(Ord. 1999-497, effective 11-11-99)  
CHAPTER 31. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES  
ARTICLE I. - TOWN FINANCE DIRECTOR 
 
Sec. 31.01 - Office established; appointment. 
(A)  Pursuant to the authority granted by the provisions of Cal. Gov't Code §§ 36501 and 37209, the office of Town Finance Director is hereby created and established. 
(1975 Code, § 2-3.101) 
(B)  The Council, by resolution, shall appoint the Town Finance Director. 
(1975 Code, § 2-3.102) (Ord. 1974-251, effective - -74)  
Sec. 31.02 - Bond. 
Before entering upon the duties of his/her office, the Town Finance Director shall be bonded to assure the faithful and honest performance of his/her duties as set forth in Section 31.01. The penal sum of the bond shall be in a reasonable amount as recommended by the Town Attorney and fixed by the Council by resolution. Any premium for such bond shall be a proper charge against the Town. 
(1975 Code, § 2-3.103) (Ord. 1974-251, effective - -74)  
Sec. 31.03 - Powers and duties. 
It shall be the duty of the Town Finance Director to act in all cases to promote, secure, and preserve the financial and property interests of the Town, and he/she shall have the following general powers and duties: 
(A)  To perform the duties imposed upon the Town Clerk by Cal. Gov't Code §§ 37200 through 37209 and 40802 through 40805; 
(B)  To exercise general supervision over all Town officers regarding the proper management of the fiscal concerns of their respective offices, prescribe the form of accounts and reports to be rendered to him/her, and ensure that budget appropriations are not exceeded; 
(C)  To examine and audit from time to time the accounts of all officers and departments; 
(D)  To ascertain that all officers and employees receiving money pay such money into the Town treasury as required and that all the necessary financial reports are made by the Town officers. The Finance Director shall report all delinquencies or defaults in payments or in reports to the Council; 
(E)  To demand and receive all moneys and fees owing to the Town whenever the means of collection of such moneys and fees is not otherwise prescribed by law; 
(F)  To prepare and audit a register of demands against the Town and certify the register of demands to the Council at each regular Council meeting; 
(G)  To keep all general accounts of the Town government and transmit, at least monthly, to the Council and all departments and officers current information of the classified unencumbered appropriation balances; 
(H)  To collect all licenses and fees in the manner authorized and required by law and issue all permits and licenses, except those which are required by law to be issued by a particular department or officer; and 
(I)  To perform such additional duties as are prescribed from time to time by the Council or state authority. 
(1975 Code, § 2-3.104) (Ord. 1974-251, effective - -74)  
Sec. 31.04 - Town Clerk. 
(A)  The Town Clerk shall perform the duties prescribed by law, including the duties prescribed by Cal. Gov't Code § 40801 et seq., and any additional duties as prescribed by the Town Manager. The Town Clerk is appointed by the Town Manager and shall hold said office at the pleasure of the Town Manager. 
(B)  The financial, accounting, and other duties imposed upon the Town Clerk by Cal. Gov't Code §§ 37200 through 37209 and 40802 through 40805.5 are hereby transferred to the Town Finance Director in accordance with the provisions of Cal. Gov't Code §§ 37209 and 40805.5. 
(1975 Code, § 2-3.105) (Ord. 1974-251, effective - -74)  
Sec. 31.05 - Designation of Town Manager as Town Finance Director. 
Unless the Town Council has appointed the Town Finance Director under this subchapter, the Town Manager or his/her designee shall act and perform the duties of Town Finance Director. 
(Ord. 1993-471, effective 9-14-93)  
Sec. 31.06 - Town Treasurer. 
The Town Finance Director is designated as, and shall perform all the duties of the office of Treasurer under Cal. Gov't Code § 36501, and any other duties and responsibilities imposed on the office of Treasurer under state law. 
(Ord. 1993-471, effective 9-14-93)  
Secs. 31.07—31.14 - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - TOWN MANAGER 
 
Sec. 31.15 - Office established; appointment, eligibility and subordinate officers. 
(A)  The office of Town Manager is hereby created and established. 
(1975 Code, § 2-1.201) 
(B)  The Town Manager shall be appointed by the Council on the basis of his/her administrative and executive abilities and qualifications, and he/she shall hold office for and during the pleasure of the Council. 
(C)  No person elected as a member of the Council shall, subsequent to such election, be eligible for appointment as Town Manager until one year has elapsed after such member of the Council shall have ceased to be a member of the Council. 
(1975 Code, § 2-3.202) (Ord. 1972-238, effective - -72)  
Sec. 31.16 - Residence. 
Residence in the Town at the time of the appointment of the Town Manager shall not be required as a condition of employment. However, if the Town Manager does not become a resident of the Town within one year after taking office, the Council shall require that he/she reside within an area of close proximity to the Town, and such area shall be determined by the Council. 
(1975 Code, § 2-3.203) (Ord. 1972-238, effective - -72)  
Sec. 31.17 - Bond. 
The Town Manager shall furnish a corporate surety bond to be approved by the Council in such sum as may be determined by the Council, and such bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties imposed upon the Town Manager as set forth in Section 31.20. Any premium for such bond shall be a proper charge against the Town. 
(1975 Code, § 2-3.204) (Ord. 1972-238, effective - -72)  
Sec. 31.18 - Absence or disability; Town Manager Pro Tempore. 
The Town Manager shall appoint, subject to the approval of the Council, one of the other officers or department heads of the Town to serve as Town Manager Pro Tempore during any temporary absence or disability of the Town Manager. In the event of the absence or disability of the Town Manager and his/her failure to so appoint a Town Manager Pro Tempore, the Council may designate some qualified Town officer or employee to perform the duties of the Town Manager during the period of the absence or disability of the Town Manager. 
(1975 Code, § 2-3.205) (Ord. 1972-238, effective - -72)  
Sec. 31.19 - Compensation and expenses. 
The Town Manager shall receive such compensation and expense allowances as the Council shall from time to time determine. Such compensation and expense allowances shall be fixed by resolution and shall be a proper charge against such funds of the Town as the Council shall designate. In addition, the Town Manager shall be reimbursed for all sums necessarily incurred or paid by him/her in the performance of his/her duties or incurred when traveling on business pertaining to the Town under the direction of the Council. 
(1975 Code, § 2-3.206) (Ord. 1972-238, effective - -72; Am. Ord. 1997-486, effective 6-26-97)  
Sec. 31.20 - Powers and duties. 
The Town Manager shall be the administrative head of the Town government under the direction and control of the Council, except as otherwise provided in this subchapter. He/she shall be responsible for the efficient administration of all the affairs of the Town which are under his/her control, and he/she is hereby authorized to sign all written contracts and agreements which have previously been approved by the Council. In addition to his/her general powers as administrative head, and not as a limitation thereon, he/she shall have the following powers and duties: 
(A)  Law enforcement. To enforce any of the provisions of this Code or any other ordinance of the Town, or any rule, regulation, or order promulgated or issued pursuant to this Code, or to the provisions of any code adopted by reference by this Code, and to ascertain that all franchises, contracts, permits, and privileges granted by the Council are faithfully observed. 
(B)  Direction of officers and employees. To control, order, and give directions to all department heads, including those appointed by contract or agreement, subordinate officers, and employees of the Town, except the elected officers, the Town Attorney, and the Town Auditor; provided, however, nothing in this section or this subchapter shall be construed as giving the Town Manager the power and authority to order or direct an appointive Town officer to perform any duty or function which is in violation of the laws of the state or the Town, nor to cease performing a duty or function which may be required by the laws of the state or the Town. 
(C)  Appointment, removal, promotion, and demotion of officers and employees. To appoint, remove, promote, and demote any and all officers and employees of the Town, except the Town Attorney; 
(D)  Organization of offices, positions, and departments. To recommend to the Council such organization of offices, positions, departments, or units under his/her direction as may be indicated in the interests of the efficient, effective, and economical conduct of the business of the Town; 
(E)  Recommendation of legislation. To recommend to the Council for adoption such measures and ordinances as he/she deems necessary or expedient; 
(F)  Attendance at Council meetings. To attend all meetings of the Council, unless excused therefrom, except when his/her removal is under consideration; 
(G)  Disposition of correspondence. To receive and dispose of mail addressed to the Council and to take action on matters not necessarily requiring Council action; 
(H)  Preparation of financial reports. To keep the Council at all times fully advised as to the financial conditions and needs of the Town; 
(I)  Preparation of budgets and salary plans. To prepare and submit to the Council for its approval the proposed annual budget and the proposed annual salary plan; 
(J)  Purchases and expenditures. To purchase all supplies for all the departments or divisions of the Town. No expenditure shall be submitted to the Council except with the report and approval of the Town Manager; 
(K)  Investigations. To make investigations into the affairs of the Town, and any department or division thereof, and any contract or the proper performance of any obligation of the Town; 
(L)  Investigations of complaints. To investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of the Town government and the services maintained by public utilities in the Town and to ascertain that all franchises and permits granted by the Town are faithfully performed and observed; 
(M)  Suspension of public property. To exercise general supervision over all public buildings, parks, and all other public property which is under the control and jurisdiction of the Council; 
(N)  Devotion of time to his/her duties. To devote his/her entire time to the duties of his/her office in the interests of the Town; and 
(O)  Performance of additional duties. To perform such other duties and exercise such other powers as may be delegated to him/her from time to time by ordinance, resolution, or other action of the Council. 
(1975 Code, § 2-3.207) (Ord. 1972-238, effective - -72; Am. Ord. 1984-318, effective 5-10-84) Designation of Town Manager as Town Finance Director, see § 31.05.  
Sec. 31.21 - Attendance at commission, board and committee meetings. 
The Town Manager, or his/her duly authorized and appointed representative, may attend any and all meetings of the Planning Commission and any other commissions, boards, and committees created by the Council upon his/her own volition or upon the direction of the Council, at which meetings he/she shall be heard by such commissions, boards, and committees as to all matters upon which he/she may wish to address the members thereof, and he/she shall inform such members as to the status of any matter being considered by the Council, and he/she shall cooperate to the fullest extent with the members of all such commissions, boards, and committees appointed by the Council. 
(1975 Code, § 2-3.08) (Ord. 1972-238, effective - -72)  
Sec. 31.22 - Manager's relationship with Council. 
(A)  The Council and its members shall deal with the administrative services of the Town only through the Town Manager, except for the purposes of inquiry, and neither the Council nor any of its members shall give orders to any subordinate of the Town Manager. The Town Manager shall take his/her orders and instructions from the Council only when sitting in a duly held meeting of the Council, and no individual Councilman shall give any orders or instructions to the Town Manager; provided, however, the provisions of this section shall not preclude the Town Manager from meeting with other public officials or agencies for the purpose of conferring on Town policy matters even though he/she may not have received official instructions from the Council sitting in a duly held meeting. 
(B)  The Mayor shall act in a liaison capacity between the Council and the Town Manager and in such capacity shall advise the Town Manager on matters of Council policy. 
(1975 Code, § 2-3.209) (Ord. 1972-238, effective - -72)  
Sec. 31.23 - Relationship with Town officers. 
It shall be the duty of each subordinate officer of the Town to cooperate with and assist the Town Manager in administering the affairs of the Town efficiently, economically, and harmoniously so far as may be consistent with their duties as prescribed by the laws of the Town. 
(1975 Code, § 2-3.210) (Ord. 1972-238, effective - -72; Am. Ord. 1997-486, effective 6-26-97)  
Secs. 31.24—31.34 - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OTHER OFFICIALS 
 
Sec. 31.35 - Town Engineer. 
The Town Engineer shall have, in addition to any other duties assigned to him/her, the duty to enforce any of the provisions of this Code or any other ordinance of the Town, or any rule, regulation, or order promulgated or issued pursuant to this Code, or to the provisions of any code adopted by reference by this Code. 
(1975 Code, § 2-3.301) (Ord. 1984-318, effective 5-10-84)  
Sec. 31.36 - Planning Director. 
The Planning Director shall have, in addition to any other duties assigned to him/her, the duty to enforce any of the provisions of this Code or any other ordinance of the Town, or any rule, regulation, or order promulgated or issued pursuant to this Code, or to the provisions of any code adopted by reference by this Code. Pursuant to Chapter 153, the Planning Director shall serve as the Architectural and Site Review Administrator. 
(1975 Code, § 2-3.401) (Ord. 1984-318, effective 5-10-84; Am. Ord. 2008-543, effective 1-8-09; Am. Ord. 2015-569, effective 1-7-16)  
Sec. 31.37 - Town Building Official. 
The Town Building Official shall have, in addition to any other duties assigned to him/her, the duty to enforce any of the provisions of this Code or any other ordinance of the Town, or any rule, regulation, or order promulgated or issued pursuant to this Code, or to the provisions of any code adopted by reference by this Code. 
(Ord. 2008-543, effective 1-8-09)  
CHAPTER 32. - COMMISSIONS  
ARTICLE I. - PLANNING COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 32.01 - Creation. 
Pursuant to the provisions of Cal. Gov't Code § 65100, a Planning Commission, consisting of seven members, is hereby created. 
(1975 Code, § 2-2.201) (Ord. 1957-20, effective - -57; Am. Ord. 1968-200, effective - -68; Am. Ord. 1970-220, effective - -70; Am. Ord. 2015-569, effective 1-7-16)  
Sec. 32.02 - Appointments. 
(A)  The members of the Planning Commission shall be appointed by the Council by a majority vote of the full membership thereof. Appointments to the offices, the terms of which expire in a given year, shall be made by the Council at the first regular meeting on or after February 1 in such year. 
(B)  All appointments, including those to fill vacancies, shall be made from nominations filed in writing, no later than 15 days prior to selection, with the Town Clerk by any citizen on his/her own behalf, or by another citizen, stating the qualifications and reasons for the appointment of the nominee. The Council may make additional nominations and shall review all statements of qualification before selection and appointment. 
(C)  The Town Clerk shall circulate the statements of the qualifications of the nominees to all members of the Council prior to such appointments to office. 
(1975 Code, § 2-2.202) (Ord. 1957-20, effective - -57; Am. Ord. 1968-200, effective - -68; Am. Ord. 1970-220, effective - -70; Am. Ord. 2015-569, effective 1-7-16)  
Sec. 32.03 - Terms of office. 
Each term of office of a member of the Planning Commission shall be for a period of four years and until the qualification of the successor to the member whose term expires. 
(1975 Code, § 2-2.203) (Ord. 1968-200, effective - -68; Am. Ord. 1970-220, effective - -70; Am. Ord. 2015-569, effective 1-7-16)  
Sec. 32.04 - Residence. 
No more than one member of the Planning Commission shall have his/her place of legal residence in, and be appointed from, each district of the Town; provided, however, the Council, by two-thirds vote of the full membership thereof, may appoint two or more members having their places of legal residence in the same district. If two or more members from the same district are so appointed, the Council shall designate which such members shall be appointed to which term or terms of office. If a member, during his/her term of office, removes his/her place of legal residence from one district to another, he/she may nevertheless complete the term of his/her office. If a member removes his/her place of legal residence from the Town, his/her office shall become vacant and shall be filled as for any other vacancy. 
(1975 Code, § 2-2.204) (Ord. 1968-200, effective - -68; Am. Ord. 1976-265, effective 8-12-76; Am. Ord. 2015-569, effective 1-7-16)  
Sec. 32.05 - Vacancies; removal from office. 
Vacancies occurring in the membership of the Planning Commission shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired portion of the term of each such office. Any appointee to the Planning Commission may be removed from office by not less than five members of the Council voting in favor of such removal. 
(1975 Code, § 2-2.205) (Ord. 1968-200, effective - -68; Am. Ord. 1970-220, effective - -70; Am. Ord. 2015-569, effective 1-7-16)  
Sec. 32.06 - Powers and duties. 
The Planning Commission shall have the powers and duties set forth in Cal. Gov't Code and the general laws of the state and as set forth in this Code, which shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(A)  To prepare a general plan and development policy for the Town for recommendation to the Council; 
(B)  To recommend such ordinances and resolutions to the Council as are necessary to implement the general plan and development policy adopted by the Council; 
(C)  To participate in the administration of the laws and policies of the Town by conducting the necessary public hearings and acting upon applications for zoning amendments, conditional use permits, variances, subdivisions, and other functions as may be assigned by the Council; 
(D)  To recommend to the Council changes, when necessary, in the general plan, the development policy, and pertinent laws; 
(E)  To prepare and recommend to the Council such specific plans as it deems necessary to supplement the general plan; and 
(F)  To periodically review the capital improvement program of the Town. 
(1975 Code, § 2-2.206) (Ord. 1968-200, effective - -68; Am. Ord. 1970-220, effective - -70; Am. Ord. 2015-569, effective 1-7-16)  
Secs. 32.07—32.14 - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ARCHITECTURAL AND SITE REVIEW BOARD 
 
Sec. 32.15 - Creation. 
There is created an Architectural and Site Review Board (ASRB) which shall be advisory to the Planning Director. The Board shall consist of five members, one of which shall be a licensed architect if one is available for appointment and another one of which shall be a licensed landscape architect if one is available for appointment. The Board's members shall be appointed by the Town Council. The Planning Director shall serve as the executive officer of the Board and shall be responsible for calling meetings of the Board, maintaining records, including minutes, referring applications, and transmitting, in writing, the reports and recommendations of the Board to the Planning Commission for action. The Board shall have the duties specified in Section 32.19. 
(Ord. 2015-569, effective 1-7-16)  
Sec. 32.16 - Appointments. 
(A)  The members of the ASRB shall be appointed by the Council by a majority vote of the full membership thereof. Appointments to the offices, the terms of which expire in a given year, shall be made by the Council at the first regular meeting on or after February 1 in such year. 
(B)  All appointments, including those to fill vacancies, shall be made from nominations filed in writing, no later than 15 days prior to selection, with the Town Clerk by any citizen on his/her own behalf, or by another citizen, stating the qualifications and reasons for the appointment of the nominee. The Council may make additional nominations and shall review all statements of qualification before selection and appointment. 
(C)  The Town Clerk shall circulate the statements of the qualifications of the nominees to all members of the Council prior to such appointments to office. 
(Ord. 2015-569, effective 1-7-16)  
Sec. 32.17 - Terms of office. 
Each term of office of a member of the ASRB shall be for a period of four years and until the qualification of the successor to the member whose term expires. 
(Ord. 2015-569, effective 1-7-16)  
Sec. 32.18 - Vacancies; removal from office. 
Vacancies occurring in the membership of the ASRB shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired portion of the term of each such office. Any appointee to the ASRB may be removed from office by not less than five members of the Council voting in favor of such removal. 
(Ord. 2015-569, effective 1-7-16)  
Sec. 32.19 - Duties. 
The ASRB reviews residential applications for community character, site planning, building design, and landscape elements; reviews applications for non-residential development; and makes recommendations to the Planning Director or Planning Commission regarding approval or disapproval, and suggests modifications or imposes conditions in accordance with the evaluation criteria set forth in the Woodside Municipal Code (Title 15, Chapter 153, beginning at Section 153.220). The Code charges the ASRB with protecting the rural character and natural beauty of the Town. The ASRB ensures that projects are consistent with the General Plan and are in keeping with the Residential Design Guidelines. 
(Ord. 2015-569, effective 1-7-16)  
CHAPTER 33. - EMERGENCY SERVICES 
 
Sec. 33.01 - Purpose. 
The declared purposes of this chapter are to provide for the preparation and carrying out of plans for the protection of persons and property within the Town in the event of an emergency; the direction of the Emergency Organization; and the coordination of the emergency functions of the Town with all other public agencies, corporations, organizations, and affected private persons. 
(1975 Code, § 4-1.01) (Ord. 1978-283, effective 11-9-78)  
Sec. 33.02 - Emergency defined. 
For the purposes of this chapter, "emergency" shall mean the actual or threatened existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within the Town caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot, earthquake, or other conditions, including conditions resulting from war or the imminent threat of war, but other than conditions resulting from a labor controversy, which conditions are, or are likely to be, beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment, and political subdivisions to combat. 
(1975 Code, § 4-1.02) (Ord. 1978-283, effective 11-9-78)  
Sec. 33.03 - Director and assistant director of emergency services; powers and duties. 
(A)  There is hereby created the office of Director of Emergency Services. The Town Manager shall be the Director of Emergency Services. There is hereby created the office of Assistant Director of Emergency Services, who shall be appointed by the Director of Emergency Services with the advice and consent of the Town Council. 
(1975 Code, § 4-1.05) 
(B)  The Director of Emergency Services is hereby empowered to: 
(1)  Request the Town Council to proclaim the existence or threatened existence of a local emergency, if the Town Council is in session, or to issue such proclamation if the Town Council is not in session. Whenever a local emergency is proclaimed by the Director, the Town Council shall take action to ratify the proclamation within seven days thereafter; 
(2)  Request the Governor of the State to proclaim a state of emergency when, in the opinion of the Director, the locally available resources are inadequate to cope with the emergency; 
(3)  Control and direct the effort of the Emergency Organization of the Town for the accomplishment of the purposes of this chapter; 
(4)  Direct cooperation between, and the coordination of the services and staff of, the Emergency Organization of the Town, and resolve questions of authority and responsibility that may arise between them; 
(5)  Represent the Town in all dealings with public or private agencies on matters pertaining to emergencies; and 
(6)  In the event of the proclamation of a local emergency as provided in this section, the proclamation of a state of emergency by the Governor of the State or the Director of the State Office of Emergency Services, or the existence of a state of war emergency, the Director is hereby empowered: 
(a)  To make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by such emergency; provided, however, such rules and regulations shall be confirmed at the earliest practicable time by the Town Council; 
(b)  To obtain vital supplies, equipment, and such other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of life and property, and to bind the Town for the fair value thereof, and, if required immediately, to commandeer the same for public use; 
(c)  To require the emergency services of any Town officer or employee and, in the event of the proclamation of a state of emergency in the county or the existence of a state of war emergency, to command the aid of as many citizens of the community as he/she deems necessary in the execution of his/her duties. Such persons shall be entitled to all the privileges, benefits, and immunities as are provided by state laws for registered disaster service workers; 
(d)  To requisition the necessary personnel or material of any Town department or agency; and 
(e)  To execute all of his/her ordinary powers as Town Manager, all of the special powers conferred upon him/her by this chapter or by resolution or emergency plan pursuant to this chapter adopted by the Town Council, and all powers conferred upon him/her by any statute, by any agreement approved by the Town Council, and by any other lawful authority. 
(C)  The Director of Emergency Services shall designate the order of succession to that office which shall take effect in the event the Director is unavailable to attend meetings and otherwise perform his/her duties during an emergency. Such order of succession shall be approved by the Town Council. 
(D)  The Assistant Director of Emergency Services, under the supervision of the Director and with the assistance of the emergency service chiefs, shall develop emergency plans and manage the emergency programs of the Town and shall have such other powers and duties as may be assigned by the Director. 
(1975 Code, § 4-1.06) (Ord. 1978-283, effective 11-9-78)  
Sec. 33.04 - Emergency organization. 
All officers and employees of the Town, together with those volunteer forces enrolled to aid them during emergencies, and all groups, organizations, and persons who may by agreement or operation of law, including persons pressed into service under the provisions of Section 33.03(B)(6)(c), be charged with duties incident to the protection of life and property in the Town during such emergency, shall constitute the Emergency Organization of the Town. 
(1975 Code, § 4-1.07) (Ord. 1978-283, effective 11-9-78)  
Sec. 33.05 - Emergency plan. 
The Director of Emergency Services shall be responsible for the development of the Town Emergency Plan, which shall provide for the effective mobilization of all of the resources of the Town, both public and private, to meet any condition constituting a local emergency, state of emergency, or state of war emergency and shall provide for the organization, powers and duties, services, and staff of the Emergency Organization. Such plan shall take effect upon adoption by resolution of the Town Council. 
(1975 Code, § 4-1.08) (Ord. 1978-283, effective 11-9-78; Am. Ord. 1997-486, effective 6-26-97)  
Sec. 33.06 - Expenditures. 
Any expenditure made in connection with emergency activities, including mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the Town. 
(1975 Code, § 4-1.09) (Ord. 1978-283, effective 11-9-78)  
Sec. 33.07 - Violations. 
It shall be a misdemeanor, punishable as set forth in Section 10.99, for any person during an emergency to: 
(A)  Wilfully obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the Emergency Organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him/her by virtue of this chapter; 
(B)  Do any act forbidden by any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter if such act is of such nature as to give, or be likely to give, assistance to the enemy, or to imperil the lives or property of the inhabitants of the Town, or to prevent, hinder, or delay the defense or protection thereof; or 
(C)  Wear, carry, or display, without authority, any means of identification specified by the emergency agency of the state. 
(1975 Code, § 4-1.10) (Ord. 1978-283, effective 11-9-78)  
CHAPTER 34. - FINANCE  
ARTICLE I. - PURCHASING OF SUPPLIES, EQUIPMENT, AND SERVICES 
 
Sec. 34.01 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this subchapter is to maximize the purchasing value of public funds in procurement, and to provide safeguards for maintaining a procurement system of quality and integrity. 
(Ord. effective - -96)  
Sec. 34.02 - Application. 
Except as otherwise provided herein, this subchapter applies to contracts for the procurement of supplies and services, entered into by the Town. When the procurement involves the expenditure of federal assistance or contract funds, the procurement shall be conducted in accordance with mandatory applicable federal law and regulations. Nothing in this subchapter shall prevent any public agency from complying with the terms and conditions of any grant, gift or bequest that is otherwise consistent with law. 
(Ord. effective - -96)  
Sec. 34.03 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
Architect-engineer and land surveying services. Those professional services within the scope of practice of architecture, professional engineering, or land surveying, as defined by the laws of the state. 
Brand name or equal specification. A specification limited to one or more items by manufacturers' names or catalogue numbers to describe the standard of quality, performance, and other salient characteristics needed to meet Town requirements, and which provides for the submission of equivalent products. 
Brand name specification. A specification limited to one or more items by manufacturers' names or catalogue numbers. 
Business. Any corporation, partnership, individual, sole proprietorship, joint stock company, joint venture, or any other private legal entity. 
Invitation for bids. All documents, whether attached or incorporated by reference, utilized for soliciting bids. 
Person. Any business, individual, union, committee, club, or other organization, or group of individuals. 
Procurement. The buying, purchasing, renting, leasing, or otherwise acquiring of any supplies or services. It also includes all functions that pertain to the obtaining of any supply or service, including description of requirements, selection, and solicitation of sources, preparation and award of contract, and contract administration. 
Quote. Synonymous with "bid" as used in this subchapter. 
Services. The furnishing of labor, time, or effort, not involving the delivery of a specific end product other than reports which are merely incidental to the required performance. This term shall not include employment agreements or collective bargaining agreements. 
Specification. Any description of the physical or functional characteristics or of the nature of a supply, service, or construction item. It may include a description of any requirement for inspecting, testing, or preparing a supply or service for delivery. 
Supplies. All property (including but not limited to equipment and materials) except as otherwise provided herein. 
Surplus supplies. Supplies which are worn out, obsolete or unsuitable for Town use. 
Town. The Town of Woodside. 
(Ord. effective - -96)  
Sec. 34.04 - Establishment of Division of Purchases. 
There is hereby established for the Town a Division of Purchases, headed by a Purchasing Agent. The Town Manager or Manager's designee shall be the Purchasing Agent of the Town. 
(Ord. effective - -96)  
Sec. 34.05 - Duties. 
In accordance with this subchapter, the Purchasing Agent shall: 
(A)  Procure or supervise the procurement of all supplies and services needed by the Town, except as otherwise provided herein; 
(B)  Exercise direct supervision over the Town central stores and general supervision over all other inventories of supplies belonging to the Town; 
(C)  Sell, trade or otherwise dispose of surplus supplies belonging to the Town; and 
(D)  Establish and maintain programs for specifications development, contract administration and inspection and acceptance, in cooperation with the public agencies using the supplies and services. 
(Ord. effective - -96)  
Sec. 34.06 - Operational procedures. 
Consistent with this subchapter, the Purchasing Agent may adopt operational procedures relating to the execution of duties. 
(Ord. effective - -96)  
Sec. 34.07 - Delegation. 
The Purchasing Agent may delegate authority to purchase supplies or services, and to dispose of surplus supplies, to other city officials if such delegation is deemed necessary for the effective procurement or disposal of those items, and is authorized by the Town Manager. 
(Ord. effective - -96)  
Sec. 34.08 - Consideration of bids and basis of award. 
In every case, purchases shall be awarded on the basis of the bid or bids most advantageous to the Town. In determining whether a bid is most advantageous to the Town, in addition to price, the Purchasing Agent or Town Council may consider the following: 
(A)  The ability, capacity and skill of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the service required; 
(B)  Whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide the service promptly, or within the time specified, without delay or interference; 
(C)  The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience, and efficiency of the bidder; 
(D)  The quality of performance of previous contracts or services; 
(E)  The previous and existing compliance by the bidder with the laws and ordinances; 
(F)  The sufficiency of the financial resources and ability of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the service; 
(G)  The quality, availability, and adaptability of the supplies or contractual services to the particular use required; 
(H)  The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and service for the use of the subject of the contract; 
(I)  The number and scope of conditions attached to the bid. 
(Ord. effective - -96)  
Sec. 34.09 - Justification for acceptance of a high bid. 
In cases where the Purchasing Agent makes the purchase and, in the opinion of the Purchasing Agent, the most advantageous bid is not the lowest bid, the Purchasing Agent shall prepare and place on file with the permanent records of the department a written statement of his/her opinion and the reasons therefor. Such statements shall be open to public inspection at all times during regular office hours. 
(Ord. effective - -96)  
Sec. 34.10 - Preference given to bidder within the Town when bids are equal. 
A bidder with a permanent place of business within the Town shall be preferred over a bidder without a permanent place of business within the Town, in cases where two or more bids are judged to be equal on the basis of price, quality and service. 
(Ord. effective - -96)  
Sec. 34.11 - Brand names or equal specifications. 
(A)  Use. Brand name or equal specifications may be used when the purchasing agent determines that: 
(1)  No other design or performance specification or qualified products list is available; 
(2)  Time does not permit the preparation of another form of purchase description, not including a brand name specification; 
(3)  The nature of the product or the nature of the Town's requirements makes use of a brand name or equal specification suitable for the procurement; or 
(4)  Use of a brand name or equal specification is in the Town's best interest. 
(B)  Designation of several brand names. 
(1)  Brand name or equal specifications shall state that substantially equivalent products to those designated will be considered for award. 
(2)  Where a brand name or equal specification is used in a solicitation, the solicitation shall contain explanatory language that the use of a brand name is for the purpose of describing the standard of quality, performance and characteristics desired and is not intended to limit or restrict competition. 
(Ord. effective - -96)  
Sec. 34.12 - Preference given to bidder(s) supplying recycled paper and paper products. 
The Purchasing Agent shall provide a preference to the suppliers of recycled paper or paper products as defined in Cal. Pub. Cont. Code § 10855 equal to five percent of the lowest bid or price quoted by suppliers offering non-recycled paper or paper products, provided the recycled paper is compatible with Town equipment and when fitness and quality are comparable to non-recycled paper products. 
(Ord. effective - -96)  
Sec. 34.13 - Procedure for purchase of supplies, equipment, and services. 
The purchase of all supplies, equipment, and non-consultant services of the Town shall be made pursuant to this section. 
(A)  Purchases of less than $500.00 Where the amount or value is less than $500.00, the purchase may be made without an informal or formal quote or bid process. 
(B)  Purchase of $500.00 to $5,000.00. Where the amount or value involved is from $500.00 to $5,000.00, the purchase or disposal may be made by the Purchasing Agent without written quote, and by informal price checking through telephone or mail inquiry, comparison of prices on file or otherwise. At least three informal quotations should be obtained. 
(C)  Purchase of $5,001.00 to $20,000.00 made through formal written quote. Where the amount or value involved is at least $5,001.00 and up to $20,000.00, the purchase or disposal shall be made by the Purchasing Agent through formal written quotation, with the purchase being made in the discretion of the Purchasing Agent taking into account the provisions of Sections 34.08 through 34.12. 
(D)  Purchase of $20,001.00 or more made by the Town Council through competitive bid. Where the amount or value involved is at least $20,001.00, the purchase shall be made by the Town Council through competitive bid, upon notice as hereafter required by Section 34.18. Provided, however, the Council may elect to make any purchase in any amount (except as the law of the state of California otherwise require) in the following cases: 
(1)  By affirmative vote of three Councilpersons upon a determination that competitive bids upon notice would not be likely to result in a lower price to the Town from a responsible bidder or would cause unnecessary expense or delay under the circumstances; 
(2)  By majority vote of Councilpersons present at a Council meeting that said purchase may be made through a governmental entity, as provided in Section 34.17, upon a determination that competitive bids upon notice would not be likely to result in a lower price to the Town from a responsible bidder or would cause unnecessary expense or delay under the circumstances; 
(3)  By majority vote of those present at a Council meeting upon a determination that the immediate preservation of the public peace, health, or safety requires said purchase be made without competitive bids upon notice; 
(4)  By majority vote of those present at a Council meeting upon a determination that there is only one source for the required supply or service based on a review of available sources by the Purchasing Agent or written recommendation therefor. 
(Ord. effective - -96)  
Sec. 34.14 - Consultants. 
(A)  The Council finds and declares that the competitive bid process is ill-suited for the selection of consultants. Consultants are required for professional or technical expertise and for matters requiring specialized abilities or a high degree of skill. Their numbers (in relation to a particular skill or expertise required) are comparatively limited. Where consultants are involved, the bidding process is not likely to result in a lower price to the Town or eliminate unnecessary expense or delay. 
(B)  The Purchasing Agent shall be empowered to engage a consultant (including, but not limited to, material testing services and construction inspection services) without the necessity of competitive bidding or notice thereof: 
(1)  Without Council approval if the consultant's total fee for services and materials under the contract by which the consultant is engaged does not exceed $10,000.00. 
(2)  With Council approval if the consultant's total fee for services and materials under the contract by which the consultant is engaged exceeds $10,000.00. 
(Ord. effective - -96)  
Sec. 34.15 - Emergency authority of purchasing agent. 
(A)  In an emergency requiring the immediate preservation of the public peace, health and safety, and precluding action by the Town Council, the Purchasing Agent may purchase supplies or services, even though the amount thereof may exceed $20,000.00, without competitive bids upon notice. 
(B)  At the next succeeding Council meeting, the Purchasing Agent shall submit to the Council a written statement of the circumstances of such emergency, a description of the supplies or services purchased, and the prices thereof. 
(Ord. effective - -96)  
Sec. 34.16 - Waiver of informalities; rejection of bids. 
(A)  Where the Purchasing Agent or Town Council are required to make purchases upon competitive bids, said Agent or Council may waive any informalities or minor irregularities or may reject any and all bids (anything herein contained to the contrary notwithstanding) if said Agent or Council deems said rejection to be in the best interests of the Town. 
(B)  Said rejection shall be at the sole discretion of the Agent or Council, as the case may be. Upon rejection of bids, the Agent or the Council, as the case may be, may: 
(1)  Give subsequent notice for new competitive bids; or 
(2)  Postpone said purchase or disposal definitely or indefinitely; or 
(3)  Elect to make the purchase without competitive bids, upon notice (and as if competitive bids, upon notice, had not been required in the first instance) in accordance with the authority granted by the various subsections of this subchapter. 
(Ord. effective - -96)  
Sec. 34.17 - Purchase through a governmental entity. 
Purchases may be made on behalf of the Town through any governmental entity (including, but not limited to, the state of California or the county of San Mateo) pursuant to authority granted by any statute or ordinance or pursuant to contractual arrangement between the Town and said governmental entity. The Town is hereby authorized and empowered to enter into contracts with other governmental entities providing for purchases to be made on behalf of the Town. 
(Ord. effective - -96)  
Sec. 34.18 - Competitive bids; notice. 
Where notice is required, notice shall be given as follows: 
(A)  For purchase under Section 34.13(D) ($20,001.00 or more) by publishing notice in a newspaper of general circulation within the Town on at least one occasion at least five days prior to the date set for the final receipt of bids. Provided that publication may be made in any newspaper of general circulation in San Mateo County which the Purchasing Agent shall select if the publication schedule of all newspapers of general circulation in the Town are such that notice by publication cannot be given in time. 
(B)  The notice shall give such information as to the proposed purchase or disposal as the Purchasing Agent deems sufficient but shall include the following: 
(1)  A general description of the supplies, equipment, or non-consultant services to be purchased or personal property to be disposed; 
(2)  Date, time and place of bid opening; 
(3)  Whether bid deposit or bond and faithful performance bond will be required. 
(Ord. effective - -96)  
Sec. 34.19 - Competitive bids. 
(A)  Submission in writing. Where competitive bids are required, they shall be submitted in writing in a sealed envelope at the office of the Purchasing Agent no later than the final time and date for the receipt of bids as set forth in the notice of publication and opened publicly. Where competitive bids are required, the purchase or disposal shall be made on the basis of three or more of said bids unless the Purchasing Agent shall certify in writing that less than three prospective vendors or purchasers have submitted bids or that, to the best of the Agent's knowledge, there are less than three prospective vendors from whom the supplies or services are available and that bids were invited from all of said vendors. Any bid may be withdrawn by a written request signed by the bidder and received by the Purchasing Agent prior to the final time and date for the receipt of bids. 
(B)  Opening. Bids shall be opened in public at the time and place stated in the public notices. 
(C)  Tabulation. A tabulation of all bids received shall be posted for public inspection. 
(Ord. effective - -96)  
Sec. 34.20 - Bid deposits. 
When deemed necessary by the Purchasing Agent or Town Council, any bidder may be required to submit a bid deposit or bond in an amount determined by the Purchasing Agent or Council. A successful bidder (and his/her surety, if a bond is furnished) shall be liable for any damages upon the bidder's failure to enter into a contract with the Town or upon the bidder's failure to perform his/her bid. 
(Ord. effective - -96)  
Sec. 34.21 - Faithful performance deposits. 
When deemed necessary by the Purchasing Agent or Town Council, any person entering into a contract with the Town may be required to furnish a faithful performance deposit or bond in an amount determined by the Purchasing Agent or Council. Said person (and his/her surety, if a bond is furnished) shall be liable for any damages upon said person's failure to faithfully perform the terms of his/her contract. 
(Ord. effective - -96)  
Sec. 34.22 - Additional powers and duties of purchasing agent. 
(A)  The Purchasing Agent may call for bids or give notice to any and all persons whatsoever or publish in any case where the same is not required by the terms of this subchapter; and is empowered to invite bids by telephone, telegraph or by mail when deemed in the best interests of the Town. 
(B)  The Purchasing Agent shall keep a record of all purchases made and the bids, if any, submitted thereon. Said records shall be open to public inspection. 
(Ord. effective - -96)  
Sec. 34.23 - Request for sealed proposals (RFP). 
(A)  The Purchasing Agent shall be empowered to utilize the request for sealed proposal method for purchase of supplies, equipment, or non-consultant services without Council approval if the amount or value involved is $20,000.00 or less if the Purchasing Agent determines that the use of competitive bidding is advantageous to the Town. 
(B)  Proposals shall be solicited through a request for proposals. 
(C)  Notice shall be given as required by Section 34.18. 
(D)  No proposals shall be handled so as to permit disclosure of the identity of any offeror or the contents of any proposal to competing offerors during the process of negotiation. A register of proposals shall be prepared containing the name of each offeror and a description sufficient to identify the item offered. The register of proposals shall be open for public inspection only after contract award. 
(E)  The request for proposals shall state evaluation factors. 
(F)  As provided in the request for proposals, discussions may be conducted with responsible offerors who submit proposals determined to be reasonably susceptible of being selected for award for the purpose of clarification to assure full understanding of, and conformance to, the solicitation requirements. Offerors shall be accorded equal treatment with respect to any opportunity for discussion and revision of proposals and such revisions may be permitted after submissions and prior to award for the purpose of obtaining best and final offers. In conducting discussions, there shall be no disclosure of the identity of competing offerors or of any information derived from proposals submitted by competing offerors. 
(G)  Award shall be made to the responsible offeror whose proposal is determined in writing to be the most advantageous to the Town, taking into consideration price and the evaluation factors set forth in the request for proposals. No other factors or criteria shall be used in the evaluation. 
(H)  Without limitation to the applicability of any other provisions of this subchapter, the Purchasing Agent or Town Council may reject any and all proposals if said rejection is deemed in the best interests of the Town. Upon rejection, the Purchasing Agent or Council may request new sealed proposals or utilize any alternative method allowed under this subchapter. 
(Ord. effective - -96)  
Sec. 34.24 - Preparation of purchase orders. 
Upon ascertaining the price to be paid for supplies or services, the Purchasing Agent shall prepare a purchase order. The Purchasing Agent shall forward the original purchase order to the vendor, retaining one copy for his/her purchase order file. He/she shall likewise forward one copy of the purchase order to the department for whose benefit the purchase is being made to be used as a receiving report. 
(Ord. effective - -96)  
Sec. 34.25 - Sufficient funds must be available. 
No purchase order shall be issued until it has been ascertained that there is, to the credit of the department of the Town for whose benefit such purchase is to be made, a sufficient unencumbered appropriated balance in excess of all unpaid obligations to defray the amount of such order. 
(Ord. effective - -96)  
Sec. 34.26 - Department head responsible for checking quality. 
Upon receipt by any department of supplies or services, the department head shall be responsible for the making of a careful check of the quality, condition, and quantity received as against his/her copy of the purchase order and the packing lists. The department head shall fill out the receiving report form, attaching thereto the packing lists, if any, and return the same to the Purchasing Agent. 
(Ord. effective - -96)  
Sec. 34.27 - Purchasing agent to check invoice. 
The Purchasing Agent, upon receipt of the vendor's invoice, shall compare the same with the copy of the purchase order and the receiving report. He/she shall check the invoice for correctness of unit prices, discounts, transportation allowances, etc., and with reports of quality and quantity of goods received. 
(Ord. effective - -96)  
Sec. 34.28 - Purchasing agent's inspection. 
The Purchasing Agent shall inspect, or cause to be inspected, all deliveries of supplies or services to determine their conformance to specifications. The Purchasing Agent shall have the authority to require chemical, physical, or other tests of samples submitted with bids and samples of deliveries which are necessary to determine quality and conformance to the specifications. In the performance of such tests, the Purchasing Agent shall have the authority to make use of laboratory facilities of any department of the Town or any outside laboratory. 
(Ord. effective - -96)  
Sec. 34.29 - Storerooms and warehouses. 
The Purchasing Agent shall control and supervise any and all storerooms or warehouses of the Town. The Purchasing Agent shall be responsible and accountable for all supplies in his/her custody and shall maintain a suitable inventory thereof. 
(Ord. effective - -96)  
Sec. 34.30 - Disposal of less than $1,000.00. 
Except as otherwise provided by state law or Town ordinance, the Purchasing Agent shall be empowered to dispose of personal property of the Town which cannot be used by any department of the Town, at public or private sale or by renting or destroying the same, (all with or without notice, competitive bid or necessity of posting bid bonds, at the Purchasing Agent's discretion, and upon such terms as he/she deems best) provided any single item of property involved does not exceed $1,000.00 in current market value. 
(Ord. effective - -96)  
Sec. 34.31 - Deposit. 
The Purchasing Agent may, in his/her discretion, require that a deposit in the amount of the bid or any fraction thereof accompany each bid upon the disposal of personal property. 
(Ord. effective - -96)  
Sec. 34.32 - Disposal of more than $1,000.00. 
In the event any single item of property exceeds $1000.00 in current market value, the Town Council may empower the Purchasing Agent to dispose of it (in accordance with the same terms and conditions and subject to the same discretion and limitations as if it were under $1000.00). Alternatively, the Town Council may elect to sell, rent or destroy the same in accordance with whatever provision, terms and conditions the Council may, in its discretion, decide. 
(Ord. effective - -96)  
Sec. 34.33 - Exclusions. 
The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply: 
(A)  To public works projects (governed by the provisions of the California Public Contracts Code); 
(B)  To franchises governed by the provisions of the California Public Utilities Code or other statute of the state of California; 
(C)  Where state or federal law requires a different procedure; 
(D)  To franchises, rights, privileges, licenses and permits granted by the Town; 
(E)  To the purchase of insurance; 
(F)  To the leasing, purchase or sale of land or any interest therein; 
(G)  To the hiring of or contracting for personnel (whether as temporary, seasonal or permanent employees, agents or independent contractors); 
(H)  To construction contracts other than public works projects; or 
(I)  To the purchase of utilities, including, but not limited to, telephone service, gas, electricity or water. 
(Ord. effective - -96)  
Secs. 34.34—34.39 - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FUNDS 
 
Sec. 34.40 - Gas tax street improvement fund. 
(A)  Creation. To comply with the provisions of Cal. Sts. & High. Code, Article 5 of Chapter 1 of Division 1, there is hereby created in the Town treasury a special fund to be known as the "Special Gas Tax Street Improvement Fund." 
(1975 Code, § 3-2.101) 
(B)  Deposits. All moneys received by the Town from the state pursuant to the provisions of the Cal. Sts. & High. Code for the acquisition of real property, or interests therein, or for the construction, maintenance, or improvement of streets or highways, other than state highways, shall be paid into the Special Gas Tax Street Improvement Fund. 
(1975 Code, § 3-2.102) 
(C)  Expenditures. All moneys in the Special Gas Tax Street Improvement Fund shall be expended exclusively for the purposes authorized by, and subject to, all of the provisions of Cal. Sts. & High. Code, Article 5 of Chapter 1 of Division 1. 
(1975 Code, § 3-2.103) (Ord. 1957-36, effective - -57)  
Secs. 34.41—34.49 - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ROAD PROGRAM 
 
Sec. 34.50 - Title. 
This subchapter shall be known as the "Road Program of the Town of Woodside." 
(Ord. 1994-472, effective 1-11-94)  
Sec. 34.51 - Purpose, findings and limitations. 
(A)  The Town Council finds that the General Plan of the Town provides policies regarding the design, use, and upkeep of the road system of the Town among which the key ones are: 
(1)  Whenever the design of any new road or change in any existing road within the Woodside Planning Area is being considered, great care must be taken to assure that the scenic character, rural residential qualities and the privacy of the area through which they pass will be maintained. 
(2)  Roads shall have capacity adequate for use in times of emergency. 
(3)  The number and extent of roadway cuts and fills required in construction, reconstruction and road maintenance shall be kept to a minimum. 
(4)  Roads shall be designed for safe travel at moderate speeds; roadway design shall not include road users to travel at excessive speed. 
(5)  Roads shall be designed and maintained to encourage safe, alternative forms of transportation that contribute to a rural atmosphere, such as walking, bicycling, horseback riding, and public transportation. This subchapter is intended to and shall be carried out to fulfill and meet these policies. 
(B)  The Council further finds that the road system of the Town is one of its most valuable capital assets and maintenance of the road system is one of the Town government's key services. 
(C)  There is hereby established a road program. All revenue proceeds received from state gas taxes, measure A taxes, traffic safety fines and forfeitures, and road impact fees shall be utilized to support this program. Such revenue proceeds will be used in conformance with this subchapter. 
(D)  The Council hereby determines that a meaningful road program will provide the following: 
(1)  The establishment of a master road program that would be annually updated to address the needs for road repair in the Town on a prioritized basis. 
(2)  A determination by the Council, after the comments and recommendations received at the annual road program hearing set forth in Section 34.27, of the priorities of road program work to be performed. In making that determination, the Council shall apply the following considerations: 
(a)  The volume of traffic on the road to be repaired or remediated; 
(b)  The impact on road user safety of the then current condition of the road; 
(c)  The likelihood and impact severity of failure of the road; 
(d)  The impact on emergency vehicle access and residential evacuation of the then current condition of the road; 
(e)  The wishes and priorities of the neighborhood in which the road is located; 
(f)  The number of homes served by the road; and 
(g)  The availability of supplementary or innovative means to complement the appropriation of road program funds. 
(3)  An annual allocation of ten percent of all tax or fee revenue received or collected pursuant to this subchapter to an emergency reserve to be used for emergency repair and reconstruction of roads destroyed or disrupted by earthquake, landslide, flood, fire, or other natural or manmade disaster. Such reserve shall be capped at no more than ten percent of the Town's annual operating budget. 
(E)  All revenue proceeds as specified in division (C) above shall be used solely for design, construction, repair, and maintenance work and safety service as set forth in this section. 
(F)  The Council further finds that the enactment of this subchapter is a first step in ensuring the financial independence of the Town from the inability of the state to fund or address the needs of the state, and in particular the needs of the community. 
(Ord. 1994-472, effective 1-11-94)  
Sec. 34.52 - Annual report. 
(A)  The Town Manager shall submit a detailed report to the Town Council each year for consideration at the regular December meeting of the Town Council. This report shall detail the status of the current road program, providing a narrative description of work done by location and approximate expenditure. This report shall also include a recommended preliminary priority list of expenditures for the road program for the coming fiscal year. 
(B)  The Town Manager shall submit a detailed report concerning the road program to the Town Council in March of each year. This report shall include a projection of resources available for road program purposes for the upcoming five-year period and recommend specific road program projects for the upcoming two-year funding cycle. The Town Council shall hold a public hearing on the annual report and on the effectiveness of the road program at a regular March meeting of the Town Council. The recommended road program priorities for the upcoming two-year cycle shall also be considered at the March meeting. The Council shall adopt and approve a priority list for the upcoming two-year funding cycle by March 31 of each year. 
(C)  The input of Town residents and committees shall be actively solicited. The Town Manager shall cause the annual reports to be broadly distributed and reaction encouraged. The Town's Bicycle and Trails Committees shall be requested to provide annual road program priority reports to the Town Manager not less than 60 days prior to the submission of the December annual report. The Committees shall be asked to review and comment on the specific recommendations contained in the February annual report and shall be requested to review actual project plans before they are presented to the Town Council for approval. 
(Ord. 1994-472, effective 1-11-94; Am. Ord. 2011-547, effective 5-26-11)  
CHAPTER 35. - TAXATION  
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 35.01 - Transfer of duties to County; retention of duties of Town Treasurer. 
(A)  Pursuant to the provisions of Cal. Gov't Code §§ 51500 through 51521, the Council hereby transfers the assessment and tax collection duties performed by the Town Assessor and Tax Collector to the Assessor and Tax Collector of the County. 
(1975 Code, § 3-4.201) 
(B)  The duties of the Town Treasurer are hereby reserved to him/her and are not included in the transfer provided for in division (A) above. The Town Treasurer shall, upon payment to him/her by the Controller of the County of sums due the Town, keep and disburse such sums in the existing customary practice and procedure of the Town. 
(1975 Code, § 3-4.202) (Ord. 1957-27, effective - -57)  
Secs. 35.02—35.09 - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DWELLING UNIT TAXES 
 
Sec. 35.10 - Authority and purpose. 
(A)  The Council hereby declares that the taxes required to be paid pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter are assessed pursuant to the taxing powers of the Town and solely for the purpose of producing revenue. 
(1975 Code, § 3-4.101) 
(B)  The construction of dwelling units causes increases in the demand for recreation facilities and park and open space lands and causes a burden on existing facilities. In order to serve the needs of an expanding population, the Town needs additional revenues to finance such facilities. 
(1975 Code, § 3-4.102) (Ord. 1973-241, effective - -73)  
Sec. 35.11 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
Dwelling unit. Any building used for human habitation containing one or more bedrooms. 
Person. Every person, firm, or corporation constructing a dwelling unit itself, or through the services of any employee, agent, or independent contractor. 
(1975 Code, § 3-4.103) (Ord. 1973-241, effective - -73)  
Sec. 35.12 - Rate of tax; due date. 
(A)  Every person constructing any new building containing a dwelling unit, including, but not limited to, servants' quarters and guest houses, in the Town shall pay the Town the following taxes: 
(1)  The sum of $50.00 for each dwelling unit containing not more than one bedroom and the sum of $25.00 for each additional bedroom contained therein; and 
(2)  The sum of $50.00 for each detached guest house or servants' quarters containing not more than one bedroom and the sum of $25.00 for each additional bedroom. 
(1975 Code, § 3-4.104) 
(B)  The taxes set forth in division (A) above shall be due and payable at the time the building permit fee is required to be paid. 
(Ord. 1973-241, effective - -73)  
Sec. 35.13 - Use of proceeds. 
All of the taxes collected pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be used for the purposes of financing the acquisition, construction, and maintenance of parks and recreation and open space land and their facilities. 
(Ord. 1973-241, effective - -73)  
Secs. 35.14—35.24 - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAXES 
 
Sec. 35.25 - Title. 
This subchapter shall be known as the "Real Property Transfer Tax Law of the Town of Woodside." It is adopted pursuant to the provisions of Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code, Division 2, Part 6.7 (commencing with § 11901). 
(1975 Code, § 3-4.301) (Ord. 1967-193, effective - -67)  
Sec. 35.26 - Administration by County Recorder. 
The County Recorder shall administer the provisions of this subchapter in conformity with the provisions of Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code, Division 2, Part 6.7 and the provisions of any county ordinance adopted pursuant thereto. 
(1975 Code, § 3-4.302) (Ord. 1967-193, effective - -67)  
Sec. 35.27 - Imposition of tax rate and payment. 
(A)  There is hereby imposed on each deed, instrument, or writing by which any lands, tenements, or other realty sold within the Town shall be granted, assigned, transferred, or otherwise conveyed to, or vested in, the purchaser or any other person, by his/her direction, when the consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed (exclusive of the value of any liens or encumbrances remaining thereon at the time of sale) exceeds $100.00, a tax at the rate of 27½¢ for each $500.00, or fractional part thereof. 
(1975 Code, § 3-4.303) 
(B)  The tax imposed by the provisions of division (A) above shall be paid by any person who makes, signs, or issues any document or instrument subject to the tax or for whose use or benefit such document or instrument is made, signed, or issued. 
(1975 Code, § 3-4.304) (Ord. 1967-193, effective - -67)  
Sec. 35.28 - Exemptions. 
The tax imposed by the provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to any entity listed in Cal. Rev & Tax. 11926 through 11929, which are hereby adopted by reference and incorporated as if set out at length herein.  
Sec. 35.29 - Claims for refund. 
Claims for the refund of the taxes imposed by the provisions of this subchapter shall be governed by the provisions of Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code Division 1, Part 9, Chapter 5 (commencing with § 5096). 
(1975 Code, § 3-4.310) (Ord. 1967-193, effective - -67)  
Secs. 35.30—35.39 - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - SALES AND USE TAXES 
 
Sec. 35.40 - Title. 
This subchapter shall be known as the "Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law of the Town of Woodside." 
(1975 Code, § 3-4.401) (Ord. 1973-249, effective - -73)  
Sec. 35.41 - Rate. 
The rate of the sales tax and use tax imposed by the provisions of this subchapter shall be 0.95 percent. 
(1975 Code, § 3-4.402) (Ord. 1973-249, effective - -73)  
Sec. 35.42 - Purpose. 
The Council hereby declares that the provisions of this subchapter are adopted to achieve the following, among other, purposes and directs that the provisions of this subchapter be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes: 
(A)  To adopt a sales and use tax law which complies with the requirements and limitations set forth in Cal. Rev. & Tax. §§ 7200; 
(B)  To adopt a sales and use tax law which incorporates provisions identical to those of the sales and use tax law of the state insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations set forth in Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code, Division 2, Part 1.5; 
(C)  To adopt a sales and use tax law which imposes a tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the sales and use taxes of the state; and 
(D)  To adopt a sales and use tax law which can be administered in a manner that will, to the degree possible consistent with the provisions of Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code, Division 2, Part 1.5, minimize the cost of collecting city sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this subchapter. 
(1975 Code, § 3-4.404) (Ord. 1973-249, effective - -73)  
Sec. 35.43 - Sales tax imposed; place of sale defined. 
(A)  For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is hereby imposed upon all retailers in the Town, at the rate set forth in Section 35.41 of this subchapter, of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in the Town on and after the operative date of this subchapter. 
(1975 Code, § 3-4.406) 
(B)  For the purposes of this subchapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his/her agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless, of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization. 
(1975 Code, § 3-4.407) (Ord. 1973-249, effective - -73)  
Sec. 35.44 - Use taxes imposed. 
An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use, or other consumption in the Town of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date of this subchapter for storage, use, or other consumption in the Town at the rate set forth in Section 35.41 of this subchapter of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to the state sales or use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. 
(1975 Code, § 3-4.408) (Ord. 1973-249, effective - -73)  
Sec. 35.45 - Adoption of state law provisions; limitations; amendments. 
(A)  Except as otherwise provided in this subchapter, and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code, Division 2, Part 1.5, all of the provisions of Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code, Division 2, Part 1 are hereby adopted and made a part of this subchapter as though fully set forth in this subchapter. 
(1975 Code, § 3-4.409) 
(B)  In adopting the provisions of Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code, Division 2, Part 1, wherever the state is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of the Town shall be substituted therefor. Such substitution, however, shall not be made when the word "State" is used as part of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of Equalization, the State Treasury, or the Constitution of the State. Such substitution shall not be made when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the Town, or any agency thereof, rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of the provisions of this subchapter. Such substitution shall not be made in those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use, or other consumption remains subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code Division 2, Part 1, or to impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the provisions of the Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code. Such substitution shall not be made in Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code §§ 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797, or 6828. Such substitution shall not be made for the word "State" in the phrase "retailer engaged in business in this State" in Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code § 6203 or in the definition of that phrase in said § 6203. 
(1975 Code, § 3-4.410) 
(C)  All subsequent amendments of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State, which amendments relate to the sales and use tax and which are not inconsistent with the provisions of Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code, Division 2, Part 1.5, shall automatically become a part of this subchapter. 
(1975 Code, § 3-4.415) (Ord. 1973-249, effective - -73)  
Sec. 35.46 - Sellers' permits. 
If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer pursuant to the provisions of Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code § 6067, an additional seller's permit shall not be required by the provisions of this subchapter. 
(1975 Code, § 3-4.411) (Ord. 1973-249, effective - -73)  
Sec. 35.47 - Exclusions and exemptions. 
There shall be excluded from the measure of tax: 
(A)  The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the state upon a retailer or consumer; 
(B)  The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to sales tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with the provisions of Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code Division 2, Part 1.5 by any city and county, county or city in the state; 
(C)  The storage or use of tangible personal property in the transportation or transmission of persons, property, or communications, or in the generation, transmission, or distribution of electricity, or in the manufacture, transmission or distribution of gas in intrastate, interstate, or foreign commerce by public utilities which are regulated by the Public Utilities Commission of the State. 
(1975 Code, § 3-4.412) (Ord. 1973-249, effective - -73)  
Sec. 35.48 - Alternative exclusions and exemptions. 
(A)  Alternative. 
(1)  The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the state upon a retailer or consumer. 
(2)  The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code, Division 2, Part 1.5, by any city and county, county or city in the state shall be exempt from the tax due under the provisions of this subchapter. 
(3)  There shall be exempted from the computation of the amount of sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of the State, the United States, or any foreign government. 
(4)  In addition to the exemptions provided in Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code §§ 6366 and 6366.1, the storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of the State, the United States, or any foreign government shall be exempted from the use tax. 
(1975 Code, § 3-4.413) (Ord. 1983-316, passed 12-13-83, operative 1-1-84) 
(B)  Alternative. 
(1)  The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the state upon a retailer or consumer. 
(2)  The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code Division 2, Part 1.5, by any city and county, county, or city in the state shall be exempt from the tax due under the provisions of this subchapter. 
(3)  There shall be exempted from the computation of the amount of sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of the state, the United States, or any foreign government. 
(4)  In addition to the exemptions provided in Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code §§ 6366 and 6366.1, the storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of the State, the United States, or any foreign government shall be exempted from the use tax. 
(1975 Code, § 3-4.413) (Ord. 1973-249, effective - -73; Am. Ord. 1983-316, effective 12-13-83)  
Sec. 35.49 - Collection not to be enjoined. 
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or the Town, or against any officer of the state or the Town, to prevent or enjoin the collection of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected under this subchapter or Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code, Division 2, Part 1.5. 
(1975 Code, § 3-4.416) (Ord. 1973-249, effective - -73)  
Sec. 35.50 - Contract with State Board of Equalization. 
Prior to the operative date of this subchapter, the Town shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all the functions incident to the administration and operation of this sales and use tax law. If the Town shall not have contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to such operative date, the Town shall nevertheless so contract, and, in such a case, the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such contract rather than the first day of the first calendar quarter following the adoption of this subchapter. 
(1975 Code, § 3-4.405) (Ord. 1973-249, effective - -73)  
Sec. 35.51 - Operative date. 
The provisions of this subchapter shall be operative on January 1, 1974. 
(1975 Code, § 3-4.403) (Ord. 1973-249, effective - -73)  
CHAPTER 36. - APPEALS 
 
Sec. 36.01 - Right to appeal. 
(A)  Except where an appeals procedure is otherwise specifically set forth in this Code, any person excepting to the approval, denial, suspension, or revocation of a permit, or to any administrative decision made by any official of the Town, if the denial, suspension, or revocation of such permit or the determination of such administrative decision involves the exercise of administrative discretion or personal judgment exercised pursuant to any of the provisions of this Code, may appeal in writing to the Council by filing with the Town Clerk a written notice of such appeal, setting forth the specific grounds thereof. 
(B)  No right of appeal to the Council from any administrative decision made by an official of the Town pursuant to any of the provisions of this Code shall exist when such decision is ministerial and thus does not involve the exercise of administrative discretion or personal judgment exercised pursuant to any of the provisions of this Code, whether the administrative decision involves the denial, suspension, or revocation of a permit or any other administrative decision. 
(1975 Code, § 1-4.01) (Ord. 2003-520, effective 10-23-03)  
Sec. 36.02 - Time limit for filing. 
The appellant shall file a notice of appeal with the Town Clerk within ten days after the date of the administrative decision concerned. 
(1975 Code, § 1-4.02) (Ord. 2003-520, effective 10-23-03)  
Sec. 36.03 - Hearings; notices. 
The Town Council shall conduct a hearing to consider the administrative decision of the Town Official and the arguments of the appellant. The Town Clerk shall cause a written notice of the hearing to be given to the appellant not less than ten days prior to such hearing, unless such notice is waived in writing by the appellant. 
(1975 Code, § 1-4.03) (Ord. 2003-520, effective 10-23-03)  
CHAPTER 37. - FRANCHISES 
 
Sec. 37.01 - Franchises required. 
Except as otherwise provided in Chapter 113 of this Code, any person or corporation, except those granted special privileges by the laws of the state, desiring to make use of any street or highway within the Town for the purpose of erecting or installing thereby or thereon any facility shall be required to obtain a franchise authorizing such use, unless such franchise has been previously obtained. 
(1975 Code, § 7-3.01) (Ord. 1957-32, effective - -57; Am. Ord. 1968-207, effective - -68)  
Sec. 37.02 - Rights granted. 
Every franchise or privilege whatsoever granted by the Council shall be granted subject to the laws regulating the activity of the applicant therefor and the laws granting the franchises or privileges by the Council, and the grantee of any such franchise or privilege shall have the right as against all persons to make use of the streets and highways of the Town as provided in the franchise or privilege granted by the Council to the full extent of the lawful authority of the Town to permit such use. 
(1975 Code, § 7-3.02) (Ord. 1957-32, effective - -57; Am. Ord. 1968-207, effective - -68)  
Sec. 37.03 - Sale, transfers and assignments. 
The grantee of any franchise granted by the Council shall not sell, transfer, or assign any franchise, or any of the rights or privileges granted thereby, except by a duly executed instrument in writing, and no such sale, transfer, or assignment may be made without the consent of the Council thereto, except that no provision of any franchise shall require any such consent, and no consent shall be required, for any transfer by the grantee in trust or by way of mortgage or hypothecation covering all and any part of the property of the grantee, which transfer, mortgage, or hypothecation shall be for the purpose of securing an indebtedness of the grantee or for the purpose of renewing, extending, refunding, retiring, paying, or cancelling, in whole or in part, any such indebtedness at any time or from time to time. 
(1975 Code, § 7-3.03) (Ord. 1957-32, effective - -57; Am. Ord. 1968-207, effective - -68)  
Sec. 37.04 - Notice of use, operation and installation. 
Before any use, operation, or installation under any franchise shall be permitted, notification shall be given to the Town Engineer. 
(1975 Code, § 7-3.04) (Ord. 1957-32, effective - -57; Am. Ord. 2000-506, effective 12-14-00)  
Sec. 37.05 - Liability. 
The grantee of any franchise shall indemnify, defend and hold harmless the Town, its officers, employees and agents from all damages or liability, claims or litigation, from the use, operation, or possession of the franchise and from the use, operation, or maintenance of the facilities erected, constructed, or maintained thereunder. 
(1975 Code, § 7-3.05) (Ord. 1957-32, effective - -57; Am. Ord. 2000-506, effective 12-14-00 )  
Sec. 37.06 - Pipelines and mains. 
(A)  Depth. Every new pipeline and main pursuant to any franchise shall be laid and maintained at such depth as will not cause injuries or damages to, or interfere with, the use of the surface of the street, highway, or public way under which such pipeline or main shall have been laid or maintained for public travel or otherwise. 
(B)  Reports. The first annual payment provided for in such franchise shall be made by submitting two copies of a report, verified by the oath of a duly authorized representative of the grantee, setting forth the length of the pipelines in the public highways and the total amount due insofar as such information is known to the grantee. In the event new pipelines have been laid in public highways subsequent to the previous report, there shall be included with the report of the grantee a statement showing that a notice was presented to the Town Engineer or Street Superintendent, as set forth in Section 37.04, the date the pipe was laid, the feet specified in the notice, and the feet laid. A complete computation of the license fee shall also be submitted with such report. 
(C)  Inspections. The Town Treasurer, or his/her deputies or agents, shall have the right to inspect the maps, records, and physical properties of the grantee necessary to determine the number, location, extent, and the period of maintenance of such pipelines. Such officers may, upon reasonable notice being given, inspect at the offices of the grantee reports or maps which reasonably affect any franchise, and the grantee shall promptly supply the same. In the event the grantee refuses any such inspection request, the grantee or the Town Treasurer shall have the right of appeal to the Council, and the decision of the Council as to the reasonableness of such request thus obtained shall be final and binding upon the grantee and the Town. 
(1975 Code, § 7-3.07) (Ord. 1957-32, effective - -57; Am. Ord. 1975-43, effective - -75)  
CHAPTER 38. - BIDDING PUBLIC PROJECTS 
 
Sec. 38.01 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
Public facility. Any plant, building, structure, ground facility, utility system, real property, streets and highways or other public work improvement owned, leased, or operated by the Town, a municipal corporation. 
Public project. Any of the following: 
(1)  Construction, reconstruction, erection, alteration, renovation, improvement, demolition and repair work involving any publicly owned, leased or operated facility. 
(2)  Painting or repainting any publicly owned, leased or operated facility. 
(3)  Public project does not include maintenance work such as routine, recurring work for the preservation of a publicly owned facility; minor repainting; landscape maintenance; resurfacing streets at less than one inch. 
(Ord. 2001-512, effective 8-23-01)  
Sec. 38.02 - Formal bid—Public projects more than $125,000.00. 
Public projects with an estimated value exceeding $125,000.00 shall be by written contract with the lowest responsible bidder, except as otherwise provided herein. 
(Ord. 2001-512, effective 8-23-01; Am. Ord. 2005-529, effective 1-12-06)  
Sec. 38.03 - Informal bid—Public projects of $125,000.00 or less. 
Public projects with a value in the amount of $125,000.00 or less shall be governed by the informal bid procedures as follows: 
(A)  A list of qualified contractors shall be developed and maintained by the Town Engineer in accordance with the provisions of Section 22034 of the Public Contract Code and criteria promulgated from time to time by the California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission. 
(B)  Where a public project is to be performed, a notice inviting informal bids shall be mailed to all contractors for the category of work to be bid, as shown on the list developed in accordance with Section 38.03, and to all construction trade journals as specified by the California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission in accordance with Section 22036 of the Public Contract Code. Provided, however: 
(1)  If there is no list of qualified contractors maintained by the Town for the particular category of work to be performed, the notice inviting bids shall be sent only to the construction trade journals specified by the California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission. 
(2)  If the product or service is proprietary in nature such that it can be obtained only from a certain contractor or contractors, the notice inviting informal bids may be sent exclusively to such contractor or contractors. 
(3)  Notices shall be mailed at least ten days before bids are due. 
(4)  The notice shall describe the project in general terms; how to obtain more information; and state the time and place for bids. 
(5)  The Town Manager or his/her designee shall have the authority to award informal bids. 
(C)  If all bids received are in excess of $125,000.00, the Town Council may by ? vote pass a resolution awarding the informal contract to the lowest responsible bidder provided: 
(1)  The Council determines that the original cost estimate by the Town was reasonable. 
(2)  The contract is for $137,500.00 or less. 
(Ord. 2001-512, effective 8-23-01; Am. Ord. 2005-529, effective 1-12-06)  
Sec. 38.04 - Public projects—$30,000.00 or less. 
Public projects of $30,000.00 or less may be performed by the employees of the Town by force account, by negotiated contract, or by purchase order without formal or informal bid procedures. 
(Ord. 2001-512, effective 8-23-01)  
TITLE V - PUBLIC WORKS 
   
CHAPTER 50. - GARBAGE  
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 50.01 - Health and sanitation rules and regulations established. 
The Council hereby establishes health and sanitation rules and regulations as set forth in this chapter. 
(1975 Code, § 6-4.01) (Ord. 1957-28, effective - -57)  
Sec. 50.02 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
Garbage. All putrescible wastes, including kitchen and food wastes; animal or vegetable wastes resulting from storage, preparation, cooking, processing, or handling of food or food stuffs; non-putrescible wastes that are mixed in the same container with or are contaminated by putrescible wastes; infectious wastes, such as used tissues, which are normally produced at residential premises; small dead animals not exceeding ten pounds in weight; and any putrefactive or easily decomposable waste material which is likely to attract flies, vermin, birds or rodents. Garbage does not include materials that are separated and set aside for recycling, and does not include stable matter (manure and other waste matter normally accumulated in stables or on livestock or poultry enclosures) or hazardous material. 
Refuse. Any and all matter and materials which are rejected, abandoned, or discarded by the owner or producer thereof as offensive or useless and which, by their presence or accumulation, may injuriously affect the health, comfort, or safety of the community in any manner whatsoever. 
Scavenger. An agent or employee of the Town or any person, or the agents or employees thereof, with whom the Town shall have duly contracted to collect, receive, carry, and transport garbage, swill, refuse, and waste matter in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
Swill. All putrefactive or easily decomposable animal or vegetable matter having a property value and attractive to flies and rodents. 
Waste matter. Any and all matter and materials, whether they be organic, inorganic, combustible, or noncombustible, which cannot be defined as refuse but which are rejected, abandoned, or discarded by the owner or producer thereof as useless or no longer desired by the owner or producer. 
Watercourse. Any natural or artificial drainage ditch, channel, stream, creek, or river which flows through, originates in, or terminates within the Town. 
(1975 Code, § 6-4.02) (Ord. 1957-28, effective - -57; Am. Ord. 1963-130, effective - -63)  
Sec. 50.03 - Receptacles. 
(A)  Except as otherwise set forth in division (C) below of this section, all garbage, refuse, waste matter, and swill shall, by the person upon whose premises the same shall have been produced or accumulated, be placed in a watertight galvanized metal container of not less than ten nor more than 30 gallons net capacity and of a design approved by the Health Officer, or such other person as may be designated by the Council, which container shall be kept clean and continuously closed by a tight-fitting galvanized metal cover, except when garbage, refuse, waste matter, or swill is being dumped within or removed therefrom, and which container shall be proofed against the access of flies and rodents. The contents of such container shall be delivered not less than once a week to the scavenger authorized by the Town to collect such contents in accordance with the provisions of this chapter; provided, however, swill may be placed in separate containers of the type and size indicated in this section, or as may be approved by the Health Officer, or such other person designated by the Council, for delivery to swill collectors pursuant to the rules and regulations for the collection of swill set forth in this chapter. 
(1975 Code, § 6-4.03) 
(B)  All receptacles required by the provisions of this chapter shall be located in such a place as to be readily accessible for removing and emptying but shall not be placed within the limits of any street, road, avenue, way, alley, public place, or anywhere so as to constitute a nuisance. 
(1975 Code, § 6-4.04) 
(C)  The producer or owner of garbage, refuse, waste matter or swill may elect to segregate non-putrefactive materials from other garbage, refuse, waste matter, and swill, and the same may be placed in a box or barrel located near the galvanized container, but the material so segregated shall be kept in a dry condition and in such a manner as not to be offensive, attractive to flies and rodents, and so as not to create a nuisance or fire hazard. All cardboard and wooden boxes, except containers of refuse or waste matter, shall be broken up so as to facilitate their collection by the scavenger. Such refuse shall be delivered to the scavenger in the same manner as the contents of the galvanized containers. 
(1975 Code, § 6-4.05) (Ord. 1957-28, effective - -57) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 50.04 - Combustible waste materials. 
No person shall dump or deposit, or cause or allow to be dumped or deposited, or allow to accumulate any waste material of a combustible nature on any property within the Town without first obtaining written permission from the Health Officer and the Fire Chief. 
(1975 Code, § 6-4.14) (Ord. 1963-130, effective - -63) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 50.05 - Depositing and burning garbage. 
It shall be unlawful to deposit, place, or burn garbage, refuse, waste matter, or swill of any kind upon public streets, alleyways, or public places. It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, place, or burn garbage, refuse, waste matter, or swill upon any public or private lot or park, except as otherwise provided in this section. Dry refuse and waste matter may be burned by owners or producers of the same only pursuant to a permit from the Woodside Fire Protection District and under the terms and conditions thereof, but such burning shall not create any offensive odor or smoke screen. 
(1975 Code, § 6-4.15) (Ord. 1957-28, effective - -57) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 50.06 - Dumping and depositing in watercourses, public places. 
(A)  No person shall dump or deposit, or cause or allow to be dumped or deposited, in any watercourse, waste material of any nature whatsoever. 
(B)  No person shall dump or deposit, or cause or allow to be dumped or deposited, waste material within 20 feet of the bank or slope of any watercourse without first having obtained the written permission of the Town Engineer, the Health Officer, the Fire Chief, and the Council. 
(1975 Code, § 6-4.16) 
(C)  No person shall dump or deposit, or cause or allow to be dumped or deposited, waste material upon public streets or other public property within the Town. 
(1975 Code, § 6-4.17) (Ord. 1963-130, effective - -63) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 50.07 - Use of dumps. 
All garbage, refuse, waste matter, and swill collected by the scavenger shall be disposed of at a dump operated by the scavenger or other persons in such a manner as to comply with all State, County, Town, or district regulations governing such dumps. 
(1975 Code, § 6-4.18) (Ord. 1957-28, effective - -57) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 50.08 - Individuals transporting trash and refuse. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not prohibit a person, other than the scavenger, from transporting, without spilling, his/her own trash, refuse, or waste matter, except garbage or swill, over the streets of the Town without obtaining a permit. 
(1975 Code, § 6-4.19) (Ord. 1957-28, effective - -57)  
Sec. 50.09 - Enforcement; violations. 
The Health Officer, Police Chief (or such other officials of the Town or county who are acting therefor pursuant to authorization by the Council) and the Fire Chief or Acting Fire Chief shall enforce the provisions of this chapter, and they shall have the right to enter upon any and all premises for the purposes of determining the sanitary conditions thereof and ascertaining whether the provisions of this chapter are being complied with, and any person denying or obstructing such entry shall be subject to the penalty provisions set forth in Chapter 10 of this Code. 
(1975 Code, § 6-4.20) (Ord. 1957-28, effective - -57)  
Secs. 50.10—50.19 - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION PRACTICES 
 
Sec. 50.20 - Authorization to collect. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any person to collect, transport, or carry garbage, refuse, waste matter, or swill through any street or public place in the Town without a permit from the Health Officer, or such other official as may be designated by the Council, unless such person is an employee or agent of the Town, and is acting within the scope of his/her employment, or has been awarded a contract by the Town as a scavenger, or has been granted a permit to collect swill in the Town. 
(1975 Code, § 6-4.06) 
(B)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of collecting swill in the Town, or to haul swill through any street or public place of the Town, unless such person is an agent or employee of the Town, or is the regular scavenger with whom the Town has a contract, or has been duly licensed or franchised as provided in this section. The Council may, by resolution, fix the fees to be charged for the business of collecting swill and for transporting swill through the streets, alleys, or public ways of the Town. All such fees shall be paid to the Town Clerk upon the issuance of the license. Applications for such licenses or franchises shall be made to the Health Officer, or to such other official as may be designated by the Council, who shall have the authority to issue such licenses or franchises. The vehicles used for the transportation of swill and the manner in which the swill is handled, collected, and transported shall be approved by the Health Officer, or such other official as may be designated by the Council. Such licenses or franchises may be revoked by the Council, after a notice in writing to the scavenger given by the Town Clerk by registered United States mail at least ten days before the date fixed for a hearing thereon, for failure to collect and transport swill in the manner and with the vehicles approved by the Health Officer or such other official as may be designated by the Council. 
(1975 Code, § 6-4.13) (Ord. 1957-28, effective - -57) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 50.21 - Scavenger contracts or franchises. 
(A)  Award. The Council may, by resolution, award a contract or franchise for the collection and disposal of garbage, refuse, waste matter, and swill to any person the Council believes best qualified and equipped to perform the work of a scavenger. 
(B)  Manner of collection and disposal. Such contract shall require the scavenger to collect, remove, and dispose of garbage, refuse, waste matter, and swill in the Town in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and in conformance with such regulations as may be prescribed by the Health Officer, or such other official as may be designated by the Council, the Police Chief, and the Fire Chief or Acting Fire Chief. 
(C)  Compensation. The contract shall fix the compensation to be paid the scavenger therefor. 
(D)  Bonds; insurance. The contract shall require the scavenger to furnish a surety bond of not less than $300,000.00, conditioned upon the faithful performance of his/her contract, and shall require the scavenger to carry workmen's compensation insurance and property damage and public liability insurance in amounts to be determined by the Council. 
(E)  Renewal. Such contract shall be subject to renewal, by resolution, if, in the discretion of the Council, time, circumstances, and conditions warrant such renewal. 
(F)  Exclusive. No license or franchise shall be issued other than to the scavenger named in the contract granted by the Town while any such contract is in effect and as to any services provided for thereby. 
(1975 Code, §§ 6-4.07, 6-4.08) (Ord. 1957-28, effective - -57)  
Sec. 50.22 - Collection times, manner and vehicles. 
Collections of garbage, refuse, waste matter, and swill shall be made at least once each week; provided, however, such collections may be made at other intervals within such areas as may from time to time be designated in any agreement between the Town and any garbage collector. The contents of all containers shall be transferred by the scavenger into a vehicle provided by the scavenger and approved by the Health Officer, or such other official as may be designated by the Council, as being a satisfactory vehicle for such purpose. It shall be unlawful for the scavenger to spill any of the contents of the containers on stairs, yards, streets, alleyways, or public places. No collection shall be made by the scavenger before 5:30 a.m. of any day. 
(1975 Code, § 6-4.09) (Ord. 1957-28, effective - -57; Am. Ord. 1957-37, effective - -57) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 50.23 - Collection fees. 
The scavenger shall have the authority to charge such fees for the collection and disposal of garbage, refuse, waste matter, and swill as may be determined by the Council to be reasonable and to collect such charges, either in advance or otherwise, at such times as may be fixed in the contract provided for in Section 50.21. 
(1975 Code, § 6-4.10) (Ord. 1957-28, effective - -57)  
Sec. 50.24 - Interference with collection. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in any manner to interfere with the collection or disposal of garbage, refuse, waste matter, or swill by any person authorized by license, franchise, or contract to collect or dispose of the same. 
(1975 Code, § 6-4.11) (Ord. 1957-28, effective - -57) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 50.25 - Disputes. 
Disputes over charges made or as to the character of the services performed in the collection and disposal of garbage, refuse, waste matter, and swill shall be decided by the Health Officer, and his/her decision shall be final. 
(1975 Code, § 6-4.12) (Ord. 1957-28, effective - -57)  
Secs. 50.26—50.29 - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - RECYCLING; DIVERSION OF CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS 
 
Sec. 50.30 - Findings and purpose. 
(A)  The Town Council finds that the State of California through its California Waste Management Act of 1989, Assembly Bill 939 (AB 939), requires that each local jurisdiction in the state divert 50 percent of solid waste from landfill by December 31, 2000, through source reduction, recycling, and composting activities. 
(B)  The Town Council finds that every city and county in California, including the Town, could face fines up to $10,000.00 a day for not meeting the above mandated goal. 
(C)  The Town Council finds and determines that the Town is committed to protecting the public health, safety, welfare and environment. 
(D)  In order to meet these goals, it is necessary that the Town promote the reduction of solid waste and reduce the stream of solid waste going to landfills. 
(E)  Debris from demolition and construction of buildings represents approximately one-third or more of the volume presently going to landfill from Woodside, and much of said debris is particularly suitable for recycling. 
(F)  The Town finds that reuse and recycling of certain portions of construction and demolition debris is essential to further the Town's efforts to reduce solid waste and comply with AB 939 mandates. 
(G)  The Town finds that, except in unusual circumstances, it is feasible to divert an average of at least 60 percent of all construction and demolition debris from construction, demolition, and renovation covered projects. 
(H)  The Town Council recognizes that requiring construction and demolition debris to be recycled and reused may in some respects add modestly to the cost of demolition and in other respects may make possible some cost recovery and cost reduction. 
(I)  It is necessary in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare that the following regulations be adopted. 
(Ord. 2000-504, effective 8-10-00)  
Sec. 50.31 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this subchapter the following definitions apply: 
Alternative daily cover (ADC). Materials other than soil that have been approved by the California Integrated Waste Management Board for use as a temporary overlay on an exposed landfill face. 
Applicant. Any individual, firm, limited liability company, association, partnership, government agency, industry, public or private corporation, or any other person or entity whatsoever who applies to the Town for the applicable permits to undertake any construction, demolition, or renovation for a covered project within the Town. 
Contractor. Any person or entity holding, or required to hold, a contractor's license of any type under the laws of the State of California, and who performs (whether as contractor, subcontractor or owner-builder) any construction, demolition, and/or renovation of a covered project in Woodside. 
Construction. All building, landscaping, remodeling, addition, removal or demolition involving the use or disposal of designated recyclable and reusable materials as defined in this section. 
Construction and demolition debris. 
(1)  Discarded materials generally considered to be not water soluble and nonhazardous in nature, including but not limited to steel, glass, brick, concrete, asphalt material, pipe, gypsum, wallboard, and lumber from the construction or demolition of a structure as part of a construction or demolition project or from the renovation of a structure and/or landscaping, and including rocks, soils, tree remains, trees, and other vegetative matter that normally results from land clearing, landscaping and development operations for a construction project. 
(2)  Clean cardboard, paper, plastic, wood, and metal scraps from any construction and/or landscape project. 
(3)  Non-construction and demolition debris wood scraps. 
(4)  De minimis amounts of other non-hazardous wastes that are generated at construction or demolition projects, provided such amounts are consistent with best management practices of the industry. 
(5)  Mixing of construction and demolition debris with other types of solid waste will cause it to be classified as other than construction and demolition debris. 
Conversion rate. The rate set forth in the standardized Conversion Rate Table approved by the Town pursuant to this chapter for use in estimating the volume or weight of materials identified in a Waste Management Plan. 
Covered project. Any construction, demolition, and/or renovation of covered projects within the Town the total costs of which are, or are projected to be, greater than or equal to $10,000.00, or which will generate more than ten tons of construction and demolition debris. 
Deconstruction. The soft demolition of any facility, structure, or building through a planned dismantling and salvaging of reusable materials and parts. 
Demolition. The decimating, razing, ruining, tearing down or wrecking of any facility, structure, pavement or building, whether in whole or in part, whether interior or exterior and/or the removal of landscaping materials, including green waste. 
Deposit. Cash or a check in the amount of $50.00 for each estimated ton of construction and/or demolition debris from a covered project, but not less than $1,000.00, subject to the further provisions of Section 50.35 of this chapter. 
Designated recyclable and reusable materials. That portion of construction and demolition debris that includes the following: 
(1)  Masonry building materials including all products generally used in construction including, but not limited to asphalt, concrete, rock, stone and brick. 
(2)  Wood materials including any and all dimensional lumber, fencing or construction wood that is not chemically treated, creosoted, CCA pressure treated, contaminated or painted. 
(3)  Vegetative materials including trees, tree parts, shrubs, stumps, logs, brush or any other type of plants that are cleared from a site for construction or other use. 
(4)  Earth materials, including dirt and rocks from land clearing activities in preparation for construction. 
(5)  Metals including all metal scrap such as, but not limited to, pipes, siding, window frames, door frames and fences. 
(6)  Roofing materials including wood shingles as well as asphalt, tile, stone and slate based roofing material. 
(7)  Salvageable materials and structures including, but not limited to wallboard, doors, cabinets, shelves, furniture, plumbing and electrical fixtures, windows, fixtures, toilets, sinks, bath tubs and appliances. 
Divert. To use material for any purpose other than disposal in a landfill or transformation facility. 
Diversion requirement. The diversion of at least 60 percent of the total construction and demolition debris generated by a covered project via reuse or recycling. 
Non-recyclable/non-reusable materials. That portion of construction and demolition debris for which there is no locally available facility for the return of these materials to the economic mainstream in the form of raw material for new, reused, or reconstituted products that meet the quality standards necessary to be used in the marketplace. 
Project. Any activity which requires an application for a building or demolition permit or any similar permit from the Town. 
Recovery. The removal and reclamation of those materials from a project that may have value if reused or recycled. 
Recycling. The process of collecting, sorting, cleansing, treating, and reconstituting materials that would otherwise become solid waste, and returning them to the economic mainstream in the form of raw material for new, reused, or reconstituted products which meet the quality standards necessary to be used in the marketplace. 
Renovation. Any change, addition, or modification in an existing structure. 
Reuse. Further or repeated use of construction or demolition debris. 
Salvage. The controlled removal of designated recyclable and reusable materials from construction and demolition debris, from a covered project, for the purpose of recycling, reuse, or storage for later recycling or reuse. 
Waste management plan. A completed Waste Management Plan (WMP) form, approved by the Town for the purpose of compliance with this subchapter, submitted by the applicant for any covered project. 
WMP Compliance Official. The Town Manager or designated staff person(s) authorized and responsible for implementing this subchapter. 
Waste tonnage. The actual weight of either construction and demolition debris, or designated recyclable and reusable materials as used in this chapter. 
(Ord. 2000-504, effective 8-10-00; Am. Ord. 2001-507, effective 2-8-01)  
Sec. 50.32 - Deconstruction and salvage and recovery. 
Every covered project shall be made available for deconstruction, salvage, and recovery prior to demolition. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to recover the maximum feasible amount of salvageable designated recyclable and reusable materials prior to demolition. In order to provide sufficient time for deconstruction and salvage and recovery to be undertaken, no demolition may commence until a period of five working days has elapsed from the date of issuance of the demolition permit. Recovered and salvaged designated recyclable and reusable materials from the covered project shall qualify to be counted in meeting the diversion requirements of this chapter. Recovered or salvaged designated recyclable and reusable materials may be given away or sold on the premises, or may be removed to reuse warehouse facilities for storage or sale. Title to designated recyclable and reusable materials forwarded to the operator of recycling facilities will transfer to the service provider upon removal of designated recyclable and reusable materials from the covered project site. 
(Ord. 2000-504, effective 8-10-00)  
Sec. 50.33 - Diversion requirements. 
(A)  It is required that at least the following specified percentages of the waste tonnage of construction and demolition debris generated from every covered project shall be diverted from going to landfill by using recycling, reuse and diversion programs: 
(1)  Demolition: Sixty percent of waste tonnage from construction and demolition debris that includes concrete and asphalt; and 15 percent of waste tonnage that does not include concrete and asphalt. 
(2)  Re-roofing of homes with shingles or shakes as a separate covered project: Sixty percent of waste tonnage from construction and demolition debris. 
(3)  Construction and remodeling: Sixty percent of waste tonnage from construction and demolition debris. 
(B)  Separate Waste Management Plans will be required for the demolition and for the construction portion of covered projects involving both demolition and construction. Because the Town believes in the highest and best use of materials that are recycled, alternative daily cover (ADC) shall not count towards reaching the required diversion percentages. If non-recyclable/non-reusable materials are present, and a good faith effort by the applicant and the Town to locate a material recycling/reuse facility has been unsuccessful, an exception to the exclusion of ADC as a bonafide diversion method may be granted by the WMP Compliance Official for these materials. If an exception is granted, any designated recyclable and reusable materials that are also present must be 100 percent diverted from disposal in a landfill or transformation facility. 
(C)  It is not the intention of this chapter to require the recycling, reuse, or diversion of materials not subject to those processes. In the event that more than 40 percent of the waste tonnage is non-recyclable/non-reusable material, and a good faith effort by the applicant and the Town to locate a material recycling/ reuse facility has been unsuccessful, an exception to the requirements of this chapter may be granted by the WMP Compliance Official. If an exception is granted, any designated recyclable and reusable materials that are also present must be 100 percent diverted from disposal in a landfill or transformation facility. 
(Ord. 2000-504, effective 8-10-00; Am. Ord. 2001-507, effective 2-8-01)  
Sec. 50.34 - Information required before issuance of demolition and/or building permit. 
(A)  Every applicant shall submit a properly completed "Waste Management Plan", in a form as prescribed by the WMP Compliance Official, to the Department of Planning and Building, as a portion of the building or demolition permit process. The completed WMP shall indicate all of the following: 
(1)  The estimated volume or weight of project construction and demolition debris, by materials type, to be generated; 
(2)  The maximum volume or weight of such materials that can feasibly be diverted via reuse or recycling; 
(3)  The vendor or facility that the applicant proposes to use to collect or receive that material; and 
(4)  The estimated volume or weight of construction and demolition debris that will be landfilled. In estimating the volume or weight of materials identified in the WMP, the applicant shall use the standardized Conversion Rates approved by the Town for this purpose. 
(B)  Approval of the form as complete and accurate shall be a condition precedent to issuance of any building or demolition permit. If the maximum volume or weight of such materials that can feasibly be diverted via reuse or recycling, as estimated pursuant to subdivision (2) above, is less than the required diversion requirements, applicant must submit information that supports the lower projected diversion rate, or the WMP shall be considered to be incomplete. 
(Ord. 2000-504, effective 8-10-00)  
Sec. 50.35 - Deposit required. 
As a condition precedent to issuance of any permit for a building or a demolition permit that involves a covered project, the owner of the property for which a permit is being applied shall post a cash or check deposit in the amount of $50.00 for each estimated ton of construction and/or demolition debris. The deposit shall be not less than $1,000.00. The deposit for designated recyclable and reusable materials consisting of earth materials, including dirt and rocks from land clearing activities in preparation for construction, shall be $50.00 per ton for amounts less than or equal to 100 tons and a flat rate of $5,000.00 for amounts greater than 100 tons. The deposit shall be returned, without interest, in total or pro rate, upon proof to the satisfaction of the WMP Compliance Official that no less than the required percentages of the waste tonnage of construction and demolition debris generated by the covered project have been diverted from landfills and have been recycled or reused or stored for later reuse or recycling. If a lesser percentage of waste tonnage of construction and demolition debris than required is diverted, a proportionate share of the deposit will be returned. The deposit shall be forfeited entirely or to the pro rate extent that there is a failure to comply with the requirements of this chapter. The Town Council may, by formal resolution, modify the amount of the required deposit. 
(Ord. 2000-504, effective 8-10-00; Am. Ord. 2001-507, effective 2-8-01)  
Sec. 50.36 - Administrative fee. 
As a condition precedent to issuance of any permit for construction or demolition for a covered project, the applicant shall pay to the Town a cash fee sufficient to compensate the Town for all expenses incurred in administering the permit. The amount of this fee shall be determined in accordance with the then current Fee Resolution of the Town Council determining the same. 
(Ord. 2000-504, effective 8-10-00)  
Sec. 50.37 - On-site practices. 
During the term of the covered project, the applicant shall recycle or reuse the required percentages of materials, and keep records thereof in tonnage or in other measurements approved by the WMP Compliance Official that can be converted to tonnage. The WMP Compliance Official will evaluate and monitor each covered project to gauge the percentage of materials recycled, salvaged and recycled or reused from the covered project. The required diversion of a minimum of the required percentages of the designated recyclable and reusable materials shall be measured separately with respect to the demolition segment and the construction segment of a covered project where both construction and demolition are involved. To the maximum extent feasible, on-site separation of scrap wood and clean green waste in a designated debris box or boxes shall be arranged, in order to permit chipping and mulching for soil enhancement or land cover purposes. In order to protect chipping and grinding machinery, metal and other materials which cannot be chipped or ground shall not be placed in such boxes. On-site separation shall be undertaken for wallboard, dimensional lumber, and cardboard to the extent feasible on new construction. 
(Ord. 2000-504, effective 8-10-00)  
Sec. 50.38 - Reporting. 
(A)  Within 60 days following the completion of the demolition phase of a covered project, and again within 60 days following the completion of the construction phase of a covered project, the applicant shall, as a condition precedent to final inspection and to issuance of any certificate of occupancy, submit documentation to the WMP Compliance Official which proves compliance with the requirements of Sections 50.32 and 50.33. The documentation shall consist of a final completed "Waste Management Plan" showing actual data of tonnage of materials salvaged for recycling and reuse, supported by originals or certified photocopies of receipts and weight tags or other records of measurement from recycling companies, deconstruction contractors, and/or landfill and disposal companies. Receipts and weight tags will be used to verify whether materials generated from the site have been or are to be recycled, reused, salvaged or otherwise disposed of. Applicant shall make reasonable efforts to ensure that all designated recyclable and reuse materials salvaged or landfilled are measured and recorded using the most accurate method of measurement available. To the extent practical, all construction and demolition debris shall be weighed by measurement on scales. Such scales shall be in compliance with all regulatory requirements for accuracy and maintenance. For construction and demolition debris for which weighing is not practical due to small size or other considerations, a volumetric measurement shall be used. For conversion of volumetric measurements to weight, the applicant shall use the standardized conversion rates approved by the Town for this purpose. 
(B)  If a covered project involves both demolition and construction, the report and documentation for the demolition project must be submitted and approved by the WMP Compliance Official before issuance of a building permit for the construction phase of a covered project. In the alternative, the applicant may submit a letter stating that no waste or recyclable materials were generated from the covered project, in which case this statement shall be subject to verification by the WMP Compliance Official. Any deposit posted pursuant to Section 50.35 shall be forfeited if the applicant does not meet the timely reporting requirements of this section. 
(Ord. 2000-504, effective 8-10-00)  
Sec. 50.39 - Violation a public nuisance. 
Each violation of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a public nuisance and be subject to abatement as such, pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 10.6 of this Code. 
(Ord. 2000-504, effective 8-10-00)  
Sec. 50.40 - Penalties. 
Each violation of the provisions of this subchapter shall constitute a misdemeanor. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a new and separate offense. 
(Ord. 2000-504, effective 8-10-00)  
Sec. 50.41 - Responsible party. 
Every applicant and/or owner of property on which a covered project occurs shall be responsible for compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2000-504, effective 8-10-00)  
CHAPTER 51. - SEWERS  
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 51.001 - Purpose. 
(A)  The General Plan of the Town of Woodside has provided, since incorporation of the Town, that individual on-site disposal systems are the primary means of treatment and disposal of sanitary wastewater in the Town. The Town has, for explicit, specific reasons of health, safety and welfare of the people of the Town, extended public sanitary sewerage facilities to certain areas of the Town. Portions of those areas are, by agreement with the County of San Mateo, annexed into the Fair Oaks Sewer Maintenance District, and are subject to the regulations of that District as well as any Town ordinances and policies. 
(B)  The purpose of this chapter is to establish standards and conditions relating to the use of sanitary wastewater facilities of the Town. It is further the purpose of this chapter to: establish uniform requirements for the installation and connection of building sewers; establish uniform requirements for discharge into the Town's wastewater collection system and the treatment system used jointly with other public entities; to enable the Town to comply with and meet applicable laws, regulations, standards and conditions established by the federal and state government, or by agencies thereof, in implementation of such laws. It is hereby found that the health, safety and welfare of the people of the Town require the enactment of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1994-476, effective 7-12-94)  
Sec. 51.002 - Definitions. 
(A)  For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
(B)  Words, phrases or terms not specifically defined herein, and having a technical or specialized meaning shall be defined as set forth in the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater , published by the American Health Association, The American Water Works Association, and the Water Pollution Control Federation. 
(C)  References to waste constituents and characteristics shall have the meaning ascribed thereto in the aforesaid Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater , and measurements thereof shall be as set forth in said publication, or as established by federal or state regulatory agencies. 
(D)  Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of terms used in this chapter are applicable to this chapter only and do not necessarily correspond to definitions that may be used by other public agencies. 
Building sewer or side sewer. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer. 
Charge or fee. Any pecuniary assessment established pursuant to this Code for services and/or facilities furnished by the Town to any premises in connection with the operation of the wastewater facilities. 
Code. The Woodside Municipal Code, with such amendments as may be adopted. 
Contamination. An impairment of the background natural quality of the wastes of the state by waste to a degree which creates a hazard to the public health. 
County. The County of San Mateo, California. 
Customer. Owner or owners of any real property for which the Town is providing sewer service; also any person who discharges, causes or permits the discharge of wastewater into the wastewater facilities. 
Emergency. A condition which creates imminent danger to the public health, safety or welfare. 
Garbage. Any kitchen, table, counter, fountain, or bar refuse including offal, vegetable or animal matter, dead animals not more than ten pounds each, or other matters pertaining to the preparation, consumption, decay, or storage of meats, fish, fowl, birds, fruits, vegetables and other matters for human food consumption. Garbage shall not include any toxic or hazardous materials or substances. 
Governmental or public premises. Any premises owned, controlled or used by: 
(a)  The United States Government or any department or agency thereof, 
(b)  The State of California or any department or agency thereof, 
(c)  Any city, county, town, or any of their departments or agencies, 
(d)  Any school district and 
(e)  Any other governmental or public entity. 
Hazardous and/or toxic materials and substances. Any material or substance which is determined by laws, regulations or rules of any government agency having jurisdiction over such matters to be toxic, hazardous, poisonous, corrosive or otherwise inimical to public health, safety and welfare. 
Natural outlet. Any form of discharge, as it occurs in nature, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body or surface or ground water. 
Nonresidential customer. Any commercial, industrial, institutional, governmental, or miscellaneous customer not classified as a residential customer. 
Parcel. A parcel of real property as described in the records of the San Mateo County Assessor by an assessor's parcel number. It includes both improved and unimproved real property. 
Person. Any individual, property owner, firm, company, partnership, association, private corporation, public corporation, or governmental entity, authority or agency, and the officers, agents or employees of such organizations. 
pH. A measure of acidity or alkalinity. 
Pollution. An alteration of the quality of the waters of the Town or state by waste to a degree which unreasonably affects such waters for any beneficial use or affects facilities serving such beneficial use. Pollution may also include contamination. 
Premises. A parcel of land, or portion thereof, including any improvements thereon, which is directly or indirectly connected to the wastewater facilities for purposes of receiving, using, and paying for service, or other purposes relating to the wastewater facilities, by an individual customer. Each dwelling unit, such as the primary home or second unit, may in the discretion of the Town be deemed a separate premises. 
Public sewer. A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights and which is controlled by public authority. 
Refuse. All types of waste materials as defined under the headings of "garbage," "rubbish," and "waste matter." 
Requirements of law. A pertinent provision of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972 (Public Law 92-500, 33 U.S.C. Section 1151 et seq.), or of any statute, ordinance, code, rule, regulation, order, directive, or of any applicable National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit, or of any amendments thereto, or other federal, state, regional or local law. 
Residential customer. Any single or multiple family dwelling customer, including premises defined as homes, second units, or similar structures. 
Rubbish. Any pasteboard boxes, rags, paper, straw, sawdust, packing material, shavings, boxes, trimmings from lawns, trees and flower gardens and similar noncombustible materials. The term shall not include any toxic or hazardous materials or substances. 
Sanitary sewer. A pipe or conduit which carries wastewater and to which storm, surface, or ground waters are not intentionally admitted. 
Sewer. A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
Single-family dwelling. Premises designed, improved or used as a residence for one family only and for no other purpose. 
Storm sewer or storm drain. A sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes wastewater and polluted industrial wastes. 
Suspended solids (SS). The total non-filterable residue as defined in Standard Methods for Chemical Analysis of Water and Wastewater. 
Town. The Town of Woodside, located in San Mateo County, California. 
Town representative. Any person authorized by the Town Council to act on its behalf in carrying out the administrative functions of the Town. 
Type of use. The purpose of the premises, such as commercial or single-family dwelling. 
Unpolluted water. Water to which no constituent has been added, either intentionally or accidentally, which would render such water unacceptable to the Town for disposal to storm or natural drainage, or directly to surface waters. 
Waste matter. Wastewater and any and all waste substances, whether liquid, solid, gaseous, or radioactive including, but not limited to, crockery, bottles, tin cans, metal vessels, ashes, shells, plaster, and all other similar non-combustible materials. Waste matter shall not include any toxic or hazardous materials or substances. 
Wastewater. Waste and water, whether treated or untreated, discharged into, or permitted to enter into the wastewater facilities. wastewater shall mean a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, and institution, together with such ground, surface, and storm waters as may be present. 
Wastewater constituents and characteristics. The individual chemical, physical, bacteriological and radiological parameters, including volume and flow rate and such other parameters that service to define, classify or measure the contents, quality, quantity, or strength of wastewater. 
Wastewater facilities. All components of the physical system for collecting, transmitting, pumping, treating, and disposing of wastewater. 
(Ord. 1994-476, effective 7-12-94)  
Sec. 51.003 - Tampering with wastewater facilities. 
No unauthorized person shall break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is part of the Town's wastewater facilities. 
(Ord. 1994-476, effective 7-12-94) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Secs. 51.004—51.014 - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - SEWER USE REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 51.015 - Sewer use required. 
(A)  The owner of all houses, buildings or structures situated within the Town used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes requiring sanitation facilities, shall provide said facilities in accordance with these regulations. 
(B)  Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to connect to the public sewer system, or to construct or maintain and privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the private disposal of wastewater. 
(C)  The owner of any house, building or structure located within an area to which public sanitary sewers have been extended pursuant to specific findings of public health and welfare and abutting on any street or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sewer of the Town, may be required at the owner's expense to install suitable toilet and wastewater facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this Code, within 90 days after date of official notice to do so, provided that the public sewer is within 200 feet of the property line. 
(D)  All inhabited buildings within the area described herein (the area) shall be connected to the public sewer system. Any new buildings in the area intended to be inhabited shall be converted to the public sewer prior to occupancy. The area under this section is that area previously annexed to the Fair Oaks Sewer Maintenance District as the Glens Sewer Collection System, and generally described as follows: On the west along Canada Road from Neuman Lane to about 550 feet north of Laning Drive, east about 350 feet then south to Laning Drive, then east about 345 feet, then south to the boundary of the Woodside Glens subdivision, along the Glens boundary to the I-280 freeway, then adjacent to the I-280 freeway and the Woodside Glens boundary south and west to Neuman Lane, including Corto Lane, Glenwood Avenue, Toyon Court, Otis Avenue, Ridge Court, Hillside Drive, Alta Mesa Road, Highland Terrace, Alta Vista Road, Arbor Court and that area described as the Glens in the Woodside Glens Specific Plan, adopted June 1, 1993 by the Town. 
(Ord. 1994-476, effective 7-12-94; Am. Ord. 2000-505, effective 12-14-00) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 51.016 - Grease, oil and sand interceptors. 
(A)  Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid waste containing grease in an excessive amount, or any flammable wastes, sand, and other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for residential dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Town's engineering representative, and shall be so as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. 
(B)  Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall be of substantial construction, watertight, and equipped with easily removable covers which, when boxed in place, shall be gastight and watertight. 
(C)  All grease, oil and sand interceptors, where required, shall be properly operated and maintained by the owner, at the owner's expense, at all times. 
(Ord. 1994-476, effective 7-12-94)  
Sec. 51.017 - Prohibited discharges. 
(A)  General prohibitions. No person shall, and it shall be unlawful to, discharge wastes into the wastewater facilities which cause, threaten to cause, or are capable of causing, either alone or by interaction with other substances: 
(1)  A fire or explosion; 
(2)  Obstruction of flow, or injury to, the wastewater facilities, or any portion thereof; 
(3)  Danger to life or safety of persons; 
(4)  Conditions inhibiting or preventing the effective maintenance or operation of the wastewater facilities; 
(5)  Strong or offensive odors, air pollution, or any noxious, toxic, or malodorous gas or substance, or gas-producing substances; 
(6)  Interference with the wastewater treatment process, or overloading of the wastewater facilities, or excessive collection or treatment costs, or use of capacity in the wastewater facilities to which the person is not entitled; 
(7)  Interference with any wastewater reclamation process operated in conjunction with the wastewater facilities, or overloading, or a breakdown of such reclamation process, or excessive reclamation costs, or any product of the treatment process which renders such reclamation process impracticable or not feasible under normal operating conditions; 
(8)  A detrimental environmental impact, or a nuisance wherever located, or a condition unacceptable to any public agency having regulatory jurisdiction over operation of the wastewater facilities; 
(9)  Discoloration, or any other adverse condition in the quality of the effluent from the wastewater facilities such that receiving water quality requirements established by any statute, rule, regulation, ordinance, or permit condition cannot be met by the Town or the agencies providing wastewater facilities to the Town. 
(B)  Storm drainage and groundwater. No person shall, and it shall be unlawful to discharge, cause to be discharged, or permit to be discharged, any stormwater, groundwater, rainwater, street drainage, swimming pool drainage, subsurface drainage, or yard drainage, either directly or indirectly into the wastewater facilities, unless a permit therefor is issued by the Town. The Town may issue such permit only upon a finding that no reasonable alternative method of disposal of such water is available. 
(C)  Unpolluted water. No person, shall, and it shall be unlawful to, discharge, cause to be discharged, or permit to be discharged any unpolluted water, including, but not limited to, cooling water, process water, or blow-down water from cooling towers or evaporative coolers, either directly or indirectly into the wastewater facilities, unless a permit therefor is issued by the Town. 
(D)  Garbage grinders. 
(1)  No person shall, and it shall be unlawful to, discharge, cause to be discharged, or permit to be discharged waste from garbage grinders into the wastewater facilities; provided, however, that: 
(a)  Wastes generated in preparation of food normally consumed on the premises may be so discharged; or 
(b)  The discharge is made pursuant to a permit issued by the Town. 
(2)  Garbage grinders from which wastes are permitted under subsections (a) and (b) above, shall be of a design and capacity to shred wastes sufficiently such that all waste particles shall be carried freely under normal flow conditions into and through the wastewater facilities. 
(E)  Direct discharge. No person shall, and it shall be unlawful to, discharge, cause to be discharged, or permit to be discharged any wastes or wastewater, or any object, material, or other substance directly into a manhole or other opening into the wastewater facilities other than wastes or wastewater through an approved building sewer. 
(F)  Holding tank waste. No person shall, and it shall be unlawful to, discharge, cause to be discharged, or permit to be discharged any holding tank waste into the wastewater facilities at any location other than one designated and clearly marked for such purpose by the Town or other public agency. 
(G)  Radioactive wastes. No person shall, and it shall be unlawful to, discharge, cause to be discharged, or permit to be discharged, any radioactive wastes into the wastewater facilities; provided, however, that: 
(1)  Persons authorized to use radioactive materials by the State Department of Health or other governmental agencies empowered to regulate the use of radioactive materials may discharge, cause to be discharged, or permit to be discharged such wastes if they are discharged in strict conformance with current state radiation control regulation (California Administrative Code, Title XVII, Ch. 5, Sub. Ch. 4, Group 3, Art. 5), and federal regulations and recommendations for safe disposal of such wastes; and 
(2)  The person so acting does so in compliance with all applicable rules and regulations of all other regulatory agencies. 
(H)  Wastewater strength. Except as provided in Section 51.018 of this chapter, no person shall, and it shall be unlawful to, discharge, cause to be discharged, or permit to be discharged into the public system any wastewater containing any of the following constituents in excess of the maximum allowable amounts respectively established therefor: 
Arsenic ..... 	0.1 mg/l 
Cadmium ..... 	0.04 mg/l 
Copper ..... 	2.0 mg/l 
Total cyanide ..... 	0.06 mg/l 
Lead ..... 	0.2 mg/l 
Mercury ..... 	0.002 mg/l 
Nickel ..... 	0.06 mg/l 
Silver ..... 	0.01 mg/l 
Total chromium ..... 	0.2 mg/l 
Zinc ..... 	1.0 mg/l 
Dissolved sulfides ..... 	0.1 mg/l 
Phenolic compounds ..... 	2.6 mg/l 
Polycyclic aromatic 
hydrocarbons ..... 	0.2 mg/l 
Methylene chloride ..... 	0.07 mg/l 
Cyanide ..... 	0.06 mg/l 
Chloroform ..... 	0.03 mg/l 
Perchloroethylene ..... 	0.03 mg/l 
Benzene ..... 	0.002 mg/l 
Carbon tetrachloride ..... 	0.001 mg/l 
Zinc ..... 	0.11 kg/day 
Carbon disulfide ..... 	0.008 mg/l 
 
(I)  Additional limitations. No person shall, and it shall be unlawful to, discharge, cause to be discharged, or permit to be discharged any wastewater: 
(1)  The temperature of which is higher than 150° F. (65° C.); 
(2)  Containing more than 300 mg/l of oil or grease of animal or vegetable origin; 
(3)  Containing more than 100 mg/l of oil or grease of mineral or petroleum origin; 
(4)  Having a pH lower than 6.0 or having a corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures or equipment of the wastewater facilities, or any portion thereof; 
(5)  Containing in excess of 1.0 mg/l phenolic compounds, unless otherwise authorized by permit issued pursuant to Sections 51.060 through 51.068 of this chapter; 
(6)  Containing in excess of 20.0 mg/l fluoride compounds, unless otherwise authorized by permit issued pursuant to Sections 51.060 through 51.068 of this chapter; 
(7)  Containing any sand, grit, straw, metal, glass, rags, feathers, paper, tar, plastic, wood, leaves, garden clippings, manure, dead animals, offal, or any other solid or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow in the wastewater facilities, or which in any way interferes with the proper operation of the wastewater facilities; 
(8)  Containing any hazardous or toxic material or substance, the discharge of which is prohibited by the laws or regulations of any government agency having jurisdiction over such matters; 
(9)  Containing any hazardous, toxic or poisonous substance not otherwise specifically prohibited in this Code in sufficient quantities to constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or to create a hazard in the wastewater facilities, or to injure or interfere with the operation thereof; or 
(10)  Containing suspended solids, not otherwise specifically prohibited under the provisions of this Code, the characteristics or quantity of which require unusual attention, treatment, or expense in handling or treating such material in the wastewater facilities, or any portion thereof. 
(Ord. 1994-476, effective 7-12-94) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 51.018 - Specific customer limitations. 
Notwithstanding the limitations upon the characteristics or quantity of wastewater discharged, caused to be discharged, or permitted to be discharged into the wastewater facilities pursuant to this subchapter, the Town may, in connection with the issuance of permits pursuant to the provisions of Sections 51.060 through 51.068 of this chapter, establish additional or different specific limitations on wastewater strength upon a finding by the Town that: 
(A)  The limitations set forth in this subchapter may not be sufficient to protect the operation of the wastewater facilities, or any portion thereof, or the waste or wastewater proposed to be discharged otherwise constitutes a hazard to, or an unreasonable burden upon, such operation; or otherwise causes or significantly contributes to violation of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit; 
(B)  The limitations set forth in this subchapter may be unreasonably restrictive when applied to a specific industry; and imposing a less stringent limitation will not cause or contribute to violation of any state or federal requirement of law; or 
(C)  Specific standards have been established by the state or federal government for a specific category of industrial customer which would supersede the limitations set forth in this subchapter with respect to such category. 
(Ord. 1994-476, effective 7-12-94)  
Sec. 51.019 - Discharges to natural outlets. 
It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the Town, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the Town, any wastewater, industrial wastes, or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with the provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. 1994-476, effective 7-12-94) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Secs. 51.020—51.029 - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PRIVATE WASTEWATER DISPOSAL 
 
Sec. 51.030 - Permits and operation. 
(A)  Where a public sanitary sewer is not available, as defined in Section 51.015(C) of this chapter, the building sewer shall be connected to a private wastewater disposal system complying with the provisions of this subchapter. 
(B)  Before commencement of construction of a private wastewater disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit from the Town, and from any other public agency having jurisdiction over such matters. 
(C)  (1)  The type, capacities, location, layout, operation and maintenance of a private wastewater disposal system shall comply with all applicable regulations promulgated by any government agency having jurisdiction with respect to the discharge of wastewater into a private wastewater disposal system. 
(2)  An initial inspection of the property in or upon which each individual sewage disposal system is to be placed shall be made by the Town to determine the feasibility of a rural sewage disposal system functioning properly. Percolation tests shall be made in the area of the proposed location of the site of the drainfield by the owner of the property, or the representative, under the direction and supervision of the Town. A permit shall not be issued if, in the opinion of the Town, the proposed disposal system will not function in a sanitary manner due to the lack of porosity of the ground or by reason of inadequate area available for the proposed disposal system. 
(D)  No septic tank, cesspool or other private wastewater treatment or disposal system shall be permitted to discharge effluent to any natural outlet to public sewer. 
(E)  The property owner shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the Town. 
(F)  At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private wastewater disposal system, and direct connection to the public sewer is made in the manner required by this Code, the private wastewater system shall be abandoned and filled in the manner directed by the Town. 
(Ord. 1994-476, effective 7-12-94; Am. Ord. 2019-600 , § 1, effective 4-25-2019) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 51.031 - County regulations incorporated. 
The written departmental regulations promulgated by the County Health Officer pursuant to the county code to obtain compliance with the provisions of this subchapter and to clarify its relations with the laws of the state are hereby incorporated as they now exist, and as they may be amended from time to time by the county. 
(Ord. 1994-476, effective 7-12-94; Am. Ord. 2019-600 , § 1, effective 4-25-2019)  
Sec. 51.032 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2019-600 , § 1, adopted March 26, 2019 and effective April 25, 2019, repealed § 51.032, which pertained to locations and alternative designs and derived from Ord. 1994-476, effective July 12, 1994.  
Secs. 51.033—51.044 - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 51.045 - Standard specifications. 
Standard specifications governing the manner of construction, repair, maintenance and operation of all Town wastewater facilities shall be adopted by resolution of the Town Council. Copies of the standard specifications shall be available for examination during regular business hours of the Town hall and at the office of the Town Engineer. 
(Ord. 1994-476, effective 7-12-94)  
Sec. 51.046 - Building sewers and connections. 
(A)  Permit required. No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connection with or openings into, nor shall they use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the Town and paying all fees and connection charges required by this Code and the Town schedule of fees and charges. 
(B)  Installation costs. All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the Town from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(C)  Separate sewers. A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building except that: 
(1)  Where one building stands at the rear of another and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining way of access the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer. 
(2)  (a)  Where, at July 1, 1994, there are one or more buildings located on the same parcel, which are owned by the same owner, and which are served by the same building sewer, the building may continue to share the building sewer so long as: 
1.  The building sewer continues to provide adequate sewer service to all buildings; and 
2.  The entire parcel remains undivided. 
(b)  If at any time the parcel is divided, that portion of the property not directly connected to the Town wastewater system shall be separately connected to the Town wastewater system with a new building sewer or sewers servicing each building individually. 
(3)  Where it is determined by the Town that it is necessary to do so in order to properly service a single structure or building, more than one building sewer may be required. 
(D)  Cleanouts. Every building sewer shall have an approved cleanout which shall be provided and installed at the property line of the premises in accordance with the applicable Plumbing Code and the Town standard specifications. This shall be in addition to any other cleanout or vents which might be required by said Plumbing Code. 
(E)  Maintenance of building sewers. The property owner shall be solely responsible to maintain the building sewer and related wastewater facilities between the building and the connection with the public sewer; provided, however, if a cleanout meeting the requirements of division (D) of this section has been installed, the Town will maintain the building sewer between the cleanout and the connection with the public sewer. 
(F)  Construction standards. The building sewer for residential property shall be of vitrified clay pipe, cast iron pipe, or approval equal; for non-residential property, the building sewer shall be cast iron pipe or vitrified clay pipe. The maximum nominal pipe length shall be five feet. Pipe specifications shall be in conformance with the technical specifications of the standard specifications approved by the Town Council. Any variations from the standard specifications must be approved by the Town's engineering representative. 
(1)  (a)  All joints and connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Cast iron pipe joints shall be firmly packed with oakum or hemp and filled with molten lead, federal specification (QQ-L-156), not less than one-inch deep. Lead shall be run in one pouring and caulked tight. No paint, varnish, or other coatings shall be permitted on the jointing material until after the joint has been tested and approved. All joints between vitrified clay pipe and metals shall be made with approved hot-poured jointing material or other approved couplings. Material for hot-poured joints shall not soften sufficiently to destroy the effectiveness of the joint when subject to a temperature of 160° F., nor be soluble in any of the wastes carried by the drainage system. The joint shall first be caulked tight with jute, hemp, or similar approved metals. 
(b)  All joints for vitrified clay pipe shall be speed seal in type. Other jointing materials and methods may be used only by approval by the Town's engineering representative. 
(2)  The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made at the "Y" branch, if such branch is available at a suitable location. If no such "Y" branch is available, a service "Y" shall be installed using standard manufacturer's fittings, with entry in the downstream direction at an angle of about 45 degrees. Connection closure shall be standard band seal couplings on service additions. No pipe breaking and concrete patching will be permitted; only neatly snapped or sawcut lengths will be allowed. The invert of the building sewer at the point of connection shall be at the same or at a higher elevation than the invert of the public sewer. A smooth, neat joint shall be made, and the connection laid secure and watertight by encasement in concrete. Special fittings may be used for the connection only when approved by the Town's engineering representative. 
(3)  Whenever possible the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. Changes in direction of the building sewer require a cleanout or properly curved pipe and fittings as approved by the Town's engineering representative. 
(4)  In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary wastewater carried by such drain shall be lifted by approved artificial means and discharged to the building sewer. In areas where a stoppage in a Town sewer may cause a backflow into the building sewer, it shall be the responsibility of the property owner to install an adequate backflow prevention device on private property in accordance with Section 51.048 of this chapter. Responsibility for construction, operation, and maintenance of wastewater facilities located on private property shall be the sole obligation of the property owner. 
(5)  All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barriers and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the Town or its representative and to any governmental agency having jurisdiction thereof. 
(6)  When required by the Town, the owner of any property served by a building sewer carrying non-residential wastes shall install a suitable control manhole in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the Town's engineering representative. The manhole shall be installed by the property owner at the owner's expense, and shall be maintained by the owner at all times. 
(G)  Inspection and testing. All building sewers and the connection of such sewers to the Town wastewater facilities shall be inspected and tested prior to the time physical connection is made. The applicant shall give at least 48 hours advance notice to the Town's engineering representative that the building sewer is ready for inspection. 
(Ord. 1994-476, effective 7-12-94) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 51.047 - Public sewers and appurtenances. 
(A)  Permit required. No person shall construct, extend, alter, use or disturb any wastewater facilities that are intended to become or are wastewater facilities of the Town without first obtaining a written permit from the Town, paying all fees and connection charges, and satisfying all other requirements of this Code; provided, however, that construction performed under contract with the Town shall not require a permit. 
(B)  Design and construction standards. Standards for the design and construction of sewers and other wastewater facilities within the Town shall be in accordance with the Town's standard specifications. The Town's engineering representative, with the consent of the Town Council, may allow modifications or may require higher standards where unusual conditions are encountered. 
(C)  Plans, profiles and specifications required. As more specifically set forth in Sections 51.060 through 51.068 of this chapter, the application for a permit for construction of wastewater facilities shall be accompanied by three complete sets of plans, profiles and specifications, complying with all requirements of this Code, prepared by a civil engineer registered in the state, showing all details of the proposed work based on an accurate survey of the ground. 
(D)  Subdivisions. The requirements of this section shall be fully complied with before any final subdivision map or parcel map may be approved by the Town. 
(E)  Easements or rights-of-way. No wastewater facilities which are to be installed on or in private property shall become public facilities unless they are dedicated to public use and accepted by the Town on such terms as the Town may require. As a condition of accepting wastewater facilities as public facilities, the applicant shall provide such grant deeds of easement to the Town, with rights of ingress and egress, as may be necessary for the Town to enter upon the private property for the purpose of operating and maintaining the facilities. No easement shall be less than ten feet in width. Easements granted to and accepted by the Town shall be recorded in official records of the county as an encumbrance on the private property over which the easement traverses. 
(F)  Persons authorized to perform work. Only properly licensed contractors shall be authorized to construct public wastewater facilities within the Town. All terms and conditions of the permit issued by the Town to the applicant shall be binding on the contractor. The requirements of this section shall apply to building sewers installed concurrently with public sewer construction. 
(G)  Compliance with local regulations. Any person constructing wastewater facilities in or on streets or other public property shall comply with all applicable state, county or Town laws, ordinances, rules and regulations pertaining to the cutting of pavement, opening, barricading, lighting and protecting of trenches, backfilling and repaving, and shall obtain all permits and pay all fees required by the government entity or entities having jurisdiction, prior to the issuance of a permit by the Town. 
(H)  Record drawings. As a condition of final acceptance of the wastewater facilities by the Town, three sets of record drawings showing the actual locations of all mains, structures, wyes, laterals, and any changes to the construction drawings, shall be filed with the Town. 
(I)  Inspection and testing. After approval of the plans by the Town, actual construction may be started and all work shall be performed under the inspection of, and in accordance with, the standard specifications and policies of the Town. All work shall be tested and inspected by the Town or its representative when construction is completed but before use is made of the facilities constructed. Inspection and testing shall be made at such other times as the Town or its representative may require. The applicant shall give 48 hours advance notice to the Town's representative. 
(J)  Reimbursement agreement. Where the cost of the extension of public wastewater facilities has been deposited or paid by the person making such extension, the Town may enter into a reimbursement agreement with that person providing for the collection from subsequent connectors of their prorated share of the cost of the construction of the facilities and for reimbursement on a prorated basis to previous connectors. The agreement shall include a map of the area from which reimbursement will be collected. Such areas will not include connections to further extensions of the facilities. The agreement shall be on such terms as the Town may require and shall be subject to the approval of the Town Council. 
(Ord. 1994-476, effective 7-12-94) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 51.048 - Protection from backflow. 
In all buildings where the sanitary sewer laterals, pipes or piping serve fixtures located below the level of the top of the nearest upgrade manhole of the Town's main sewer, said building shall be protected from backflow of sewage by the installation of an appropriate number of backflow prevention devices, in accordance with the Town's standard specifications, of a type and in the manner approved by the Town's engineering representative. These devices shall be located in such manner as to be accessible for inspection and repair at all times and, unless continuously exposed by suspension inside the building, shall be enclosed in a watertight masonry pit fitted with a removable cover. 
(Ord. 1994-476, effective 7-12-94) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Secs. 51.049—51.059 - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - PERMITS 
 
Sec. 51.060 - Permits required. 
(A)  Wastewater discharges. No unauthorized person shall do any of the following acts without first having obtained a written permit from the Town: 
(1)  Construct or use any private wastewater disposal system. 
(2)  Uncover, make any connection with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof. 
(3)  Reestablish use of any private wastewater disposal system where such use has been discontinued for a period of one year or more. 
(4)  Reestablish service to any premises served by the public sewers, where use of the public sewers has been discontinued for a period of one year or more. 
(5)  Increase the volume of discharge of wastewater from any premises into the public sewers or into a private wastewater disposal system beyond the volume authorized for such premises under any previously issued permit. 
(6)  Change the nature of the discharge of wastewater from any premises into the public sewers or into a private wastewater disposal system beyond the nature of the discharge authorized for such premises under any previously issued permit. 
(7)  Do any other act for which a permit is required pursuant to this Code. 
(B)  Other permits. Where any provision of this Code requires a permit to be issued before action may be taken in respect to connection to wastewater facilities, but the requirements applicable to the permit are not established in this subchapter, the permit shall be subject to such requirements as may be determined by the Town Council. 
(Ord. 1994-476, effective 7-12-94) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 51.061 - Pre-existing discharges. 
For the purposes of Section 51.060(A)(1) through (6) of this chapter, premises which have been legally connected to the public sewers or to a private wastewater disposal system but as to which no connection permit has ever been issued shall be deemed to have been authorized the volume and nature of discharge which existed as of July 1, 1994. 
(Ord. 1994-476, effective 7-12-94)  
Sec. 51.062 - Permit requirements and conditions. 
(A)  Permit requirements. No permit shall be issued until all of the following requirements have been satisfied: 
(1)  The applicant has submitted a properly completed application on a form supplied by the Town, together with any other information, including plans and specifications, which may be required to enable the Town to properly evaluate the application. The applicant's signature on applications for any permit shall constitute an agreement to comply with all of the provisions of this Code and other rules and regulations of the Town and with the plans and specifications for the project as approved. 
(2)  The applicant has made application to the Town for a building permit applicable to the proposed project and said building permit application has been deemed complete by the Town. 
(3)  It has been determined by the Town that: 
(a)  The real property to be served is within the Town's sewer service area, which area is consistent with the general plan and adopted by resolution of the Town Council; 
(b)  The proposed project is not prohibited or precluded by the regulations of the Town or of any other government agency having jurisdiction over wastewater disposal within the Town; 
(c)  The Town's wastewater facilities have the capacity to accommodate the quantity and quality of wastewater to be produced by the proposed project; 
(d)  No extension of the Town's collection facilities is required to serve the proposed project or, if required, that the applicant has satisfied all requirements of the Town for extending the collection facilities to the vicinity of the project site. All costs necessary for acquisition, construction, and installation of the facilities shall be borne by the applicant, provided, however, that the Town may enter into reimbursement agreements with applicants as provided in Section 51.047(J) of this chapter; and 
(e)  If required, any easements necessary for the Town to operate and maintain public facilities installed in private property have been granted and accepted by the Town. 
(4)  The applicant has paid all fees and charges imposed by the Town to process and consider the application. 
(B)  Conditions. Where the interests of the Town would be served, the Town Council may, in its discretion: 
(1)  Impose additional requirements upon an applicant which must be satisfied before the permit will be issued; 
(2)  Authorize issuance of the permit subject to satisfaction of conditions to be established subsequently; failure to satisfy such conditions is grounds for the Town to revoke the permit and discontinue any use authorized by the permit; and 
(3)  Waive compliance by the applicant with requirements or conditions previously imposed. 
(Ord. 1994-476, effective 7-12-94) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 51.063 - Classes of sewer permits; information required. 
(A)  Types of sewer permits. 
(1)  There shall be three classes of sewer permits: 
(a)  Class 1 — Residential occupancies. Applies to all residential uses including second units. Includes connections to either private wastewater disposal systems or public sewers. 
(b)  Class 2 — Non-residential uses. Applies to all uses other than residential. 
(c)  Class 3 — Facilities construction. Required for the construction of sewer mains, pumping stations and other wastewater facilities to be dedicated to the Town. 
(2)  After the Town's acceptance of a sewer system constructed pursuant to a Class 3 permit, but prior to connection of and discharge into the Town's wastewater facilities, a Class 1 or Class 2 permit, as applicable, must be obtained by the applicant. 
(B)  Information required by type of sewer permit. 
(1)  Class 1. The following information is required of all applicants for Class 1 sewer permits: 
(a)  Legal description of the real property to be served including street address, lot number, block number, name of subdivision, assessor's parcel number and the parcel volume and page number according to the parcel map. 
(b)  Type of work to be done including the kind of building to be connected, whether it is a new connection, a repair or other type of work, and the building department permit number. 
(c)  The owner's name, address and phone number. 
(d)  The contractor's name, address and phone number. 
(e)  Any additional information which the County Health Department may require, or which the Town may require due to the nature of the project. This information may include plans as required for Class 2 permits. 
(f)  The signature of the applicant, including the applicant's address and telephone number, if not the owner or contractor. 
(2)  Class 2. The following information shall be required of all applicants for a Class 2 sewer permit. 
(a)  Applicant's business name. 
(b)  Address of premises discharging wastewater, including the assessor's parcel number. 
(c)  The standard industrial classification of applicant's business and the number of the classification. 
(d)  The applicant's name, mailing address and telephone number. 
(e)  The engineer's/contractor's name, address and telephone number. 
(f)  The volume of wastewater proposed to be discharged. 
(g)  Any additional information which the Town may require due to the nature of the project. 
(h)  The signature of the applicant. 
(3)  Class 3. The following information shall be required of all applicants for a Class 3 sewer permit: 
(a)  The name of the owner or the owner's agent making application. 
(b)  The location of the project. 
(c)  The name and address of the engineer. 
(d)  The name and address of the owner. 
(e)  The name and address of the contractor. 
(f)  Maps, plans, profiles and other information as required by the Town. These maps, plans, profiles, and other documents shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer; they shall show the location and boundary lines of the property to be sewered and of each tract, lot, or parcel therein, together with existing and proposed streets, roads, highways, easements and rights-of-way within and immediately contiguous with the property, and shall show the proposed connections with the Town's sewer system. The profile shall accurately show the proposed sewer or other proposed facilities, existing ground surface elevations and existing utilities (surface and subsurface) together with such changes as may result from subsequent grading, filling, road construction and the like. 
(g)  A notice of exemption, negative declaration or final environmental impact report, which is applicable, as determined by the Town or other lead agency for the project pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act. 
(h)  The signature and address of the applicant. 
(Ord. 1994-476, effective 7-12-94)  
Sec. 51.064 - Permit for resumption of use. 
Any person seeking to reconnect to wastewater facilities after the premises have been disconnected for more than one year shall obtain a permit for that purpose. The applicant shall supply the information describing the applicant's use corresponding to the application that would be required if the applicant were applying for a new use and shall pay fees and charges required in the Town resolution establishing fees and charges. 
(Ord. 1994-476, effective 7-12-94)  
Sec. 51.065 - Permit fees. 
No permit shall be issued until all applicable fees and charges, including inspection fees, and, if applicable, deposits or connection charges established pursuant to this Code and the Town fee resolution shall have first been paid. 
(Ord. 1994-476, effective 7-12-94)  
Sec. 51.066 - Compliance with permit required. 
After issuance of the permit, no change shall be made in the approved plans and specifications for the wastewater facilities except with the written permission of the Town Engineer. 
(Ord. 1994-476, effective 7-12-94)  
Sec. 51.067 - Expiration and extension of permits. 
(A)  Expiration. 
(1)  A sewer permit issued under this subchapter shall remain in effect for a period of six months from the date it is issued. After that time, the permit shall expire automatically unless on the expiration date: the action authorized by the permit has been completed; the permit has been extended by the Town; or the applicant has obtained and is maintaining in effect all permits, including a building permit, and any other government approvals necessary for the applicant to pursue the proposed project to completion. If at any time, any of the other necessary permits or government approvals for the proposed project are revoked or are allowed to lapse, the permit shall also be revoked or shall lapse, as the case may be, automatically. Fees and charges previously paid are not refundable. 
(2)  If any sewer permit issued by the Town expires, is revoked or allowed to lapse, the applicant may not proceed with the proposed project until a new permit has been obtained from the Town. In that event, the applicant shall satisfy all requirements and conditions which the Town imposes, including payment of application and inspection fees and other applicable charges. The applicant shall not be entitled to a credit for any fees or charges previously paid. 
(B)  Extension. The Town may extend permits for additional periods of six months upon a showing of good cause, and upon a determination by the Town that sufficient capacity to serve the applicant's project continues to exist in the Town's wastewater facilities; and the Town will not be adversely affected by the extension of the permit. No person shall be entitled to an extension of a permit as a matter of right. Extensions for good cause will be granted only upon a showing of exceptional circumstances peculiar to the applicant and not generally applicable to other persons similarly situated. An extension may be denied if the applicant fails to provide any documents or information reasonably deemed by the Town to be necessary to its consideration of the request. 
(Ord. 1994-476, effective 7-12-94)  
Sec. 51.068 - Transferability. 
(A)  Class 1 and Class 2 sewer permits may be transferred from one applicant to another upon written notice to the Town. The transferee of such a permit shall comply with requirements and conditions imposed by the Town with respect to the permit. No other permits may be transferred from one person to another without approval of the Town. 
(B)  A permit issued for use in connection with a particular premises or a particular project may not be transferred so as to be used in connection with other premises or another project. 
(C)  The Town may revoke any permit purported to have been transferred in violation of this section. 
(Ord. 1994-476, effective 7-12-94)  
Secs. 51.069—51.079 - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - RATES AND CHARGES 
 
Sec. 51.080 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the sewer service charge is to raise revenue for the costs of maintenance, operation, construction, and reconstruction of the Town's wastewater facilities used for the collection, conveyance, treatment, and disposal of wastewater, and for other expenditures deemed necessary by the Town and not prohibited by applicable state or federal law or regulations. 
(1975 Code, § 6-5.301) (Ord. 1988-369, effective 7-22-88)  
Sec. 51.081 - Users subject to charge. 
All premises connected to the Town's wastewater system are subject to the sewer service charge. 
(1975 Code, § 6-5.302) (Ord. 1988-369, effective 7-22-88)  
Sec. 51.082 - Rate schedule. 
Sewer rates shall be set by resolution of the Town Council. 
(1975 Code, § 6-5.303) (Ord. 1988-369, effective 7-22-88; Am. Ord. 1993-470, effective 7-21-93; Am. Ord. 1994-474, effective 6-22-94; Am. Ord. 1995-480, effective 7-19-95; Am. Ord. 1996-485, effective 7-26-96; Am. Ord. 1999-495, effective 7-22-99; Am. Ord. 2001-511, effective 8-23-01; Am. Ord. 2004-522, effective 5-13-04; Am. Ord. 2013-560, effective 5-9-13)  
Sec. 51.083 - Determination of quantity of wastewater in special situations. 
Upon application to the Town by users maintaining extensive irrigated landscaping or in other situations where it can be conclusively established that the metered water consumption is not a valid measure of the quantity of wastewater discharged, the quantity of wastewater to be used in determining the yearly rate shall be determined by the Town. 
(1975 Code, § 6-5.304) (Ord. 1988-369, effective 7-22-88)  
Sec. 51.084 - Vacant premises. 
No credit, adjustment or refund shall be made to any user because the premises or any part thereof are vacant, unless said premises are disconnected from the sewer system. 
(1975 Code, § 6-5.305) (Ord. 1988-369, effective 7-22-88)  
Sec. 51.085 - Effective date of charges. 
Charges and rates established by this section shall be effective upon the date specified by the Town and shall apply to all premises connected at that time to the Town's wastewater system. Premises which are connected to the system after the effective date shall be subject to the sewer connection; such charge shall be billed directly. 
(1975 Code, § 6-5.306) (Ord. 1988-369, effective 7-22-88)  
Sec. 51.086 - Responsibility for payment. 
The owner of any premises is deemed the legal user of sewer services and shall be responsible for payment of any and all sewer service charges applicable to the premises. It shall also be and is hereby made the duty of all owners of all premises to inform the Town immediately of all circumstances, and of any change or changes in any circumstances, which will in any way affect the applicability of any charge to said premises or amount of any such charge. 
(1975 Code, § 6-5.307) (Ord. 1988-369, effective 7-22-88)  
Sec. 51.087 - Collection of sewer service charges on tax roll. 
(A)  Pursuant to the provisions of Cal. Health & Safety Code Division 5, Part 3, §§ 5470 et seq., but subject to the provisions of this section, the Town hereby elects, as the primary procedure for the collection of sewer service charges prescribed or imposed by the provisions of this section, to have all such sewer service charges for each fiscal year collected on the tax roll of the County of San Mateo in the same manner, by the same persons and at the same time as property taxes, assessments and other charges collected thereon. 
(B)  A written report shall be prepared and filed with the Town Clerk setting forth a description of each parcel of real property, inside or outside the district, upon which is situated a premises which receives the sewer service and facilities of the Town and the amount of charge for each parcel for the year, computed in conformity with the charges prescribed by this section. 
(C)  The Town Clerk shall cause notice of the filing of the report and of a time and place for hearing thereon to be published prior to the date set for hearing in a newspaper of general circulation published within the Town. The publication of notice shall be once a week for two successive weeks. Publications shall be made with at least five days intervening between the respective publication dates not counting such publication dates. A minimum of two public notices shall be published in a newspaper circulated more than once a week. In newspapers which circulate once a week, the public notice shall be published in each circulation for two successive weeks. The period of notice commences upon the first day of publication and terminates at the end of the fourteenth day, including therein the first day. 
(D)  At the time stated in the above mentioned notice, the Town shall hear and consider all objections or protests, if any, to the report referred to in the notice and may continue the hearing from time to time. If the Town finds that protest is made by a majority of separate parcels of property described in the report, then the report shall not be adopted and the charges shall be collected separately from the tax roll and shall not constitute a lien against any parcel or parcels of land. 
(E)  Upon the conclusion of the hearing, the Town may adopt, revise, change, reduce or modify any charge or overrule any or all objections, excepting objections from a majority as described in division (D) above, and shall make its determination upon each charge as described in said report, which determination shall be final. 
(F)  On or before the tenth day of August of each year following such final determination, the Town Clerk shall file with the Controller of the County of San Mateo a copy of said report with a statement endorsed thereon over his/her or her signature stating that the report has been finally adopted by the Town in order that the Controller of the County of San Mateo shall be able to enter the amounts of the charges against the respective lots or parcels of land as they appear on the current assessment roll and in order that such charges may be collected on the tax roll in accordance with the provisions of Cal. Health & Safety Code §§ 5473.5 through 5473.11. 
(G)  Except as provided in Cal. Health & Safety Code § 5473.8, the amount of the charges shall constitute a lien against the lot or parcel of land against which the charge has been imposed as of the date prescribed by law as the lien for property taxes. 
(1975 Code, § 6-5.308) (Ord. 1988-369, effective 7-22-88)  
Sec. 51.088 - Direct billing; penalties for nonpayment. 
If the full amount of sewer service charges for premises connected to or discharging wastewater into the Town sewer system are, for any reason, not collected, the sewer service charges, or the portion thereof not appearing on the tax rolls, shall be collected by direct billing of the property owner. The provisions of this division shall also apply to sewer service charges accruing after a new connection to the Town's wastewater facilities, in which case the annual charge shall be prorated over the period of time from the date of the new connection to the end of the fiscal year. 
(A)  Billing. The Town shall ascertain the amount of each sewer service charge applicable to such premises and shall mail to the owner and/or owner and lessee thereof, within 60 days from and after the date of any sewer service charges become due and payable, a bill for the sewer service charges which are then due and payable. Such bill shall be mailed to the person or persons listed as the owners on the last equalized assessment role of the County of San Mateo at the address shown on the assessment role, or to the successor in interest and/or the lessee of such owner, if the name and address of each successor in interest or lessee is known to the Town. Each bill so mailed shall contain a statement that a delinquency in payment for 60 days shall constitute a lien against the lot or parcel against which the charge is imposed and that when recorded it shall have the force, effect and priority of a judgment lien for three years unless sooner released or otherwise discharged. Failure of the Town to mail any such bill or failure of owner to receive any such bill, shall not excuse the owner of any premises from the obligation of paying any sewer service charge for any premises owned by him/her. 
(B)  How payable. Each sewer service charge to be collected by direct billing shall be due and payable in full at the time of billing; provided, however, if in any fiscal year, a sewer service charge is payable for a period covering eight months, or more, of the fiscal year, the sewer service charge shall be billed in two installments with the first installment covering the period for which a sewer service charge is owned during the first six months of the fiscal year, and the second installment covering the remaining six months of the fiscal year. 
(C)  Delinquency date of sewer service charges. Each sewer service charge shall be delinquent if not paid on or before the thirtieth day of the month following the date upon which such sewer service charge became due and payable. 
(D)  Where payable. Sewer service charges collected by direct billing shall be payable at the administrative office of the Town, as noted in the billing. 
(E)  Penalties for non-payment of sewer service charges - lien. Whenever a delinquency shall occur for non-payment of sewer service charges, a penalty of ten percent shall attach to such charges, and for each month that such charges remain delinquent a further penalty of 1½ percent of said basic charge shall be added. 
(1975 Code, § 6-5.310) (Ord. 1988-369, effective 7-22-88)  
Sec. 51.089 - Use of revenues. 
Revenues derived under this section shall be used only for the acquisition, construction or reconstruction, maintenance and operation of sanitation or sewage facilities of the Town and to repay the principal and interest on bonds issued for the construction of such sanitary or sewage facilities and to repay the federal or state loans or advances made to the Town for the construction or reconstruction of sanitary or sewage facilities; provided, however, that such revenue shall not be used for the acquisition or construction of new local street sewers or laterals, as distinguished from main trunk, interceptor and outfall sewers. 
(1975 Code, § 6-5.309) (Ord. 1988-369, effective 7-22-88)  
Secs. 51.090—51.099 - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 51.100 - Right of entry of Town Officials. 
The Town's representatives bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing, in accordance with the provisions of this Code. The Town's representatives are further empowered to ascertain the nature of such premises, the type of activities carried on therein, the number and type of plumbing fixtures situated therein, and any other facts and information reasonable necessary to carry out of the provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. 1994-476, effective 7-12-94)  
Sec. 51.101 - Corrections of violations. 
(A)  Notification of unauthorized discharges. Every customer shall notify the Town immediately upon discharging wastes or wastewater in violation of the provisions of this Code, or any permit issued pursuant to this Code. A customer who discharges, causes to be discharged, or permits to be discharged such wastes or wastewater shall, within 15 days of the occurrence thereof, submit a written report to the Town describing the cause or causes of such unauthorized discharge, and measures taken, or proposed to be taken, to prevent future similar occurrences. Such report shall not relieve any customer of liability for any expense, loss, or damage suffered or incurred by the Town or other government agency, directly or indirectly, by reason of such unauthorized discharge. Such report shall not relieve or absolve any person from civil liabilities, or imposition of civil or criminal penalties in any manner whatsoever. 
(B)  Notices to employees regarding unauthorized discharges. Every non-residential customer shall prominently post a notice on the customer's premises advising of the requirement to notify the Town of any unauthorized discharge, including telephone number of the Town to be called in the event of such discharge. The Town may require any customer to inform and advise the customer's officers, agents, and employees of the provisions of this Code, or the provisions of any permit issued pursuant to this Code, or of other requirements of law, or of any other information which may be of assistance in ensuring compliance with said Code, permit, or other requirements of law. 
(C)  Cease and desist orders. Upon a determination by the Town that a discharge of waste or wastewater has occurred, or is occurring, or is about to occur, in violation of any provisions of this Code, or of any provision of any permit issued pursuant to this Code, the Town may issue an order to cease and desist such discharge, or any practice or operation likely to cause such discharge, and further order such person to: 
(1)  Comply forthwith with the provisions of this Code, or the provisions of any permit issued pursuant to this Code; 
(2)  Comply in accordance with a time schedule established by the Town; and/or 
(3)  Take appropriate remedial or preventative action. 
(D)  Time schedules. Upon a determination by the Town that a discharge of waste or wastewater has occurred, or is occurring or is about to occur in violation of the provisions of this Code, or in violation of any provision of a permit issued pursuant to this Code, the Town may require the person or customer having so discharged, or discharging, or about to discharge, to submit for approval, subject to such modifications, terms and conditions as the Town reasonably deems necessary or appropriate, a detailed time schedule of specific actions which the person or customer shall take in order to eliminate or prevent such violation(s). In order to enforce the provisions of this Code, with respect to Section 51.016 of this chapter, grease, oil and sand interceptors and limitations imposed by Section 51.017(I)(2) of this chapter, existing discharging are required to have interceptors in place and functional by December 31, 1994. 
(E)  Damage to wastewater facilities or emergency corrections. 
(1)  In the event repairs, construction, or other public work is performed on any premises pursuant to any provision of law authorizing the emergency performance of public work and the expenditure of public funds therefor, or pursuant to any other provision of law authorizing public work on private property in order to correct, eliminate or abate a condition upon such premises which threatens to cause, causes, or caused damage to the wastewater facilities, or which otherwise threatens to cause, causes, or caused a violation of any provision of this Code, or of any other requirement of law, the customer responsible for the occurrence or condition giving rise to such work, the occupant and the owner of the premises shall be liable, jointly and severally to the Town and/or any other affected government agency for such public expenditures. 
(2)  In order to enforce the provision of this Code, the Town may correct any violation. The cost of such correction may be added to any sewer service charge payable by the person violating the Code or the owner or tenant of the property upon which the violation occurred, and the Town shall have such remedies for the collection of such costs as it has for the collection of sewer service charges. The Town may also petition the Superior Court for the issuance of a preliminary or permanent injunction, or both, as may be appropriate, restraining any person from the continued violation of this Code. 
(F)  Court injunctions. Upon a determination by the Town that a discharge of waste or wastewater has occurred, or is occurring, or is about to occur in violation of the provisions of this Code, or in violation of any provision of a permit issued pursuant to this Code, and further that the customer, occupant or owner of the premises has not complied with the provisions of a duly issued cease and desist order as prescribed in division (C) of this section or has not complied with the terms and conditions of a time schedule as described in division (D) of this section, approved by the Town, then the violation shall be reviewed by the Town Council which may request a court injunction in order to compel the customer, occupant, or owner of said premises to do or to refrain from doing a specified act, or acts in order to prevent or to correct the violation. 
(Ord. 1994-476, effective 7-12-94) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 51.102 - Termination of service. 
In order to effect its powers, and subject to the provisions of this section, the Town may terminate sanitary wastewater service to any premises from which wastes or wastewater have been discharged, are being discharged, or are threatened to be discharged in violation of any provision of this Code, or because of a delinquency in the payment of any charge or fee assessed by the Town, or because of a violation of any other requirement of law or this Code. 
(A)  Notification/hearing. Prior to termination of service, the Town shall notify, in writing, the owner and tenant, if any, of such property that service is intended to be terminated, which notice shall state the date of proposed termination of service, the reason(s) therefor, and the date, time and place of a hearing to be held by the Town Council upon the question of the termination. Such notice shall be mailed to the owner at the address shown on the records of the assessor of the county or as known to the Town, and a copy shall be delivered to the tenant or posted conspicuously on the property. The hearing shall be held not less than ten days after notice is given as herein described; it may be held at any regular or special meeting of the Town Council. The Town Council shall make such order as it deems appropriate under the circumstances and in furtherance of the purposes and intent of this Code. 
(B)  Imminent threat. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any unauthorized connection with or opening into the public sanitary wastewater system or appurtenance or discharge thereof into the wastewater facilities may be abated by the Town without notice of such unauthorized connection or opening or discharge poses an imminent threat of damage to the Town's wastewater facilities or of injury to the public health, safety and welfare. 
(C)  Public hazard or nuisance. In the event a disconnection from the wastewater facilities would create a public hazard or nuisance, the Town's representatives may enter upon the premises for the purpose of doing such things as may be reasonably necessary to alleviate or remove such hazard or menace. The owner of such premises shall have a duty to reimburse the Town for all expenses incurred by the Town in disconnecting any such premises, or in doing other things authorized by this section; and no reconnection shall be made until all such charges are paid. 
(Ord. 1994-476, effective 7-12-94)  
Sec. 51.103 - Revocation of permits. 
(A)  Subject to the procedures set forth in division (B) of this section, the Town Council may revoke any permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this Code upon a determination by the Town Council that: 
(1)  The permittee has failed to factually report the wastewater constituents, characteristics, or volume of the permitted wastewater discharge; 
(2)  The permittee has failed to report significant or substantial changes in the operations conducted upon the premises to which the permit pertains, or significant or substantial changes in wastewater constituents, characteristics, or volumes pertaining to said premises; 
(3)  The permittee has refused, or failed to permit, reasonable access to the premises to which the permit pertains; or 
(4)  The permittee has violated, caused to be violated, or allowed to be violated, any term, condition, or provision of the permit. 
(B)  Prior to revocation of the permit, the Town shall notify, in writing, the owner and tenant, the customer and alleged violator that the permit is intended to be revoked, which notice shall state the date of the proposed revocation, the reason(s) therefor, and the date, time and place a hearing shall be held by the Town Council upon the question of revocation of the permit. Such notice shall be mailed to the owner at the address shown on the records of the assessor of the county, or as known to the Town, and a copy shall be delivered to the tenant or posted conspicuously on the property. Such hearing shall not be held less than ten days subsequent to the giving of notice as herein described; it may be held at any regular or special meeting of the Town Council. The Town Council shall make such order as it deems appropriate under the circumstances and in furtherance of the purpose and intent of the permit and other provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. 1994-476, effective 7-12-94)  
Sec. 51.104 - Discharges constituting public nuisance. 
Any discharge or threatened discharge, or any condition which is in any manner in violation of the provisions of this Code, or of any permit issued pursuant to this Code, or of any order or directive of an authorized shall be, and the same is hereby declared to be, unlawful and a public nuisance. Such nuisance may be abated, removed, or enjoined, and damages assessed therefor, in any manner provided by law. 
(Ord. 1994-476, effective 7-12-94)  
Sec. 51.105 - Remedies cumulative. 
The remedies provided in this Code shall be cumulative and not exclusive, and shall be in addition to any or all other remedies available to the Town or to other government agencies. 
(Ord. 1994-476, effective 7-12-94)  
Sec. 51.106 - Waivers. 
(A)  Grants. Subject to the provisions of this section, the Town Council may grant waivers from compliance with the provisions of this Code. 
(B)  Applications. Applications for waivers shall be submitted in writing and shall be considered and acted upon by the Town Council. The Town Council may schedule a public hearing on such application, in which event the Town shall cause notice of the public hearing to be given in such manner as it determines is adequate in the circumstances. 
(C)  Limitations. No waiver shall be granted if such action would result in a violation of any statute, regulation, order, or other provision of law promulgated or enacted by a federal, state, or local government entity having jurisdiction over the matter in question. 
(D)  Necessary determinations. 
(1)  A waiver may be granted only upon a determination by the Town Council that: 
(a)  In the absence of the waiver, the strict application of the provisions of this Code would result in a substantial hardship peculiar to the applicant and not generally applicable to other persons similarly situated; 
(b)  Granting of the waiver is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment by the applicant of substantial personal and/or property rights possessed by other persons similarly situated; 
(c)  Granting of the waiver will not constitute a special privilege of the applicant; and 
(d)  Granting of the waiver will not be materially detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare, nor will it result in undue hardships to other persons. 
(2)  If the Town makes such a determination, it shall adopt a resolution granting the waiver, which resolution shall include therein findings of fact supporting the Council's determination. 
(E)  Burden of proof. The burden of establishing facts to support the necessary determinations for a waiver shall be upon the applicant. The Town Council may deny any application if the applicant fails to supply relevant information, including documents and records, required by the Town Council in order to make the necessary determinations. 
(F)  Fees; conditions. In addition to the application fee required by Section 51.065 of this chapter, reasonable fees and charges may be imposed by resolution to cover the cost to the Town of considering an application for a waiver, including the costs of giving notice of a public hearing, the costs of engineering and legal services, and the like. The Town Council may also require the applicant to satisfy reasonable requirements as a condition of granting a waiver. 
(Ord. 1994-476, effective 7-12-94)  
Sec. 51.107 - Sewage system equalization fee. 
In addition to any other applicable fees and charges established by the Town, there shall be collected, prior to issuance of a permit by the Town, to allow connection to the sewer system of the Cañada Corridor Sanitary Sewer Service Area (the "service area"), a sewer system equalization fee known as the Special Equalization Charge ("SEC"), to equalize conditions between those properties originally participating in the financing and those properties seeking to connect to the Town's facilities in the service area which did not participate in the original financing, and to thereby contribute to repayment of the Town's loans for said sewer system construction, or to the capital repair and reconstruction of the system, maintenance of the system, and to reimburse funds advanced for the initial construction of the said sewer system by the Town or its agents. 
(Ord. 1997-490, effective 11-13-97; Am. Ord. 2004-523, effective 5-13-04)  
Sec. 51.108 - Amount of fee. 
The SEC shall be composed of three parts: 
(A)  The cost for one single-family residential equivalent benefit unit ("benefit") in the service area. The benefit will be determined by the Town Manager prior to the Town's acceptance of the completed sewer construction project, and shall include all costs, including but not limited to, developer contracts, inspections, design, engineering, and Town staff and overhead. The benefit cost will be filed with the Town Clerk; 
(B)  A construction cost inflator, which will be the Engineer News Records - Construction Cost Index for the San Francisco Bay Area from January 2004 to the time of application, times the cost of the benefit (as defined in (A) above); and 
(C)  A processing fee, adjusted by the change in the San Francisco Bay Area Consumer Price Index ("CPI") for the period of time from January 1, 2004, to the time of application. The processing cost shall initially be $1,000.00. 
(Ord. 1997-490, effective 11-13-97; Am. Ord. 2004-523, effective 5-13-04)  
Sec. 51.109 - Dedication of funds. 
Funds acquired by the Town through the collection of the SEC shall be segregated in the Town's Sewer Funds and earmarked for use only for payment of the Town loan, or to be used for capital repair or capital improvements to the service area's sewer system, or to reimburse funds advanced for the initial construction of the said sewer system. 
(Ord. 1997-490, effective 11-13-97; Am. Ord. 2004-523, effective 5-13-04)  
Sec. 51.110 - Additional fees/collection of fees. 
The SEC shall be collected by Town Staff and shall be in addition to all other applicable fees, including then current sewer connection fees, and building permit fees. 
(Ord. 1997-490, effective 11-13-97; Am. Ord. 2004-523, effective 5-13-04)  
Secs. 51.111—51.119 - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - SEWER SERVICE ALLOCATION REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 51.120 - Purpose of sewer service allocation regulations. 
(A)  On May 23, 1968 the Town established the Redwood Creek Trunk Sewer Assessment District (hereinafter RCS), with sewer capacity established through the Fair Oaks Sewer Maintenance District (hereinafter FOSD) at 150,000 gallons per day. 
(B)  In 1987 the Town established the Town Center Sewer Assessment District (hereinafter TCAD) with sewer capacity now established through Redwood City at 100,000 gallons per day. 
(C)  The Town has allocated sewer service in the RCS and the TCAD to parcels where the owners were assessed full assessments. 
(D)  The Town has an adopted "Master Plan of Proposed Local Sanitary Sewer Facilities in the Redwood Creek Main Trunk Sewer Service Area", dated May 1974 (hereinafter the Master Plan), which requires that sewer service be available to parcels in the RCS for implementation of the Master Plan. 
(E)  The Town previously estimated in Ordinance 1998-491 that there were approximately 13,500 gallons per day of estimated excess sewer capacity in the RCS beyond capacity being used or reserved for parcels with Full Assessments. The estimated excess sewer capacity would allow for up to 54 residential equivalent units or residential connections to the RCS based on an estimated 250 gallons per day of sewer usage per residential household. 
(F)  The Town has conducted a study of residential water usage in the RCS for the years 1995-99 during the wet weather months of January, February, and March when internal water usage closely matches sewer flow. The Town has determined that residential sewer usage in the RCS averages approximately 291.9 gallons per day per household. This substantially exceeds the previous estimate of 250 gallons per day which was the basis for the finding in Ordinance 1998-491 of excess sewer capacity. 
(G)  There are 299 residential connections to the RCS which at 291.9 gallons per day is equal to 87,278 gallons per day of sewer usage. 
(H)  There remain 254 residential properties, with paid Full Assessments for which the Town is required to reserve capacity to connect to the RCS. These properties represent a minimum potential of 74,143 gallons per day of sewer usage. 
(I)  At present, based on empirical data as to sewer usage in the RCS, there is no excess sewer capacity in the RCS. Accordingly, the sewer allocation program adopted by the Town in Ordinance 1998-491 requires modification. 
(J)  The Town Council finds that these sewer service allocation regulations are consistent with the Town's General Plan, particularly with: 
(1)  General Policy P7 which states: "Utility lines and other services shall not be extended in advance of need," and 
(2)  Public Utility Policy P14 which states: "Individual on-site sewage disposal systems meeting Town standards and requirements shall be used for sewage disposal except where: 
(a)  Such systems are precluded because of adverse conditions such as low soil permeability or high water table; and 
(b)  Parcels lie within the service area of an existing sanitary sewer system, as designated by the Town. 
Where conditions (a) and (b) prevail, these properties, if developed, shall be served by a public sewer system, if capacity is available and connection is authorized by the Town. If a public system is not available, then it is possible that either: 
(1)  Specially designed individual systems may be considered, or 
(2)  Development may be limited or prohibited.", and 
(3)  Public Utilities Policy P22: "Connection to a sanitary sewer may be required of all lots or parcels located in an area where a local collector system is provided in an established public sewer service area, if a health or safety hazard exists or is likely to exist in the future," and 
(4)  Public Utilities Policy P23: "The Town shall attempt to assure that service remains available for any properties included in sewer assessment districts, to the extent of the assessment and within the sewer capacity limits of service providers. Authority to permit additional connections within a sewer service area or assessment district rests with the Town Council, prior to final approval by the service provider." 
(K)  The Town has reviewed its records pertaining to the May 23, 1968 formation of the RCS and has identified only one situation involving parcels with Partial Assessments that: (a) were in common ownership as of the formation of the RCS, (b) were undeveloped but separated by a developed parcel with a Full Assessment, all in the same ownership, and (c) were not contiguous and therefore not capable of being merged to create a Full Assessment in the RCS without a subdivision or lot line adjustment involving the center parcel. 
(L)  The Town has limited available contractual sewer capacity from Redwood City for the Town Center Sewer Assessment District that can be temporarily allocated to properties with failed or failing on-site septic systems pursuant to this chapter. 
(M)  There are parcels within the Town's jurisdictional boundaries which have failed or failing on-site septic systems that are potentially creating a public health concern and which are not within or contiguous to either the RCS or the TCAD, but which are contiguous to the Fair Oaks Sewer Maintenance District Service Area. 
(Ord. 1998-491, effective 7-9-98; Am. Ord. 1999-500, effective 1-13-00; Am. Ord. 2000-501, effective 3-9-00; Am. Ord. 2007-537, effective 5-24-07)  
Sec. 51.121 - Definitions. 
In addition to the definitions in Section 51.002, the following definitions shall apply: 
Common ownership of a parcel. Shall mean for purposes of this chapter, record title to two or more parcels held in the name of the same person(s) or entity(ies). For purposes of this chapter married persons shall be considered the same person. 
Contiguous parcel. One that shares at any point at least one property line with another parcel that is fully annexed as of the effective date of this section, into either the RCS or the TCAD or the FOSD Service Area. A parcel shall also be deemed "contiguous" if it is located across a right-of-way from a parcel that is fully annexed as of the effective date of this section into either the RCS or the TCAD or the FOSD Service Area, where if the right-of-way did not exist, the parcels would share at least one common point. 
Developed parcel. A parcel on which there is a structure, the use of which structure requires a residential sewer connection to either the RCS or the TCAD, or the FOSD, or a private sanitary sewer (septic) permit from the Town and the County Department of Environmental Health (hereinafter County Health). 
Expanded development. The construction of an addition to a structure or a new structure, on a Developed Parcel that adds at least 100 square feet of living area. 
Fair Oaks Sewer District (FOSD). For purposes of this chapter shall mean that special district organized under the jurisdiction of the County of San Mateo known as the Fair Oaks Sewer Maintenance District; the jurisdictional area of the FOSD, in the Town of Woodside shall comprise those parcels in the Town that have been annexed to the FOSD. 
Full assessment. An assessment levied against a parcel, or one or more contiguous parcels, at the formation of the Redwood Creek Trunk Sewer Assessment District (RCS) in 1968, or the Town Center Sewer Assessment District (TCAD) in 1987. 
New development. The construction of a structure on an Undeveloped Parcel, which requires a residential sewer connection to either the RCS or TCAD, or a private sanitary sewer (septic) permit from the Town and County Health. 
Partial assessment. Less than a full assessment levied against a parcel, or one or more contiguous parcels, at the formation of the Redwood Creek Trunk Sewer Assessment District (RCS) on May 23, 1968, or the Town Center Sewer Assessment District (TCAD) in 1987. 
The Glens. That area comprising approximately 80 acres within the Town located approximately one-half mile north of Woodside Road, and bounded by Canada Road on the west, I-280 on the east, Neuman Lane on the south, and Arbor Court and Jane Drive on the north, and as described in the Woodside Glens Specific Plan adopted June 1, 1993. 
Undeveloped parcel. A parcel on which there is no structure, or there is a structure, the use of which structure does not require a residential sewer connection to either the RCS or TCAD, or a private sanitary sewer (septic) permit from the Town and County Health. 
(Ord. 1998-491, effective 7-9-98; Am. Ord. 1999-500, effective 1-13-00; Am. Ord. 2007-537, effective 5-24-07)  
Sec. 51.122 - Failed septic system. 
A private wastewater disposal system, as provided for in Sections 51.030—51.032 (also hereinafter referred to as "septic systems") which will no longer function in a safe and sanitary manner according to regulations of the Town and County Health shall be considered a failed septic system. The Town Engineer shall find that the existing septic system cannot reasonably be repaired or replaced in a conforming location on the same parcel or a contiguous parcel in common ownership. The septic system's failure shall be determined by the Town Engineer in consultation with County Health, and with Town consultants. 
(Ord. 1998-491, effective 7-9-98; Am. Ord. 1999-500, effective 1-13-00)  
Sec. 51.123 - Sewer service allocation areas. 
For the purposes of this chapter, there shall be three sewer service allocation areas established. 
(A)  Area I — That area comprised of parcels located within the RCS and which are located in the Glens Area. 
(B)  Area II — That area comprised of parcels located within the RCS, excluding the Glens Area, and parcels located within the TCAD. 
(C)  Area III — That area comprised of parcels located outside the RCS and outside the TCAD and which are contiguous parcels to either the RCS or the TCAD or the FOSD. 
(Ord. 1998-491, effective 7-9-98; Am. Ord. 1999-500, effective 1-13-00; Am. Ord. 2007-537, effective 5-24-07)  
Sec. 51.124 - Allocation of sewer service to Area I. 
(A)  A sewer service allocation shall be reserved for any undeveloped parcel which has a paid full assessment in the RCS and which has not yet connected to the RCS. 
(B)  A sewer service allocation may be approved by the Town Council for new development or expanded development where the owner(s) of contiguous parcels with full or partial assessments either by merger of the parcels as provided under Chapter 152 of the Town Code, or subdivision of the parcels, under the Town Code, creates a parcel, or parcels, each with the equivalent of a full assessment and does not leave any developed parcel with less than a full assessment, provided sewer capacity is available. 
(C)  Parcels with existing full or partial assessments shall not be allowed to divide such assessments among different parcels and shall not be allowed to transfer the assessment, or the rights, if any, under such an assessment, from the parcel originally assessed in the RCS, and the assessment shall be deemed to run with the land. An exception shall be permitted for parcels that meet the following conditions: (1) the parcels were in common ownership as of the formation date for the RCS (May 23, 1968), (2) the parcels received partial assessments that when added together constitute a full assessment, (3) the parcels were undeveloped at that time of assessment but separated by a developed parcel with a full assessment, all in the same ownership, and (4) the parcels were and are not contiguous and therefore cannot be merged under Section 151.124(B) of the Town Code because they are not contiguous. In these circumstances, the owner(s) shall be permitted to transfer a partial assessment from one such parcel to another such parcel so that one of the parcels will have a full assessment. 
(D)  No parcel shall be issued a building permit by the Town for new development or expanded development unless a full assessment is or has been acquired for said parcel. A developed parcel that was allowed to connect to the RCS before this section was adopted and which does not have a paid full assessment shall be allowed a building permit for expanded development only if it has paid a connection fee and an equalization fee as set forth in Section 51.127 General Conditions herein. Expanded development which requires additional sewer service capacity shall not be permitted unless unreserved and unallocated sewer service capacity exists. 
(E)  Owners of developed parcels which are connected to the RCS and which have less than a full assessment across all contiguous parcels that were in common ownership at the time of connection may apply to the Town for a full assessment. The full assessment status shall only be permitted where a connection fee and an equalization fee have been paid under Section 51.127 General Conditions. 
(Ord. 1998-491, effective 7-9-98; Am. Ord. 1999-500, effective 1-13-00; Am. Ord. 2000-501, effective 3-9-00)  
Sec. 51.125 - Allocation of sewer service to Area II. 
(A)  Sewer service shall be reserved for all parcels for which there is a paid full assessment and which have not yet connected to the RCS or TCAD sewer systems. 
(B)  Owner(s) of parcels for which there is a paid full assessment shall not be permitted to sell or otherwise transfer the assessment or any rights to sewer service to their parcel except to successors in interest, and the assessment shall be deemed to run with the parcel. 
(C)  In the case of developed parcels with a paid full assessment and which are presently on septic systems, the owner(s) may continue to remain on the septic system until such time as it becomes a failed septic system, at which time the parcel shall connect to the public sewer system. 
(D)  Developed parcels presently connected to the public sewer system in either the RCS or the TCAD shall be required to continue to use the said sewer system. 
(E)  New Development and Expanded Development shall be allowed to use a septic system provided the septic system meets all Town and County Health regulations, provided that expanded development for a parcel on a public sewer shall be required to use only the public sewer. 
(F)  Owners of developed parcels without a paid full assessment, and with a failed septic system may receive a sewer service allocation subject to Town Council approval, with any conditions imposed and the general conditions required by this chapter, based on findings that: (1) the allocation is consistent with the Town's General Plan and any applicable specific plan, and (2) the sewer service capacity is available, and (3) the Town Engineer has determined that the septic system has failed as provided in Section 51.122. At present, unreserved sewer service capacity does not exist within the RCS. Limited temporary capacity is currently available from the TCAD. The Town may, where the findings of this subsection can otherwise be made, and a health and safety emergency exists, allocate temporary sewer service capacity for a developed parcel that has a failed septic system as defined in this chapter. 
(G)  Expanded development shall not be permitted on developed parcels which receive an allocation of temporary sewer service capacity pursuant to this chapter and a restrictive covenant shall be recorded with the County Recorder to so indicate as a condition of the allocation of sewer service capacity. 
(Ord. 1998-491, effective 7-9-98; Am. Ord. 1999-500, effective 1-13-00; Am. Ord. 2007-537, effective 5-24-07)  
Sec. 51.126 - Allocation of sewer service to Area III. 
(A)  Owners of developed parcels with a failed septic system may receive a sewer service allocation, subject to Town Council approval, with any conditions imposed, and the general conditions required by this chapter, based on finding that: (1) the Town Engineer has determined that the septic system has failed and that it is a contiguous parcel, as provided in Section 51.122, (2) the allocation is consistent with the Town's General Plan and any applicable specific plan, and (3) sewer service capacity is available. At present, unreserved sewer service capacity does not exist within the RCS. Limited temporary capacity is currently available from the TCAD. The Town may, where the findings of this subsection are otherwise made and a health and safety emergency exists, allocate temporary sewer service capacity for a developed parcel that has a failed septic system as defined in this chapter. 
(B)  With the limited amount of available sewer capacity, there shall be no allocation of sewer service for new development or expanded development, and such development shall be made utilizing septic systems. Expanded development shall not be permitted on developed parcels which receive an allocation of temporary sewer service capacity pursuant to this chapter and a restrictive covenant shall be recorded with the County Recorder to so indicate as a condition of the allocation of sewer service capacity. 
(C)  Expansion area. 
(1)  Subject to available sewer service capacity, including modification of existing agreements with FOSD and RCS for additional sewer service capacity, the Town Council may designate an area outside and not contiguous to the RCS and the TCAD for expansion of existing public sewer service (Expansion Area). 
(2)  The Town Council shall find that the Expansion Area is generally not suitable for septic systems due to small lot size, poor soil percolation and/or high ground water table. 
(3)  The designation of an expansion area shall be consistent with the General Plan and any applicable specific plan. 
(4)  Adequate public sewer service shall be made available to all lots within the expansion area. 
(5)  Expansion shall not deprive owners with parcels in the RCS and TCAD of existing sewer service capacity allocated for their parcels. 
(6)  Development of undeveloped parcels within an expansion area shall only be allowed to parcels which fully conform to the minimum lot size requirement of the Town's Zoning Code. 
(Ord. 1998-491, effective 7-9-98; Am. Ord. 1999-500, effective 1-13-00; Am. Ord. 2007-537, effective 5-24-07)  
Sec. 51.127 - General conditions. 
All connections to the public sewer system shall require: 
(A)  Payment of a sewer connection fee as required by ordinance or resolution. 
(B)  Payment of an equalization fee for parcels which have not had a full assessment paid in either the RCS or the TCAD. 
(C)  Annexation of the parcel, as appropriate, to either the FOSD (for the RCS and the FOSD) or the TCAD. 
(D)  Payment of costs for staff and consultant in processing the allocation request and connection to the sewer system, and for determining failure of a septic system. 
(E)  Payment of costs of extending the sewer main, and of connecting the development on the parcel to the sewer system, including the cost of any sewer lateral from the sewer's trunk system to the parcel. 
(F)  Payment of any costs required by County Health and/or the FOSD. 
(Ord. 1998-491, effective 7-9-98; Am. Ord. 1999-500, effective 1-13-00; Am. Ord. 2007-537, effective 5-24-07)  
Sec. 51.128 - Testing for sewer service capacity; report to Town Council. 
The Town Engineer shall, on a biannual basis, review water usage records for parcels in the RCS and TCAD, and shall meter the sewer flow from the RCS and the TCAD and report to the Town Council on the status of sewer service capacity. 
(Ord. 1999-500, effective 1-13-00)  
CHAPTER 52. - STORM WATER MANAGEMENT  
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 52.01 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "Town of Woodside Storm Water Management and Discharge Control Ordinance" and may be so cited. 
(Ord. 1994-473, effective 6-22-94)  
Sec. 52.02 - Purpose and intent. 
(A)  The purpose of this chapter is to ensure the future health, safety, and general welfare of Town citizens by: 
(1)  Eliminating non-storm water discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer. 
(2)  Controlling the discharge to municipal separate storm sewers from spills, dumping or disposal of materials other than storm water. 
(3)  Reducing pollutants in storm water discharges to the maximum extent practicable. 
(B)  The intent of this chapter is to protect and enhance the water quality of our watercourses, water bodies, and wetlands in a manner pursuant to and consistent with the Clean Water Act. 
(Ord. 1994-473, effective 6-22-94)  
Sec. 52.03 - Definitions. 
(A)  Any terms defined in the Federal Clean Water Act and acts amendatory thereof or supplementary thereto, and/or defined in the regulations for the storm water discharge permitting program issued by the Environmental Protection Agency on November 16, 1990 (as may from time to time be amended) as used in this chapter shall have the same meaning as in that statute or regulations. Specifically, the definition of the following terms included in that statute or regulations are hereby incorporated by reference, as now applicable or as may hereafter be amended: discharge, illicit discharge, pollutant, and storm water. These terms presently are defined as follows: 
(1)  Discharge. 
(a)  Any addition of any pollutant to navigable waters from any source; or 
(b)  Any addition of any pollutant to the waters of the contiguous zone or the ocean from any source other than a vessel or other floating craft. 
(2)  Illicit discharge. Any discharge to the Town storm sewer system that is not composed entirely of storm water except discharges pursuant to a NPDES permit and discharges resulting from firefighting and other emergency response activities. 
(3)  Pollutant. Dredged soil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, wrecked or destroyed equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste discharge into water. 
(4)  Storm water. Storm water runoff and surface runoff and drainage. 
(B)  For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
Authorized enforcement official. The Town Manager or his/her designees is hereby authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
Best management practices (BMPs). Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to "waters of the United States." BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw material storage. 
Non-storm water discharge. Any discharge that is not entirely composed of storm water except those noted within an NPDES Permit and this chapter. 
Premises. Any building, lot parcel, real estate, or land or portion of land whether improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
Town. The Town of Woodside. 
Town storm sewer system. Includes but is not limited to those facilities within the Town by which storm water may be conveyed to waters of the United States, including any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels or storm drains, which is not part of the Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW) as defined at 40 CFR § 122.2. 
Watercourse. A natural stream, creek, or man-made uncovered channel through which water flows continuously or intermittently. 
(Ord. 1994-473, effective 6-22-94)  
Sec. 52.04 - Construction and application. 
This chapter shall be construed to assure consistency with the requirements of the Federal Clean Water Act and acts amendatory thereof or supplementary thereto, applicable implementing regulations, and NPDES Permit No. CA0029921 and any amendment, revision or reissuance thereof. 
(Ord. 1994-473, effective 6-22-94)  
Sec. 52.05 - Coordination with other programs. 
The first revision of the business plan for any facility subject to the Town's hazardous materials inventory and response program shall include a program for compliance with this chapter, including the prohibitions on non-storm water discharges and illicit discharges, and the requirement to reduce storm water pollutants to the maximum extent practicable. 
(Ord. 1994-473, effective 6-22-94)  
Secs. 52.06—52.16 - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DISCHARGE REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 52.15 - Discharge of pollutants. 
(A)  The discharge of non-storm water discharges to the Town storm sewer system is prohibited. All discharges of material other than storm water must be in compliance with a NPDES permit issued for the discharge (other than NPDES Permit No. CA0029921) and this chapter. 
(B)  The following discharges are exempt from the prohibition set forth in division (A) above, of this section. 
(1)  The prohibition on discharges shall not apply to any discharge regulated under a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit issued to the discharger and administered by the State of California under authority of the United States Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit and other applicable laws or regulations. 
(2)  Discharges from the following activities will not be considered a source of pollutants to waters of the United States when properly managed: water line flushing and other discharges from potable water sources, municipal street cleaning, municipal park maintenance, landscape irrigation and lawn watering, irrigation water, diverted stream flows, rising ground waters, infiltration to separate storm drains, uncontaminated pumped ground water, foundation and footing drains, water from crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, individual residential car washings, flows from riparian habitats and wetlands, dechlorinated swimming pool discharges, or flows from firefighting and other emergency response activity, and accordingly are not subject to the prohibition on discharges. 
(Ord. 1994-473, effective 6-22-94) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 52.16 - Discharge in violation of permit. 
Any discharge that would result in or contribute to a violation of NPDES Permit No. CA0029921, the terms of which are incorporated herein by reference, and which is on file in the Office of the Town Clerk, and any amendment, revision or reissuance thereof, either separately considered or when combined with other discharges, is prohibited. Liability for any such discharge shall be the responsibility of the person(s) causing or responsible for the discharge, and such persons shall defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the Town in any administrative or judicial enforcement action relating to such discharge. 
(Ord. 1994-473, effective 6-22-94) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 52.17 - Illicit discharge. 
It is prohibited to commence or continue any illicit discharges to the Town storm sewer system. 
(Ord. 1994-473, effective 6-22-94) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 52.18 - Reduction of pollutants in storm water. 
Any person engaged in activities which will or may result in pollutants entering the Town storm sewer system shall undertake all practicable measures to reduce such pollutants. Examples of such activities include ownership and use of facilities which may be a source of pollutants such as parking lots, gasoline stations, industrial facilities, commercial facilities, stores fronting Town streets, etc. The following minimal requirements shall apply: 
(A)  Littering. No person shall throw, deposit, leave, maintain, keep, or permit to be thrown, deposited, place, left or maintained, any refuse, rubbish, garbage, or other discarded or abandoned objects, articles, and accumulations, in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, storm drain inlet, catch basin, conduit or other drainage structures, business place, or upon any public or private lot of land in the Town, so that the same might be or become a pollutant, except in containers or in lawfully established dumping grounds. 
(1)  The occupant or tenant, or in the absence of occupant or tenant, the owner, lessee, or proprietor of any real property in the Town in front of which there is a paved sidewalk shall maintain said sidewalk free of litter to the maximum extent practicable. 
(2)  No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, lake, stream or any other body of water in a park or elsewhere within the Town. 
(B)  Standard for parking lots and similar structures. Persons owning or operating a parking lot, gas station pavement or similar structure shall clean those structures as frequently and thoroughly as practicable in a manner that does not result in discharge of pollutants to the Town storm sewer system. 
(C)  Practices for new developments and redevelopments. Any construction contractor performing work in the Town shall endeavor, whenever possible, to provide filter materials at the catch basin to retain any debris and dirt flowing in to the Town's storm sewer system. Town may establish controls on the volume and rate of storm water runoff from new developments and redevelopments as may be appropriate to minimize the discharge and transport of pollutants. 
(D)  Compliance with best management practices. Where best management practices guidelines or requirements have been adopted by the Town for any activity, operation, or facility which may cause or contribute to storm water pollution or contamination, illicit discharges, and/or discharge of non-storm water to the storm water system, every person undertaking such activity or operation, or owning or operating such facility shall comply with such guidelines or requirements (as may be identified by the Town Engineer). 
(Ord. 1994-473, effective 6-22-94) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 52.19 - Watercourse protection. 
Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such person's lessee or tenant, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property reasonably free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles which would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse; shall maintain existing privately owned structures within a watercourse so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse; and shall not remove healthy bank vegetation beyond that actually necessary for said maintenance, nor remove said vegetation in such a manner as to increase the vulnerability of the watercourse to erosion. 
(Ord. 1994-473, effective 6-22-94) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Secs. 52.20—52.29 - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 52.30 - Administration by Town Manager; authority of enforcement officials. 
(A)  This chapter shall be administered for the Town by the Town Manager and his/her designees. 
(B)  In addition to the other enforcement powers and remedies established by this chapter, any authorized Enforcement Official has the authority to utilize administrative remedies. 
(Ord. 1994-473, effective 6-22-94)  
Sec. 52.31 - Waiver procedures. 
(A)  It is the intent of this chapter to protect and enhance water quality while respecting the rights of private property owners to economically viable use of land. It is not the intent of this chapter to prohibit all economically viable use of any private lands, nor to result in a confiscatory impact. Accordingly, the purpose of this section is to provide for an administrative procedure for a waiver or modification of a particular provision of this chapter in the event the strict application of this chapter would result in the denial of all economically viable use of real property. 
(B)  An applicant for a waiver of a provision of this chapter shall file a waiver application with the Director of the Planning and Building Department on a form provided by the Director identifying the provision sought to be waived or modified. The applicant shall file a complete form and shall provide all documentation and information required by the Director to determine whether application of the provision in question will prohibit any economically viable use of the land in question or otherwise have an impermissible confiscatory result. 
(C)  The Director may approve, deny or conditionally approve a waiver application upon making all of the following written findings: 
(1)  That the strict application of the provision for which a waiver or modification is sought would result in the denial of all economically viable use of the real property in question; 
(2)  To the maximum extent feasible, conditions have been placed upon such a waiver or modification in order to achieve the goals of this chapter as closely as possible while still allowing economically viable use of the real property in question; 
(3)  Approval of such a waiver will not result in a public nuisance which would constitute a significant and direct threat to public health or safety. 
(Ord. 1994-473, effective 6-22-94)  
Sec. 52.32 - Right of entry of Town Officials. 
(A)  Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this chapter, or whenever an authorized enforcement official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition which constitutes a violation of the provisions of this chapter, the official may enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or perform any duty imposed upon the official by this chapter; provided that if such building or premises be occupied, he/she shall first present proper credentials and request entry; and if such building or premises be unoccupied, he/she shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry. 
(B)  Any such request for entry shall state that the property owner or occupant has the right to refuse entry and that in the event such entry is refused, inspection may be made only upon issuance of a search warrant by a duly authorized magistrate. In the event the owner and/or occupant refuses entry after such request has been made, the official is hereby empowered to seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining such entry. 
(C)  Routine or area inspections shall be based upon such reasonable selection processes as may be deemed necessary to carry out the objectives of this chapter, including but not limited to random sampling and/or sampling in areas with evidence of storm water contamination, illicit discharges, discharge of non-storm water to the storm water system, or similar factors. 
(Ord. 1994-473, effective 6-22-94)  
Sec. 52.33 - Sampling devices. 
The Town shall have the right to establish on any property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling or metering operations. During all inspections as provided herein, the official may take any samples deemed necessary to aid in the pursuit of the inquiry or in the recordation of the activities on site. 
(Ord. 1994-473, effective 6-22-94)  
Sec. 52.34 - Notification of spills. 
As soon as any person in charge of a facility or responsible for emergency response for a facility has knowledge of any confirmed or unconfirmed release of materials, pollutants, or waste which may result in pollutants or non-storm water discharges entering the Town storm sewer system, such person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery and containment and clean-up of such release and shall notify the Town of the occurrence by telephoning 851-6790 and confirming the notification by correspondence to the Town Engineer. 
(Ord. 1994-473, effective 6-22-94)  
Sec. 52.35 - Testing or monitoring. 
Any authorized enforcement official may request that any person engaged in any activity and/or owning or operating any facility which may cause or contribute to storm water pollution or contamination, illicit discharges, and/or discharge of non-storm water to the storm water system, undertake such monitoring activities and/or analysis and furnish such reports as the official may specify. The burden, including costs, of these activities, analysis and reports shall bear a reasonable relationship to the need for the monitoring, analysis and reports and the benefits to be obtained. The recipient of such request shall undertake and provide the monitoring, analysis and/or reports requested. 
(Ord. 1994-473, effective 6-22-94)  
Sec. 52.36 - Remedies not exclusive. 
Remedies under this chapter are in addition to and do not supersede or limit any and all other remedies, civil or criminal. The remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive. 
(Ord. 1994-473, effective 6-22-94)  
Sec. 52.37 - Violations; civil actions. 
(A)  Unless otherwise specified by ordinance, the violation of any provision of this chapter, or failure to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor; except that notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, any such violation constituting a misdemeanor under this chapter may, at the discretion of the enforcing authority, be charged and prosecuted as an infraction. 
(B)  Unless otherwise provided, a person, firm, corporation or organization, shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which a violation of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by the person, firm, corporation or organization and shall be punishable accordingly as herein provided. 
(C)  Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting or concealing a violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a violation of such provision. 
(D)  In addition to any other remedies provided in this section, any violation of this section may be enforced by civil action brought by the Town. In any such action, the Town may seek, and the court shall grant, as appropriate, any or all of the following remedies: 
(1)  A temporary and/or permanent injunction. 
(2)  Assessment of the violator for the costs of any investigation, inspection, or monitoring survey which led to the establishment of the violation, and for the reasonable costs of preparing and bringing legal action under this division. 
(3)  Costs incurred in removing, correcting, or terminating the adverse effects resulting from the violation, including reasonable attorney's fees and court costs. 
(4)  Compensatory damages for loss or destruction to water quality, wildlife, fish and aquatic life. Assessments under this division shall be paid to the Town to be used exclusively for costs associated with monitoring and establishing storm water discharge pollution control systems and/or implementing or enforcing the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1994-473, effective 6-22-94)  
CHAPTER 53. - UNDERGROUND UTILITIES  
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 53.01 - Underground installations required. 
The Council hereby finds and declares that the public necessity, convenience, safety, welfare, and interest require that whenever an underground utility service for supplying electric, communication, or similar or associated service is made, or is to be made available, to private or public property within the Town, the property owner of person in possession of such property shall make the connection to such underground utility distribution facility in the manner and under the terms and conditions set forth in this subchapter. The responsibility of the property owner or the person in possession of any property to which an underground utility service for supplying electric, communication, or similar or associated service is made available shall include and be limited to the installation and completion of the underground construction and conduits, conductors, and associated equipment necessary to maintain utility service to the building or structure being served, or up to a distance of 50 feet from the property line abutting the public street in which the utility facilities are located toward the building or structure being served, whichever is the lesser distance, subject to the applicable rules, regulations, and tariffs of the respective utilities on file with the Public Utilities Commission of the State. 
(1975 Code, § 7-5.101) (Ord. 1967-189, effective - -67)  
Sec. 53.02 - Notice to owners and occupants. 
(A)  The Town shall give a notice to all affected utilities and all persons owning and/or occupying real property affected by the provisions of Section 53.01 of this chapter. The Town shall further notify such affected property owners of the necessity that, if they or any person occupying such property desire to continue to receive electric, communication, or other similar or associated service, they or such occupant shall provide all the necessary facility changes on their premises, within the time provided for in the notice, so as to receive such service from the lines of the supplying utilities, subject to the applicable rules, regulations, and tariffs of the respective utilities on file with the Public Utilities Commission of the State. The notice shall state that if the underground work is not completed within 45 days after the receipt of such notice, the Town will order the disconnection and removal of existing overhead service facilities. 
(1975 Code, § 7-5.102) 
(B)  The notice required by the provisions of division (A) above of this section may be given either by personal service or by mail. In the case of service by mail the notice shall be addressed to the occupant or to the owner of the affected premises directed to his/her address as such address appears on the last equalized assessment roll of the county and, when no address appears, to General Delivery, Town of Woodside. If notice is given by mail, such notice shall be deemed to have been received by the person to whom it has been sent within 48 hours after the mailing thereof. If notice is not given by mail to either the owner or occupant of such premises, the Town shall, within 48 hours, cause a copy thereof, printed on a card not less than eight inches by ten inches in size, to be posted in a conspicuous place on such premises. 
(1975 Code, § 7-5.103) (Ord. 1967-189, effective - -67)  
Sec. 53.03 - Unlawful acts. 
Whenever a notice has been given by the Town directing the removal of poles and overhead wires and associated overhead structures, it shall be unlawful for any person or utility to erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ, or operate any pole, overhead wire, or associated overhead structure, except as may be otherwise provided in this subchapter. 
(1975 Code, § 7-5.104) (Ord. 1967-189, effective - -67) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 53.04 - Orders for removal. 
If, upon the expiration of the 45-day period set forth in Section 53.02, the affected existing overhead facilities have not been removed and the underground work has not been completed, the Town shall forthwith order the disconnection and removal of such existing overhead facilities. 
(1975 Code, § 7-5.105) (Ord. 1967-189, effective - -67)  
Sec. 53.05 - Extensions of time. 
In the event any act required of any person by the provisions of this subchapter cannot be performed within the time provided in this subchapter on account of shortages of materials, war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor disturbances, or any other circumstances beyond the control of the actor, the time within which such act will be accomplished shall be extended by the Town for a period equivalent to the time of such limitation. 
(1975 Code, § 7-5.106) (Ord. 1967-189, effective - -67)  
Secs. 53.06—53.14 - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICTS 
 
Sec. 53.15 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
Commission. The Public Utilities Commission of the State. 
District or underground utility district. That area in the Town within which poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures are prohibited as such area is described in a resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 53.17. 
Poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures. Poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms, braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits, appliances, attachments, and appurtenances located aboveground within a District and used or useful in supplying electric, communication, or similar or associated services. 
Utility. All persons or entities supplying electric, communication, or similar or associated services by means of electrical materials or devices. 
(1975 Code, § 7-5.201) (Ord. 1968-202, effective - -68)  
Sec. 53.16 - Public hearings. 
The Council may from time to time set public hearings to ascertain whether the public necessity, health, safety, or welfare requires the removal of poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures within designated areas of the Town and the underground installation of wires and facilities for supplying electric, communication, or similar or associated services. The Town Clerk shall notify by mail all affected property owners as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, and utilities concerned of the time and place of such hearings at least ten days prior to the date thereof. Each such hearing shall be open to the public and may be continued from time to time. At such hearings all persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The decision of the Council shall be final and conclusive. 
(1975 Code, § 7-5.202) (Ord. 1968-202, effective - -68)  
Sec. 53.17 - Designation of underground utility districts. 
If, after any public hearing provided for in Section 53.16, the Council finds that the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires such removal and such underground installations within a designated area, the Council, by resolution, shall declare such designated area an Underground Utility District and order such removal and underground installations. Such resolution shall include a description of the area comprising such District and shall fix the time within which such removal and underground installations shall be accomplished and within which affected property owners shall be ready to receive underground services. A reasonable time shall be allowed for such removal and underground installations, having due regard for the availability of the labor, materials, and equipment necessary for such removal and for the installation of such underground facilities as may be occasioned thereby. 
(1975 Code, § 7-5.203) (Ord. 1968-202, effective - -68)  
Sec. 53.18 - Unlawful acts. 
Whenever the Council creates an Underground Utility District and orders the removal of poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures therein, as provided in Section 53.17, it shall be unlawful for any person or utility to erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ, or operate poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures in such District after the date such overhead facilities are required by resolution to be removed, except such overhead facilities which may be required to furnish services to an owner or occupant of, property prior to the performance by such owner or occupant of the underground work necessary for such owner or occupant to continue to receive utility service as set forth in Section 53.22, and for such reasonable time required to remove such facilities after such work has been performed, and except as otherwise provided in this subchapter. 
(1975 Code, § 7-5.204) (Ord. 1968-202, effective - -68) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 53.19 - Exceptions. 
(A)  Notwithstanding the provisions of this subchapter, overhead facilities may be installed and maintained for a period not to exceed ten days, without the authority of the Council, in order to provide emergency services. The Council may grant special permission, on such terms as it may deem appropriate, in cases of unusual circumstances, without discrimination as to any person or utility, to erect, construct, install, maintain, use, or operate poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures. 
(B)  The provisions of this subchapter and any resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 53.17 shall not apply to the following types of facilities, unless otherwise provided in such resolution: 
(1)  Any municipal facilities or equipment for traffic signals or street lighting installed with the approval of the Council and under the supervision of the Town Engineer; 
(2)  Overhead wires (exclusive of supporting structures) crossing any portion of a District within which overhead wires have been prohibited, or connecting to buildings on the perimeter of a District, where such wires originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures are not prohibited; 
(3)  Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location on the building to another location on the same building or to an adjacent building without crossing any public street; 
(4)  Antennas, associated equipment, and supporting structures used by a utility for furnishing communication services; 
(5)  Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface-mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts; and 
(6)  Temporary poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures used or to be used in conjunction with construction projects. 
(1975 Code, § 7-5.206) 
(Ord. 1968-202, effective - -68)  
Sec. 53.20 - Notices to property owners and utility companies. 
(A)  Within ten days after the effective date of a resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 53.17, the Town Clerk shall notify all affected utilities and all persons owning real property within the District thereby created of the adoption of such resolution. The Town Clerk shall further notify such affected property owners of the necessity that, if they, or any person occupying such property, desire to continue to receive electric, communication, or similar or associated service, they, or such occupant, shall provide all the necessary facility changes on their premises so as to receive such services from the lines of the supplying utilities at a new location, subject to the applicable rules, regulations, and tariffs of the respective utilities on file with the Commission. 
(B)  Such notification by the Town Clerk shall be made by mailing a copy of the resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 53.17, together with a copy of the provisions of this subchapter, to affected property owners, as they are shown on the last equalized assessment roll, and to the affected utilities. 
(1975 Code, § 7-5.207) (Ord. 1968-202, effective - -68)  
Sec. 53.21 - Responsibility of utility companies. 
If underground construction is necessary to provide utility services within a District created by any resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 53.17, the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of the conduits, conductors, and associated equipment required to be furnished by it under its applicable rules, regulations, and tariffs on file with the Commission. 
(1975 Code, § 7-5.208) (Ord. 1968-202, effective - -68)  
Sec. 53.22 - Responsibility of property owners. 
(A)  Removal of poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures required. Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying, or renting a building or structure within a District shall remove all poles and overhead wires and associated overhead structures within 50 feet of the public street and shall construct and provide that portion of the service connection on his/her property from the facilities referred to in Section 53.21 necessary to maintain utility services to the building or structure being served, subject to the applicable rules, regulations, and tariffs of the respective utilities on file with the Public Utilities Commission of the State. 
(B)  Failure to remove poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures; notices; disconnections and removal authorized. In the event any person owning, operating, leasing, occupying, or renting such property does not comply with the provisions of division (A) of this section within the time provided for in the resolution enacted pursuant to the provisions of Section 53.17, the Town Engineer shall post a written notice on the property being served and 30 days thereafter shall have the authority to order the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated facilities supplying utility services to such property. 
(C)  Connections required; failure to comply; notices. Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying, or renting a building or structure within a District shall construct and provide that portion of the service connection on his/her property between the facilities referred to in Section 53.21 and the termination facility as referred to in division (A) of this section. If such work is not accomplished by any person within the time provided for in the resolution enacted pursuant to the provisions of Section 53.17, the Town Engineer shall give a notice in writing to the person in possession of such premises, and a notice in writing to the owner thereof as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, to provide the required underground facilities within ten days after the receipt of such notice. 
(D)  Notices; service; posting. The notice to provide the required underground facilities may be given either by personal service or by mail. In the case of service by mail to any of such persons, the notice shall be deposited in the United States mail in a sealed envelope with postage prepaid, addressed to the person in possession of such premises at such premises, and the notice shall be addressed to the owner thereof as such owner's name appears, and shall be addressed to such owner's last known address as such address appears, on the last equalized assessment roll, and, when no address appears, to General Delivery, Town of Woodside. If such notice is given by mail, the notice shall be deemed to have been received by the person to whom the notice has been sent within 48 hours after the mailing thereof. If such notice is given by mail to either the owner or the occupant of such premises, the Town Engineer shall, within 48 hours after the mailing of such notice, cause a copy thereof, printed on a card not less than eight inches by ten inches in size, to be posted in a conspicuous place on such premises. 
(E)  Notices; form. The notice given by the Town Engineer to provide the required underground facilities shall particularly specify what work is required to be done and shall state that if such work is not completed within 30 days after the receipt of such notice, the Town Engineer will provide such required underground facilities, in which case the cost and expense thereof will be assessed against the property benefitted and become a lien upon such property. 
(F)  Failure to do the work; performance of work by Town; costs; reports. If, upon the expiration of the 30-day period, the required underground facilities have not been provided, the Town Engineer shall forthwith proceed to do the work; provided, however, if such premises are unoccupied and no electric or communications services are being furnished thereto, the Town Engineer shall, in lieu of providing the required underground facilities, have the authority to order the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated facilities supplying the utility services to such property. Upon the completion of the work by the Town Engineer, he/she shall file a written report with the Council setting forth the fact that the required underground facilities have been provided, and the cost thereof, together with a legal description of the property against which such cost is to be assessed. The Council shall thereupon fix a time and place for hearing protests against the assessment of the cost of such work upon such premises, which time shall not be less than ten days thereafter. 
(G)  Failure to do the work; performance of work by Town; costs; reports; hearings; notices. The Town Engineer shall forthwith, upon the time for hearing such protests having been fixed, give a notice in writing to the person in possession of such premises and to the owner thereof, in the manner set forth in division (D) of this section, of the time and place the Council will pass upon such report and will hear protests against such assessment. Such notice shall also set forth the amount of the proposed assessment. 
(H)  Failure to do the work; performance of work by Town; costs; reports; hearings. Upon the date and hour set for the hearing of protests, the Council shall hear and consider the report and all protests, if there shall be any, and then proceed to affirm, modify, or reject the assessment. 
(I)  Failure to do the work; performance of work by Town; costs; assessments; liens. If any assessment is not paid within five days after the confirmation by the Council, the amount of the assessment shall became a lien upon the property against which the assessment is made by the Town Engineer, and he/she is hereby directed to turn over to the Assessor and Tax Collector a notice of lien on each of such properties on which the assessment has not been paid, and the Assessor and Tax Collector shall add the amount of such assessment to the next regular bill for taxes levied against the premises upon which such assessment was not paid. Such assessment shall be due and payable at the same time property taxes are due and payable and, if not paid when due and payable, shall bear interest at the rate of six percent per year. 
(1975 Code, § 7-5.209) (Ord. 1968-202, effective - -68)  
Sec. 53.23 - Responsibility of Town. 
The Town shall remove, at its own expense, all Town-owned equipment from all poles required by the provisions of this subchapter to be removed in ample time to enable the owner or user of such poles to remove the poles within the time specified in the resolution enacted pursuant to the provisions of Section 53.17. 
(1975 Code, § 7-5.210) (Ord. 1968-202, effective - -68)  
Sec. 53.24 - Extensions of time. 
In the event any act required by the provisions of this subchapter or the resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 53.17 cannot be performed within the time provided on account of shortages of materials, war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor disturbances, civil disobedience, or any other circumstance beyond the control of the actor, the time within which such act shall be accomplished shall be extended for a period equivalent to the time of such limitation. 
(1975 Code, § 7-5.211) (Ord. 1968-202, effective - -68)  
Secs. 53.25—53.35 - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - EXTENSIONS OF UTILITY SERVICES 
 
Sec. 53.35 - Findings. 
The Council hereby finds and declares that the public interest requires that facilities and wires for the extension of existing facilities for the supply and distribution of electrical energy and service, including communication service, shall be placed underground in order to promote and preserve the health, safety, and general welfare of the public and to assure the orderly development of the Town. 
(1975 Code, § 7-5.301) (Ord. 1981-296, effective 7-9-81)  
Sec. 53.36 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
Commission. The Public Utilities Commission of the State. 
Poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures. Poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms, braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits, appliances, attachments, and appurtenances located aboveground within an Underground Utility District and used or useful in supplying electric, communication, or similar or associated service. 
Utility. All persons or entities supplying electric, communication, or similar or associated services by means of electrical materials or devices. 
(1975 Code, § 7-5.302) (Ord. 1981-296, effective 7-9-81)  
Sec. 53.37 - Underground extensions required; exceptions. 
(A)  Any extension of a utility distribution facility beyond that existing on July 9, 1981, all electrical and communication service wires or cables to any new building or structure, and all electrical and communication service wires to any old building or structure not already served by aboveground overhead wires or cables shall be placed underground, unless special permission to construct such facilities aboveground in granted as provided in this subchapter. 
(1975 Code, § 7-5.303) 
(B)  The provisions of division (A) above of this section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Existing overhead electric and communication facilities which may be serviced, replaced, and repaired; 
(2)  Overhead service connections from a utility pole to a service entry weatherhead on a customer's structure which may be replaced or increased in capacity if a two or three separate wire service is replaced by a single cable service; 
(3)  Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location on the building to another location on the same building, or to an adjacent building without crossing any public or private street, or to another building on the same lot provided such wires are screened from the public right-of-way and from adjacent properties; 
(4)  Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as terminal boxes, meter cabinets, and concealed ducts, but this exception shall not include transformers or switches; and 
(5)  Temporary poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures used or to be used in conjunction with construction projects. 
(1975 Code, § 7-5.304) (Ord. 1981-296, effective 7-9-81) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 53.38 - Emergencies and unusual circumstances. 
(A)  The Planning Commission may grant special permission, on such terms as it may deem appropriate, in cases of unusual circumstances, without discrimination as to any person or utility, to erect, construct, install, maintain, use, or operate transformers, switches, poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures. For the purposes of this section, "unusual circumstances" shall include, but not be limited to, undue hardship and conflicts of jurisdiction between the Town and the Public Utilities Commission. In the case of transformers and switches, the following shall also be considered unusual circumstances: 
(1)  When transformers or switches of the required capacity are not available; 
(2)  Where the location would be in an area of unstable soil conditions; 
(3)  Where the location would be in an area where subsurface corrosive conditions (soils, water, minerals, and the like) exist; 
(4)  Where necessary service vehicles would not have all-weather access to underground transformers or switches that would have such access to surface-mounted transformers or switches; and 
(5)  For undue hardships caused by undergrounding transformers or switches and where such transformers or switches can be surface-mounted so as not to be visible by adjoining property owners or residents or by the general public. 
(B)  An appeal from the decision of the Planning Commission may be made in accordance with the procedures set forth in the zoning ordinance of the Town. 
(C)  Notwithstanding the provisions of this subchapter, and without the permission of the Planning Commission, overhead facilities may be installed and maintained for a period not to exceed ten days in order to provide emergency services. 
(1975 Code, § 7-5.305) (Ord. 1981-296, effective 7-9-81)  
Sec. 53.39 - Existing facilities. 
The provisions of Section 53.37 shall not prohibit the maintenance and operation of existing overhead facilities, nor prohibit the connection of underground service lines to existing overhead utility distribution equipment. A utility may intersect additional poles or other supporting structures, or increase the height of existing poles or other supporting structures, if such work takes place within the existing easements and locational confines of existing overhead utility facilities, and may continue to maintain, repair, replace, and reinforce any facility or structure in order to maintain the integrity of any facility or structure existing on or before July 9, 1981. 
(1975 Code, § 7-5.306) (Ord. 1981-296, effective 7-9-81)  
Sec. 53.40 - Screening. 
All permitted aboveground equipment allowed as an exception under Section 53.37(B) shall be reasonably well screened from the general view by existing vegetation or by vegetation planted and maintained by the property owner or the installing utility as follows: 
(A)  The planting and maintenance of screening for pad-mounted transformers or switches installed on private property shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property upon which the transformer is located. 
(B)  The planting and maintenance of screening for utility-owned substations or similar facilities shall be the responsibility of the utility owning the facilities. 
(1975 Code, § 7-5.307) (Ord. 1981-296, effective 7-9-81)  
CHAPTER 54. - WATER  
ARTICLE I. - WATER STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 54.01 - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this subchapter to assure that all dwellings and other occupied structures within the Town shall have a safe, adequate, continuous, and potable domestic water supply delivered under suitable pressure. 
(1975 Code, § 6-7.201) (Ord. 1967-186, effective - -67)  
Sec. 54.02 - Certificate of adequate water prerequisite to issuance of building permits. 
No building permit shall be issued for the construction of a new dwelling or other structure intended for human occupancy or for the expansion of the living area of an existing dwelling or the enlargement of the habitable area of an existing structure unless the Town Engineer or his/her designee has certified in writing that the site for such premises is serviced with a water supply that is potable, adequate, and delivered under suitable pressure as set forth in Section 54.03. 
(1975 Code, § 6-7.203) (Ord. 1967-186, effective - -67)  
Sec. 54.03 - Adequate water standards. 
(A)  Standards. Water for domestic supply purposes shall be deemed adequate only if the water is supplied by a water utility system pursuant to a permit from the Department of Public Health of the State or the County Health Department based on a written statement from such utility to the Town Engineer or his/her designee certifying the capability of delivering to the site a minimum of five gallons of water per minute for a 30-minute period during the hours of peak demand. 
(B)  Exclusions. The provisions of this subchapter regarding the requirement of supplying adequate water for fire protection purposes shall not apply in any case where a building permit or a permit for an addition to an existing building or structure of 200 square feet or less is being requested by the owner of the premises; provided, however, only one such exclusion shall apply to any one building or structure, and all subsequent similar situations shall be subject to the provisions of this subchapter. 
(C)  Access. To qualify as an approved storage facility for fire protection purposes, every swimming pool, water storage tank, and other similar source of water shall be so located that access thereto by Fire Department vehicles can be readily made. The installation of every such storage facility shall be subject to approval by the Fire Chief prior to the issuance of a building permit and prior to the certification of the final inspection. 
(D)  Suction pipes. In lieu of providing such required access, the owner may provide a permanent suction pipe with an approved check valve running from the approved storage facility to a location prescribed by the Fire Chief. The construction, specifications, and maintenance of such suction pipe installation shall be as prescribed by the Fire Chief, and such installation shall be tested prior to granting the final building and Fire Department approval. Such specifications shall provide for a pipe of a minimum size of four inches inside diameter, and all fittings shall have California Standard Thread as prescribed in Section 1400 of Sub-Chapter 9 of Chapter 1 of Title 19 of the California Administrative Code. 
(E)  Obstructions. No person shall place or keep any post, fence, growth, trash, or other obstruction near any access route or permanent suction pipe outlet which would prevent such access route or permanent suction pipe outlet from being immediately accessible or which would in any other manner prevent the Fire Department from gaining immediate access to such permanent suction pipe, swimming pool, tank, or other source of water. 
(F)  Storage facilities to serve individual properties. In no case shall a storage facility or swimming pool, privately-owned and located on the property it serves, qualify a neighboring applicant for a building permit. 
(1975 Code, § 6-7.204) (Ord. 1967-186, effective - -67; Am. Ord. 1970-212, effective - -70) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 54.04 - Supplemental rules and regulations. 
The Department of Environmental Services Agency of the County and the Woodside Fire Protection District are hereby authorized to promulgate rules and regulations in order to administer and carry out the purposes of this subchapter within the Town. 
(1975 Code, § 6-7.205) (Ord. 1967-186, effective - -67)  
Sec. 54.05 - Fees for investigations and certifications. 
The Department of Environmental Services Agency of the County and the Woodside Fire Protection District may charge a fee for the cost of the investigations and certifications required by the provisions of this subchapter. Such fee shall be approved by resolution of the Council. 
(1975 Code, § 6-7.206) (Ord. 1967-186, effective - -67)  
Secs. 54.06—54.19 - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - WATER WELLS 
 
Sec. 54.20 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
Annular space. The space between two objects, one of which is surrounded by the other, including the space between an excavation and the wall of a pit or the curbing of a well, or between two casings. 
Approved check valve. A check valve that seals readily and completely. It shall be carefully machined to have free moving parts and assured water tightness. The face of the closure element and valve seal shall be bronze, composition, or other noncorrodible material which will seal tightly under all prevailing conditions of field use. Pins and bushings shall be of bronze or other noncorrodible, nonsticking material, machined for easy dependable operation. The closure element (e.g., clapper) shall be internally weighted or otherwise internally equipped to promote rapid and positive closure. 
Property line. The surveyed line separating one piece of property from another or separating public rights-of-way from private properties. 
Sewage disposal system. A system of septic tank and drainage field and possibly a seepage pit, handling the waste from any structure not served by a community sewerage system. 
Sewer. A pipe carrying waste matter from any structure or being a part of any community sewerage system. 
Water superintendent. The designated official in charge of a water distribution system serving water to two or more families. 
(1975 Code, § 6-7.101) (Ord. 1957-31, effective - -57)  
Sec. 54.21 - Permit required; fees. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation, whether as principal, servant, agent, or employee, to dig, drill, bore, or drive a well, whether the water from the well is to be used for domestic purposes or irrigation purposes, without first having obtained a permit to do so from the Department of Environmental Services Agency of the county. 
(1975 Code, § 6-7.102) 
(B)  Permit fees shall be charged for each well permit to cover the cost of inspections and for the enforcement of the provisions of this subchapter. The amount of such permit fees shall be determined and set from time to time by resolution of the Council. 
(1975 Code, § 6-7.103) (Ord. 1957-31, effective - -57) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 54.22 - Construction standards. 
(A)  In any area subject to flooding or runoff from higher ground, or in any area where the method of sewage disposal is by the septic tank and seepage method, the following construction standards shall be used: 
(1)  The annular space between two casings or between the drilled hole and casing shall be filled with cement having a minimum thickness of two inches. Example: Annular space between an eight-inch and 12-inch casing or a 12-inch drill hole and an eight-inch casing. 
(2)  The cement shall extend to a sufficient depth to penetrate an impervious stratum below the first pervious or possible water bearing stratum, and in no event less than ten feet. 
(3)  The cement shall be introduced into the hole by pouring through a pipe, using either gravity or grout pump, and commencing at the bottom of the hole and working to the top. 
(4)  No well shall be located any closer than the following distances, unless circumstances are such that, in the opinion of the Town Engineer or his/her designee, no danger to the public health or safety will develop or the standards set forth in this section are adhered to: 
From a septic tank ..... 50 feet 
From a drainage field ..... 75 feet 
From a seepage pit ..... 100 feet 
From a cesspool ..... 100 feet 
From a sewer line ..... 50 feet 
From a property line (sewered area) ..... 5 feet 
From a property line (unsewered area) ..... 40 feet 
From a stream or creek bank ..... 10 feet 
(B)  The standards set forth in this section may be required at any time or place when, in the opinion of the Town Engineer or his/her designee, the protection of the underground water against pollution or contamination or the protection of the public health may demand. 
(1975 Code, § 6-7.104) (Ord. 1957-31, effective - -57) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 54.23 - Double check valves. 
There shall be installed between the house or structure being served water and the meter box or distribution system a double check valve arrangement, approved jointly by the Town Engineer or his/her designee and the Water Superintendent. 
(1975 Code, § 6-7.105) (Ord. 1957-31, effective - -57)  
Sec. 54.24 - Contamination protection. 
(A)  All wells shall be properly protected at the surface with an impervious slab extending at least 24 inches to all sides of the well opening. 
(B)  In areas where dug wells are the main source of available water, it shall be necessary to have an impervious lining extending down at least ten feet below the surface of the ground. 
(C)  Gravel-packed wells shall be so constructed that surface contamination will not gain access to the well. 
(D)  Upon the completion of a well, the drilling contractor shall be responsible for the placing of a secure well-cap or plug which would ordinarily make the introduction of surface contamination remote. 
(1975 Code, § 6-7.106) (Ord. 1957-31, effective - -57) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 54.25 - Inspections. 
(A)  Upon the application for a permit to dig, drill, bore, or drive a well, an inspection within a reasonable time shall be made of the proposed location by a representative of the Department of Environmental Services Agency of the County. 
(B)  Further inspections may be made during the process of well construction. 
(C)  After the well construction has been completed, a final inspection shall be made to determine that the well is properly protected and that proper approved double check valves have been installed in the water line between the house or structure and the meter box or distribution system of the community water system. 
(1975 Code, § 6-7.107) (Ord. 1957-31, effective - -57) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 54.26 - Supplemental regulations. 
The Town Engineer or his/her designee may prepare and issue written regulations deemed necessary to obtain compliance with the provisions of this subchapter and to clarify its relation with the laws of the state. 
(1975 Code, § 6-7.108) (Ord. 1957-31, effective - -57)  
Sec. 54.27 - Abandonment of wells. 
(A)  When a well is abandoned, it shall be properly capped or plugged, if the abandonment is of a temporary nature, and shall be completely sealed by filling with a mixture of one part cement to four parts sand or with neat cement if abandoned permanently. 
(B)  Upon the determination that a well is polluted or contaminated, and reasonable efforts to clear the pollution or contamination have been unsuccessful, the Town Engineer or his/her designee shall have the authority to enforce the permanent abandonment of the well as set forth in this section. 
(1975 Code, § 6-7.109) (Ord. 1957-31, effective - -57) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 54.28 - Violation deemed a nuisance; abatement. 
Any installation made in violation of the provisions of this subchapter and the standards established by this subchapter is hereby determined to constitute a public nuisance, and its maintenance and operation may be abated in a civil action instituted by the Town Attorney. 
(1975 Code, § 6-7.110) (Ord. 1957-31, effective - -57)  
CHAPTER 55. - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT  
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 55.01 - Statutory authorization. 
The state legislature has in Cal. Gov't. Code §§ 65302, 65560, and 65800 conferred upon local government units authority to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the Town does hereby adopt the floodplain management regulations of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2001-513, effective 11-22-01)  
Sec. 55.02 - Findings of fact. 
(A)  The flood hazard areas of the Town are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
(B)  These flood losses are caused by uses that are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or protected from flood damage. The cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights and velocities also contribute to the flood loss. 
(Ord. 2001-513, effective 11-22-01)  
Sec. 55.03 - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(A)  Protect human life and health; 
(B)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(C)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(D)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(E)  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains; electric, telephone and sewer lines; and streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard; 
(F)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future blighted areas caused by flood damage; 
(G)  Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and 
(H)  Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions. 
(Ord. 2001-513, effective 11-22-01)  
Sec. 55.04 - Methods of reducing flood losses. 
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and provisions to: 
(A)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or flood heights or velocities; 
(B)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(C)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood waters; 
(D)  Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage; and 
(E)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas. 
(Ord. 2001-513, effective 11-22-01)  
Sec. 55.05 - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined in this section, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
Accessory use. A use which is incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the parcel of land on which it is located. 
Alluvial fan. A geomorphologic feature characterized by a cone or fan-shaped deposit of boulders, gravel, and fine sediments that have been eroded from mountain slopes, transported by flood flows, and then deposited on the valley floors, and which is subject to flash flooding, high velocity flows, debris flows, erosion, sediment movement and deposition, and channel migration. 
Apex. The point of highest elevation on an alluvial fan, which on undisturbed fans is generally the point where the major stream that formed the fan emerges from the mountain front. 
Appeal. A request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator's interpretation of any provision of this chapter. 
Area of shallow flooding. A designated AO or AH Zone on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to three feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
Area of special flood hazard. See special flood hazard area. 
Base flood. A flood which has a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the "100-year flood"). Base flood is the term used throughout this chapter. 
Basement. Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building. See structure. 
Development. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
Encroachment. The advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the constriction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision. The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
Flood, flooding, or flood water. 
(1)  A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters; the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; and/or mudslides (i.e., mudflows); and 
(2)  The condition resulting from flood-related erosion. 
Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM). The official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the floodway. 
Flood Hazard Boundary Map. The official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated the areas of flood hazards. 
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). The official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood Insurance Study. The official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
Floodplain or flood-prone area. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. See also flooding. 
Floodplain Administrator. The individual appointed to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations. 
Floodplain Management. The operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management regulations, and open space plans. 
Floodplain Management Regulations. This chapter and other zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as grading and erosion control) and other application of police power which control development in flood-prone areas. This term describes federal, state or local regulations in any combination thereof which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage. 
Floodproofing. Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures, and their contents. (Refer to FEMA Technical Bulletins TB 1-93, TB 3-93, and TB 7-93 for guidelines on dry and wet floodproofing.) 
Floodway. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. Also referred to as "Regulatory Floodway." 
Floodway fringe. That area of the floodplain on either side of the regulatory floodway where encroachment may be permitted. 
Fraud and victimization. As related to Sections 55.51—55.53, means that the variance granted must not cause fraud on or victimization of the public. In examining this requirement, the Town Council will consider the fact that every newly constructed building adds to government responsibilities and remains a part of the community for 50 to 100 years. Buildings that are permitted to be constructed below the base flood elevation are subject during all those years to increased risk of damage from floods, while future owners of the property and the community as a whole are subject to all the costs, inconvenience, danger, and suffering that those increased flood damages bring. In addition, future owners may purchase the property, unaware that it is subject to potential flood damage, and can be insured only at very high flood insurance rates. 
Functionally dependent use. A use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, and does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
Governing body. The local governing unit, (county or municipality) that is empowered to adopt and implement regulations to provide for the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry. 
Hardship. As related to Sections 55.51—55.53, means the exceptional hardship that would result from a failure to grant the requested variance. The Town Council requires that the variance be exceptional, unusual, and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or financial hardship alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences, or the disapproval of one's neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship. All of these problems can be resolved through other means without granting a variance, even if the alternative is more expensive, or requires the property owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally intended. 
Highest adjacent grade. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
Historic structure. Any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Levee. A man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
Levee system. A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accord with sound engineering practices. 
Lowest floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement (see basement ). 
(1)  An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure below the lowest floor that is usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor provided it conforms to applicable non-elevation design requirements, including, but not limited to: 
(a)  The wet floodproofing standard in Section 55.41(C)(3); 
(b)  The anchoring standards in Section 55.41(A); 
(c)  The construction materials and methods standards in Section 55.41(B); and 
(d)  The standards for utilities in Section 55.42. 
(2)  For residential structures, all subgrade enclosed areas are prohibited as they are considered to be basements (see basement ). This prohibition includes below-grade garages and storage areas. 
Manufactured home. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. Manufactured home does not include a "recreational vehicle". 
Manufactured home park or subdivision. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Market value. Determined by estimating the cost to replace the structure in new condition and adjusting that cost figure by the amount of depreciation which has accrued since the structure was constructed. The cost of replacement of the structure shall be based on a square foot cost factor determined by reference to a building cost estimating guide recognized by the building construction industry. The amount of depreciation shall be determined by taking into account the age and physical deterioration of the structure and functional obsolescence as approved by the Floodplain Administrator, but shall not include economic or other forms of external obsolescence. Use of replacement costs or accrued depreciation factors different from those contained in recognized building cost estimating guides may be considered only if such factors are included in a report prepared by an independent professional appraiser and supported by a written explanation of the differences. 
Mean sea level. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced. 
New construction. For floodplain management purposes, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by this community, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by this community. 
Obstruction. Includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, or due to its location, its propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its likelihood of being carried downstream. 
One-hundred-year flood or 100-year flood. See base flood. 
Public safety and nuisance. As related to Sections 55.51—55.53, the granting of a variance must not result in anything which is injurious to safety or health of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, river, bay, stream, canal, or basin. 
Recreational vehicle. A vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Regulatory floodway. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
Remedy a violation. To bring the structure or other development into compliance with state or local floodplain management regulations, or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its non-compliance. Ways that impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of the ordinance or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing state or federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development. 
Riverine. Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc. 
Sheet flow area. See area of shallow flooding. 
Special flood hazard area (SFHA). An area in the floodplain subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown on an FHBM or FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99 or AH. 
Start of construction. Includes substantial improvement and other proposed new development and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days from the date of the permit. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufacture home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure. A walled and roofed building that is principally above ground; this includes a gas or liquid storage tank or a manufactured home. 
Substantial damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other proposed new development of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations or state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
(2)  Any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
Variance. A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter. 
Violation. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with this chapter. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
Water surface elevation. The height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, (or other datum, where specified) of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
Watercourse. A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo, channel or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur. 
(Ord. 2001-513, effective 11-22-01)  
Sec. 55.06 - Application. 
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the Town. 
(Ord. 2001-513, effective 11-22-01)  
Sec. 55.07 - Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard. 
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) dated May, 1979 and accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) and Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps (FBFMs), dated November 15, 1979, and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. This FIS and attendant mapping is the minimum area of applicability of this chapter and may be supplemented by studies for other areas which allow implementation of this chapter and which are recommended to the Town Council by the Floodplain Administrator. The study, FIRMs and FBFMs are on file at Woodside Town Hall. 
(Ord. 2001-513, effective 11-22-01)  
Sec. 55.08 - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violation of the requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing herein shall prevent the Town from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. 2001-513, effective 11-22-01)  
Sec. 55.09 - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. 2001-513, effective 11-22-01)  
Sec. 55.10 - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: 
(A)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(B)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(C)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. 2001-513, effective 11-22-01)  
Sec. 55.11 - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Town, any officer or employee thereof, the state, or the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. 2001-513, effective 11-22-01)  
Sec. 55.12 - Severability. 
This chapter and the various parts thereof are hereby declared to be severable. Should any section of this chapter be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole, or any portion thereof other than the section so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
(Ord. 2001-513, effective 11-22-01)  
Secs. 55.13—55.30 - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 55.31 - Establishment of development permit. 
A development permit shall be obtained before any construction or other development begins within any area of special flood hazard established in Section 55.07. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the Floodplain Administrator and may include, but not be limited to: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevation of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required: 
(A)  Site plan, including but not limited to: 
(1)  For all proposed structures, spot ground elevations at building corners and 20-foot or smaller intervals along the foundation footprint, or one foot contour elevations throughout the building site; and 
(2)  Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and utilities; and 
(3)  If available, the base flood elevation from the Flood Insurance Study and/or Flood Insurance Rate Map; and 
(4)  If applicable, the location of the regulatory floodway; and 
(B)  Foundation design detail, including but not limited to: 
(1)  Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures; and 
(2)  For a crawl-space foundation, location and total net area of foundation openings as required in Section 55.41(C)(3) and FEMA Technical Bulletins 1-93 and 7-93; and 
(3)  For foundations placed on fill, the location and height of fill, and compaction requirements (compacted to 95 percent using the Standard Proctor Test method); and 
(C)  Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed, as required in Section 55.41(C)(2) and FEMA Technical Bulletin TB 3-93; and 
(D)  All appropriate certifications listed in Section 55.33(D); and 
(E)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
(Ord. 2001-513, effective 11-22-01)  
Sec. 55.32 - Designation of Floodplain Administrator. 
The Town Engineer is hereby appointed to administer, implement, and enforce this chapter by granting or denying development permits in accord with its provisions. 
(Ord. 2001-513, effective 11-22-01)  
Sec. 55.33 - Duties and responsibilities of Floodplain Administrator. 
The duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall include, but not be limited to the following: 
(A)  Permit review . Review all development permits to determine that: 
(1)  Permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied; 
(2)  All other required state and federal permits have been obtained; 
(3)  The site is reasonably safe from flooding; and 
(4)  The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying capacity of areas where base flood elevations have been determined but a floodway has not been designated. For purposes of this chapter, "adversely affects" means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point. 
(B)  Review, use and development of other base flood data . 
(1)  When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Section 55.07, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency, or other source, in order to administer Sections 55.41—55.46. Any such information shall be submitted to the Town Council for adoption; or 
(2)  If no base flood elevation data is available from a federal or state agency or other source, then a base flood elevation shall be obtained using one of two methods from the FEMA publication "Managing Floodplain Development in Approximate Zone A Areas - A Guide for Obtaining and Developing Base (100-year) Flood Elevations" dated July, 1995 in order to administer Sections 55.41—55.46: 
(a)  Simplified method: 
1.  100-year or base flood discharge shall be obtained using the appropriate regression equation found in a U.S. Geological Survey publication, or the discharge-drainage area method; and 
2.  Base flood elevation shall be obtained using the Quick-2 computer program developed by FEMA. 
(b)  Detailed method: 
1.  100-year or base flood discharge shall be obtained using the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers' HEC-HMS computer program; and 
2.  Base flood elevation shall be obtained using the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers' HEC-RAS computer program. 
(C)  Notification of other agencies . In alteration or relocation of a watercourse: 
(1)  Notify adjacent communities and the California Department of Water Resources prior to alteration or relocation; 
(2)  Submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency; and 
(3)  Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse is maintained. 
(D)  Documentation of floodplain development . Obtain and maintain for public inspection and make available as needed the following: 
(1)  Certification required by Sections 55.41(C)(1) and 55.44 (lowest floor elevations); 
(2)  Certification required by Section 55.41(C)(2) (elevation or floodproofing of nonresidential structures); 
(3)  Certification required by Section 55.41(C)(3) (wet floodproofing standard); 
(4)  Certification of elevation required by Section 55.43(B) (subdivision standards); 
(5)  Certification required by Section 55.46(A) (floodway encroachments). 
(E)  Map determinations . Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard. Where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions, grade and base flood elevations shall be used to determine the boundaries of the special flood hazard area. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in Sections 55.51—55.53. 
(F)  Remedial action . Take action to remedy violations of this chapter as specified in Section 52.08. 
(Ord. 2001-513, effective 11-22-01)  
Sec. 55.34 - Appeals. 
The Town Council shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2001-513, effective 11-22-01)  
Secs. 55.35—55.40 - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 
 
Sec. 55.41 - Standards of construction. 
In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required: 
(A)  Anchoring . 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. 
(2)  All manufactured homes shall meet the anchoring standards of Section 55.44. 
(B)  Construction materials and methods. All new construction and substantial improvement shall be constructed: 
(1)  With flood resistant materials as specified in FEMA Technical Bulletin TB 2-93, and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(2)  Using methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(3)  With electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; and 
(4)  Within Zones AH or AO, so that there are adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide flood waters around and away from proposed structures. 
(C)  Elevation and floodproofing . (See Section 55.10 for definitions of basement, lowest floor, new construction, substantial damage and substantial improvement.) 
(1)  Residential construction, new or substantial improvement, shall have the lowest floor, including basement: 
(a)  In an AO zone, elevated above the highest adjacent grade to a height exceeding the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM by at least one foot, or elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified. 
(b)  In an A zone, elevated at least one foot above the base flood elevation. Base flood elevation shall be determined by one of the methods in Section 55.33(B) of this chapter. 
(c)  In all other zones, elevated at least one foot above the base flood elevation. 
(2)  Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor including basement shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor, and verified by the community building inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator. 
(3)  Nonresidential construction, new or substantial improvement, shall either be elevated to conform with Section 55.41(C)(1) or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities: 
(a)  Be floodproofed below the elevation recommended under Section 55.41(C)(1) so that the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water; 
(b)  Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and 
(c)  Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator. 
(4)  All new construction and substantial improvement with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (excluding basements) that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, and which are subject to flooding, shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwater. Designs for meeting this requirement shall follow the guidelines in FEMA Technical Bulletins TB 1-93 and TB 7-93, and must exceed the following minimum criteria: 
(a)  Have a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwater; or 
(b)  Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect. 
(5)  Manufactured homes shall also meet the standards in Section 55.44. 
(Ord. 2001-513, effective 11-22-01)  
Sec. 55.42 - Standards for utilities. 
(A)  All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate: 
(1)  Infiltration of flood waters into the systems; and 
(2)  Discharge from the systems into flood waters. 
(B)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them, or contamination from them during flooding. 
(Ord. 2001-513, effective 11-22-01)  
Sec. 55.43 - Standards for subdivisions. 
(A)  All preliminary subdivision proposals shall identify the special flood hazard area and the elevation of the base flood. 
(B)  All subdivision plans will provide the elevation of proposed structure(s) and pad(s). If the site is filled above the base flood elevation, the lowest floor and pad elevations shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor and provided to the Floodplain Administrator. 
(C)  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
(D)  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
(E)  All subdivisions shall provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(Ord. 2001-513, effective 11-22-01)  
Sec. 55.44 - Standards for manufactured homes. 
(A)  All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved, within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map, on sites located in the following areas shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated at least one foot above the base flood elevation and be securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
(1)  Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; 
(2)  In a new manufactured home park or subdivision; 
(3)  In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or 
(4)  In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on a site upon which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood. 
(B)  All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map that are not subject to the provisions of Section 55.44(A) will be securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement, and be elevated so that either: 
(1)  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at least one foot above the base flood elevation; or 
(2)  The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
(C)  Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor including basement shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor, and verified by the community building inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator. 
(Ord. 2001-513, effective 11-22-01)  
Sec. 55.45 - Standards for recreational vehicles. 
All recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map shall either: 
(A)  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days, and be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions; or 
(B)  Meet the permit requirements of Sections 55.31—55.34 and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in Section 54.44(A). 
(Ord. 2001-513, effective 11-22-01)  
Sec. 55.46 - Floodways. 
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in Section 55.07 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters, which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply: 
(A)  Encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvement, and other new development are prohibited unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in the base flood elevation during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(B)  If Section 55.46(A) is satisfied, all new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this subchapter. 
(Ord. 2001-513, effective 11-22-01)  
Secs. 55.47—55.50 - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - VARIANCE PROCEDURE 
 
Sec. 55.51 - Nature of variances. 
(A)  The variance criteria set forth in this subsection are based on the general principle of zoning law that variances pertain to a piece of property and are not personal in nature. A variance may be granted for a parcel of property with physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the requirements of this chapter would create an exceptional hardship to the applicant or the surrounding property owners. The characteristics must be unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent parcels. The unique characteristic must pertain to the land itself, not to the structure, its inhabitants, or the property owners. 
(B)  It is the duty of the Town Council to help protect its citizens from flooding. This need is so compelling and the implications of the cost of insuring a structure built below flood level are so serious that variances from the flood elevation or from other requirements in the flood ordinance are quite rare. 
(C)  The long term goal of preventing and reducing flood loss and damage can only be met if variances are strictly limited. Therefore, the variance guidelines provided in this chapter are more detailed and contain multiple provisions that must be met before a variance can be properly granted. The criteria are designed to screen out those situations in which alternatives other than a variance are more appropriate. 
(Ord. 2001-513, effective 11-22-01)  
Sec. 55.52 - Appeal Board. 
(A)  In passing upon requests for variances, the Town Council shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and: 
(1)  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
(2)  The danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(3)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the existing individual owner and future owners of the property; 
(4)  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
(5)  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
(6)  The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage; 
(7)  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
(8)  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area; 
(9)  The safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(10)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site; and 
(11)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and bridges. 
(B)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice over the signature of a community official that: 
(1)  The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25.00 for $100.00 of insurance coverage; and 
(2)  Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. It is recommended that a copy of the notice shall be recorded by the Floodplain Administrator in the Office of the County Recorder and shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land. 
(C)  The Floodplain Administrator will maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its biennial report submitted to the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(Ord. 2001-513, effective 11-22-01)  
Sec. 55.53 - Conditions for variances. 
(A)  Generally, variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing that the procedures of Sections 55.31—55.34 and Sections 55.41—55.46 have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
(B)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of "historic structures" (as defined in Section 55.05) upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(C)  Variances shall not be issued within any mapped regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(D)  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the "minimum necessary" considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. "Minimum necessary" means to afford relief with a minimum of deviation from the requirements of this chapter. For example, in the case of variances to an elevation requirement, this means the Town Council need not grant permission for the applicant to build at grade, or even to whatever elevation the applicant proposes, but only to that elevation which the Town Council believes will both provide relief and preserve the integrity of the local ordinance. 
(E)  Variances shall only be issued upon a: 
(1)  Showing of good and sufficient cause; 
(2)  Determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional "hardship" (as defined in Section 55.05) to the applicant; and 
(3)  Determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense, create a nuisance (as defined in Section 55.05 - see public safety or nuisance ), cause fraud or victimization (as defined in Section 55.05) of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(F)  Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that the provisions of Subsections; 55.53(A)—(E) are satisfied and that the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and does not result in additional threats to public safety and does not create a public nuisance. 
(G)  Upon consideration of the factors of Section 55.52(A) and the purposes of this chapter, the Town Council may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2001-513, effective 11-22-01)  
TITLE VII - TRAFFIC CODE 
   
CHAPTER 70 - GENERAL PROVISIONS  
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 70.01 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this Traffic Code, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Whenever any words or phrases used in this Traffic Code are not defined in this section but are defined in the Vehicle Code of the State, and amendments thereto, such definitions are hereby incorporated in this section and shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases as though set forth in this section in full. 
Bicycle. A light vehicle without a motor, having two wheels, handlebars, and a seat or seats, and propelled by the operator. 
Coach. Any motor bus, motor coach, trackless trolley, or passenger stage used as a common carrier of passengers. 
Curb. The lateral boundary of the roadway, whether such curb shall be marked by curbing construction or shall not be so marked. Curb shall not include the line dividing the roadway of a street from parking strips in the center of a street, nor from tracks or rights-of-way of public utility companies. 
Divisional island. A raised island located in the roadway and separating opposing or conflicting streams of traffic. 
Holidays. Holidays shall be defined from time to time by Town Council resolution. 
Loading zone. The space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials. 
Park. To stand or leave standing any vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in the loading or unloading of passengers or materials. 
Parking meter. A mechanical device installed within or upon the curb or sidewalk area immediately adjacent to a parking space for the purpose of controlling the period of time of occupancy of such parking meter space by any vehicle. 
Parkway. That portion of a street other than a roadway or a sidewalk. 
Passenger loading zone. The space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers. 
Pedestrian. Any person afoot. 
Police officer. Every officer of the Police Department or any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic laws. 
Stop. When required, shall mean the complete cessation of movement. 
Stopping or standing. When prohibited, shall mean any stopping or standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when it is necessary to avoid a conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic-control device. 
Vehicle Code. The Vehicle Code of the State. 
(1975 Code, §§ 4-3.101—4-3.117) (Ord. 1960-89, effective - -60)  
Sec. 70.02 - Signs required. 
No provision of the California Vehicle Code or of this title for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator unless appropriate signs are in place, and are sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person, giving notice of such provisions of the traffic laws. 
(1975 Code, § 4-3.301) (Ord. 1960-89, effective - -60)  
Sec. 70.03 - Obedience to authorized officers. 
No person shall fail or refuse to comply with or to perform any act forbidden by any lawful order, signal, or direction of a traffic or police officer, or a member of the Fire Department, or a person authorized by the Police Chief or by law. 
(1975 Code, § 4-3.303) (Ord. 1960-89, effective - -60) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see Section 10.99  
Sec. 70.04 - Application to public employees. 
The provisions of this title shall apply to the operator of any vehicle owned by, or used in the service of, the United States Government, the State, or any county or city, and it shall be unlawful for any such operator to violate any of the provisions of this title, except as otherwise permitted in this title or by the California Vehicle Code. 
(1975 Code, § 4-3.304) (Ord. 1960-89, effective - -60) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see Section 10.99  
Sec. 70.05 - Application to persons riding bicycles and riding or driving animals. 
Every person riding a bicycle or riding or driving an animal upon a highway shall have all the rights and shall be subject to all the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle as set forth in this chapter, except those provisions which by their very nature can have no application. 
(1975 Code, § 4-3.307) (Ord. 1960-89, effective - -60)  
Sec. 70.06 - Exemptions for certain vehicles. 
(A)  Emergency vehicles. The provisions of this title regulating the operation, parking, and standing of vehicles shall not apply to any vehicle operated by the Police Department or Fire Department, any public ambulance, any public utility vehicle, or any private ambulance, which public utility vehicle or private ambulance has qualified as an authorized emergency vehicle, when any vehicle mentioned in this section is operated in the manner set forth in the California Vehicle Code in response to an emergency call. Such exemptions shall not, however, protect the operator of any such vehicle from the consequences of his/her willful disregard for the safety of others. 
(B)  Construction, repair, and mail vehicles. The provisions of this title regulating the parking or standing of vehicles shall not apply to any vehicle of a Town department or public utility while necessarily in use for construction or repair work or to any vehicle owned or operated by the United States Post Office Department while in use for the collection, transportation, or delivery of United States mail. 
(1975 Code, § 4-3.310) (Ord. 1960-89, effective - -60)  
Sec. 70.07 - Interfering with or obstructing town officials. 
No person shall interfere with or obstruct in any way any police officer or other officer or employee of the Town in the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. The removal, obliteration, or concealment of any chalk mark or other distinguishing mark used by any police officer or other employee or officer of the Town in connection with the enforcement of the parking provisions of this title shall constitute such interference or obstruction. 
(1975 Code, § 4-3.305) (Ord. 1960-89, effective - -60) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see Section 10.99  
Sec. 70.08 - Unauthorized direction of traffic. 
No person, other than an officer of the Police Department, members of the Fire Department, persons authorized by the Police Chief, or persons authorized by law, shall direct or attempt to direct traffic by voice, hand, or other signal; provided, however, persons may operate, when and as provided in this title, any mechanical pushbutton signal erected by order of the Town Engineer. 
(1975 Code, § 4-3.306) (Ord. 1960-89, effective - -60) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see 10.99  
Secs. 70.09—70.19 - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES 
 
Sec. 70.20 - Unauthorized painting of streets and curbs. 
No person, unless authorized by the Town, shall paint any street or curb surface; provided, however, the provisions of this section shall not apply to the painting of numbers on a curb surface by any person who has complied with the provisions of any law of the Town pertaining thereto. 
(1975 Code, § 4-3.408) (Ord. 1960-89, effective - -60)  
Secs. 70.21—70.39 - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 70.40 - Authority of Police and Fire Departments and other officers. 
Officers of the Police Department and such officers as are assigned by the Police Chief are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand, audible, or other signal in conformance with the traffic laws; provided, however, in the event of a fire or other emergency, or to expedite traffic, or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the Police Department or members of the Fire Department may direct traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding any provision to the contrary set forth in this chapter or in the California Vehicle Code. 
(1975 Code, § 4-3.302) (Ord. 1960-89, effective - -60)  
Sec. 70.41 - Written report of accident to Police Department. 
(A)  Required. The operator of a vehicle or the person in charge of any animal involved in any accident resulting in damages to any property publicly owned or owned by a public utility, including, but not limited to, any fire hydrant, parking meter, lighting post, telephone pole, or electric light or power pole, or resulting in damage to any tree, traffic-control device, or other property of a similar nature located in or along any street shall, within 24 hours after such accident, make a written report of such accident to the Police Department. 
(B)  Form. Every such report shall set forth the following information: 
(1)  The time when and the place where the accident occurred; 
(2)  The name and address of the person owning and of the person operating or in charge of such vehicle or animal; 
(3)  The license number of every such vehicle; and 
(4)  A brief description of the property damaged in such accident. 
(C)  Disabled operators. The operator of any vehicle involved in an accident shall not be subject to the requirements or penalties of this section during the time he/she is physically incapable of making a report; provided, however, in such event such operator shall make the report required by the provisions of division (A) of this section within 24 hours after regaining the ability to make such report. 
(1975 Code, § 4-3.309) (Ord. 1960-89, effective - -60) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see 10.99  
CHAPTER 71 - TRAFFIC RULES  
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 71.01 - Commercial vehicles using private driveways. 
(A)  No person shall operate or drive a commercial vehicle in, on, or across any private driveway approach, sidewalk area, or driveway without the consent of the owner or occupant of the property if a sign or markings are in place indicating that the use of such driveway is prohibited. 
(B)  For the purposes of this section, "commercial vehicle" shall mean a vehicle having a rated capacity in excess of one-half ton. 
(1975 Code, § 4-3.803) (Ord. 1960-89, effective - -60) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see 10.99  
Sec. 71.02 - Riding or driving on sidewalks. 
No person shall ride, drive, propel, or cause to be propelled any vehicle across or upon any sidewalk, except over permanently constructed driveways and except when it is necessary for any temporary purpose to drive a loaded vehicle across a sidewalk. In such latter event, such sidewalk areas shall be substantially protected by wooden planks two inches thick, and written permission shall be previously obtained from the Town Engineer. Such wooden planks shall not be permitted to remain upon such sidewalk area from 6:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. 
(1975 Code, § 4-3.804) (Ord. 1960-89, effective - -60) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see 10.99  
Sec. 71.03 - Riding or driving on new pavement and markings. 
No person shall ride or drive any animal or any vehicle over or across any newly-made pavement or freshly-painted marking in any street when a barrier sign, cone marker, or other warning device is in place warning persons not to drive over or across such pavement or marking, or when any such device is in place indicating that the street, or any portion thereof, is closed. 
(1975 Code, § 4-3.805) (Ord. 1960-89, effective - -60) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see 10.99  
Sec. 71.04 - Unauthorized barriers or signs; tampering with barriers or signs. 
No person, public utility, or department of the Town shall erect or place any barrier or sign on any street, unless of a type approved by the Town Engineer, or disobey the instructions, remove, tamper with, or destroy any barrier or sign lawfully placed on any street by any person, public utility, or department of the Town. 
(1975 Code, § 4-3.806) (Ord. 1960-89, effective - -60) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see 10.99  
Sec. 71.05 - Obstructing traffic. 
No operator of any vehicle shall enter any intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he/she is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control signal indication to proceed. 
(1975 Code, § 4-3.807) (Ord. 1960-89, effective - -60) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see 10.99  
Sec. 71.06 - Prohibition of commercial vehicles on Old La Honda Road. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any commercial vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight of three tons, including load, to use Old La Honda Road, except as provided herein. 
(B)  Any vehicle subject to California Public Utilities Code §§ 1031 through 1036 (passenger carriers) is excepted from this regulation as required by California Vehicle Code § 35701. 
(C)  This regulation shall not apply to commercial vehicles when used for making pickups or deliveries of goods or merchandise on Old La Honda Road, or when used in the construction of a work of improvement for a residence on Old La Honda Road, or a moving truck going to or from a residence on Old La Honda Road, or to any vehicle owned by a public utility necessary in construction or repair of facilities on Old La Honda Road, or to an emergency vehicle as defined in California Vehicle Code § 165, or to Town owned vehicles. The above exceptions shall also apply for access to public or private streets that intersect with Old La Honda Road, for the purposes stated in this section. 
(D)  This section shall be enforceable when traffic signs are erected on Old La Honda Road warning users of said road of this regulation. 
(Ord. 1995-479, effective 6-8-95) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see 10.99  
Sec. 71.07 - One-way streets and alleys. 
Whenever any ordinance or resolution of the Town designates any one-way street or alley, the Town Engineer shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulation shall be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where the movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(1975 Code, § 4-3.601) (Ord. 1960-89, effective - -60)  
Secs. 71.08—71.19 - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - TURNING MOVEMENTS 
 
Sec. 71.20 - Turning markers; multiple lanes. 
(A)  Turning markers. The Town Engineer is hereby authorized to place markers, buttons, or signs within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections. 
(B)  Multiple lanes. The Town Engineer is hereby authorized to locate and indicate more than one lane of traffic from which drivers of vehicles may make right or left-hand turns, and the course to be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law. 
(C)  Obedience to directions of markers, buttons, or other indications. When authorized markers, buttons, or other indications are placed within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of such indications. 
(1975 Code, § 4-3.501) (Ord. 1960-89, effective - -60) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see 10.99  
Sec. 71.21 - Restricted turns. 
(A)  The Town Engineer is hereby authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left, or U turn and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event such hours shall be plainly indicated on the signs, or such signs may be removed when such turns are permitted. 
(1975 Code, § 4-3.502) 
(B)  Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right, left, or U turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any such signs. 
(1975 Code, § 4-3.504) (Ord. 1960-89, effective - -60) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see 10.99  
Secs. 71.22—71.34 - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SPECIAL STOPS 
 
Sec. 71.35 - Stop signs. 
Whenever any ordinance or resolution of the Town designates and describes any street, or portion thereof, as a through street, or any intersection at which vehicles are required to stop at one or more entrances thereto, or any railroad grade crossing at which vehicles are required to stop, the Town Engineer shall erect and maintain stop signs on each and every street intersecting such through street, or portion thereof, so designated, at those entrances to other intersections where a stop is required, and at any railroad grade crossing so designated. Every such sign shall conform with and shall be placed as provided in the California Vehicle Code. 
(1975 Code, § 4-3.701) (Ord. 1960-89, effective - -60) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see 10.99  
Sec. 71.36 - Through streets, stop intersections and railway grade crossings. 
(A)  Through streets. Those streets and parts of streets established by resolution of the Council are hereby declared to be through streets for the purposes of this title. 
(B)  Stop intersections. The provisions of this section shall also apply at one or more entrances to intersections as such entrances and intersections are established by resolution of the Council. 
(C)  Railway grade crossings. The provisions of this section shall apply at those highway railway grade crossings established by resolution of the Council. 
(1975 Code, § 4-3.702) (Ord. 1960-89, effective - -60) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see 10.99  
Sec. 71.37 - Emerging from alleys, driveways and buildings. 
The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway, or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or into the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway or driveway. 
(1975 Code, § 4-3.703) (Ord. 1960-89, effective - -60) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see 10.99  
Secs. 71.38—71.49 - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - PEDESTRIANS 
 
Sec. 71.50 - Designation of crosswalks. 
(A)  The Town Engineer is hereby authorized to establish and maintain crosswalks and to designate such crosswalks by appropriate devices or painted signs upon the surface of the roadway. 
(B)  The Town Engineer may place signs, at or adjacent to an intersection in respect to any crosswalk, directing that pedestrians shall not cross in the crosswalk so indicated. 
(1975 Code, § 4-3.901) (Ord. 1960-89, effective - -60) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see 10.99  
Sec. 71.51 - Crossing at other than crosswalks. 
No pedestrian shall cross a roadway, other than by a crosswalk, in the Central Traffic District or in any business district. 
(1975 Code, § 4-3.902) (Ord. 1960-89, effective - -60) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see 10.99  
Secs. 71.52—71.64 - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - TRUCK ROUTES 
 
Sec. 71.65 - Designation of truck routes; approval and exceptions. 
(A)  Signs. Whenever any ordinance of the Town designates or describes any street, or portion thereof, as a street the use of which is permitted by any commercial vehicle or by any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight of three tons, the Town Engineer is hereby authorized to designate such streets, or portions thereof, by appropriate signs as "Truck Traffic Routes" for the movement of commercial vehicles and vehicles exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of three tons. 
(B)  Approval. The provisions of this section shall not be effective with respect to any highway which is not under the exclusive jurisdiction of the Town, or, in the case of any state highway, until the proposed ordinance has been submitted by the Council to, and approved in writing by, the Department of Public Works of the State. 
(C)  Exceptions. No such ordinance shall prohibit any commercial vehicle coming from an unrestricted street having ingress or egress by direct route to and from a restricted street when necessary for the purpose of making pickups or deliveries of goods, wares, and merchandise from or to any building or structure located on such restricted street, or for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling, or construction of any building or structure upon such restricted street for which a building permit has previously been obtained therefor. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any vehicle owned by a public utility while necessarily in use in the construction, installation, or repair of any public utility. 
(1975 Code, § 4-3.1301) (Ord. 1958-70, effective - -58) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see 10.99  
Sec. 71.66 - Restricted streets; exceptions. 
(A)  Signs; obedience. All streets not designated in the provisions of this subchapter as "Truck Traffic Routes" shall be "restricted streets." When any such truck traffic route or routes are established and designated by appropriate signs, the operator of any commercial vehicle, or any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of three tons, shall drive on such routes and none other, except when necessary to traverse another street for the purpose of making pickups or deliveries of goods, wares, and merchandise from or to any building or structure located on such restricted street or for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling, or construction of any building or structure upon such restricted street for which a building permit has been previously obtained therefor, but then only by such deviation from the nearest truck route as is reasonably necessary. 
(B)  Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any vehicle owned by a public utility while necessarily in use in the construction, installation, or repair of any public utility. 
(1975 Code, § 4-3.1302) (Ord. 1958-70, effective - -58) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see 10.99  
Sec. 71.67 - Destination points. 
(A)  Outside origin. 
(1)  Outside destination points. All trucks entering the Town for a destination point outside the Town shall operate only over a truck traffic route set forth in Section 74.02, Schedule II. 
(2)  One inside destination point. All trucks entering the Town for a destination point in the Town shall enter the Town only on an established truck route, shall proceed only over an established truck route, and shall deviate only at the intersection with the street nearest to the destination point. Upon leaving the destination point, the deviating truck shall return to the nearest truck route by the shortest route. 
(3)  Multiple inside destination points. All trucks entering the Town for multiple destination points shall enter the Town only on an established truck route, shall proceed only over established truck routes, and shall deviate only at the intersection with the street nearest to the first destination point. Upon leaving the first destination point, a deviating truck shall proceed to all other destination points by the shortest route. Upon leaving the last destination point, the deviating truck shall return to the nearest truck route by the shortest route. 
(B)  Inside origin. 
(1)  Outside destination points. All trucks on a trip originating in the Town and traveling in the Town for a destination point outside the Town shall proceed by the shortest route to the nearest truck route set forth in Section 74.02, Schedule II. 
(2)  Inside destination points. All trucks on a trip originating in the Town and traveling in the Town for destination points in the Town shall proceed to such destination points by the shortest route. 
(1975 Code, §§ 4-3.1303, 4-3.1304) (Ord. 1958-70, effective - -58) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see 10.99  
Sec. 71.68 - Weighing at public scales. 
Any police officer shall have the authority to require any person driving or in control of any truck on any public street or highway in the Town to proceed to any public or private scale available for the purpose of weighing and determining whether the provisions of this subchapter have been complied with. 
(1975 Code, § 4-3.1305) (Ord. 1958-70, effective - -58) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see 10.99  
Sec. 71.69 - Limited truck routes. 
(A)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this subchapter or any other law of the Town, vehicles hauling earth and dirt fill or other material within or through the Town to or from points within or without the Town, which vehicles exceed the maximum gross weight limits set forth in this subchapter may be permitted along streets designated as "Limited Truck Routes" pursuant to the conditions and provisions of Sections 71.70 through 71.77 of this subchapter. 
(1975 Code, § 4-3.1307) 
(B)  The Town Council shall establish the routes over restricted streets which all vehicles subject to the permit required by the provisions of Section 71.70 shall travel, and such vehicles shall travel only directly over such routes, as may be directed by the Town Council to be least dangerous to the public safety and which shall cause the least interference with the general traffic and the least damages to the public streets. 
(1975 Code, § 4-3.1324) (Ord. 1958-70, effective - -58)  
Sec. 71.70 - Limited truck route permit application; filing fees and copies. 
(A)  Any person desiring to haul earth and fill or other materials along any restricted street shall file an application in triplicate for a permit to do such hauling with the Town Clerk, the original of which shall be verified. The application shall set forth the following information: 
(1)  A full identification and the residence and business addresses of the applicant, including all members of any firm or partnership and the president and secretary of any corporation. If the applicant is the agent or employee of any person for whose benefit the permit is requested, the applicant shall state this fact, with the full identification of such person and his/her business and residence address; 
(2)  The facts constituting the necessity for hauling the fill; 
(3)  The amount of fill intended to be hauled; 
(4)  The dates on which the hauling is intended to be commenced and completed and the times of day during which such hauling is intended to be done; 
(5)  The route within the Town which the applicant proposes to use over public streets or private property transporting the fill; 
(6)  The time interval between vehicles, and the number of vehicles per hour, which will travel over the route for which the permit is sought; 
(7)  The locations of the places of delivery of the earth fill or other materials, whether within or without the Town; provided, however, if delivery is to be made in small quantities to numerous places, a general description, satisfactory to the Town Clerk, of the locations of the contemplated deliveries will be sufficient; and 
(8)  Such further information as the Town Clerk may require. 
(1975 Code, § 4-3.1308) 
(B)  At the time of filing the application, the applicant shall pay to the Town a minimum filing fee of $35.00 to cover the cost of the investigation by the Town of such application, together with an additional amount at the rate of $.01 for each 1,000 cubic yards over 25,000 cubic yards of earth or fill, if any, which it is estimated will be hauled. The fees herein may be modified by resolution of the Town Council. 
(1975 Code, § 4-3.1309) 
(C)  Immediately upon the filing of an application for a permit to haul, two copies of such application shall be delivered to the Town Clerk. The Town Clerk shall make an investigation of the facts stated in the application and, within five days after the date of filing such application, shall either grant a permit with or without modification or deny such application in whole or in part. 
(1975 Code, § 4-3.1310) (Ord. 1958-70, effective - -58; Am. Ord. 1997-486, effective 6-26-97) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see 10.99  
Sec. 71.71 - Limited truck route permit deposits; surety bonds and insurance. 
(A)  Deposits. 
(1)  In the event the application is made for the hauling of earth or fill, the Town Engineer shall require, as a condition to the granting of such permit, that the applicant, prior to the issuance of the permit, deposit with the Town, as security for the payment of the fees set forth in Section 71.73, a sum of money to be fixed by the Town Engineer, which shall be based upon the charges set forth in Section 71.73, for the amount of fill which it is estimated will be hauled pursuant to the permit; provided, however: 
(a)  Such security shall be applied to the progress payments, or if no progress payments are required, then to the sole payment, of the permit fee required by the provisions of Section 71.73 as and when such payments become due. 
(b)  Within 35 days after the hauling shall have been completed, the permittee shall pay to the Town the difference between the amount deposited pursuant to the provisions of this section and the fee due the Town pursuant to the provisions of Section 71.73 if the fee due pursuant to the provisions of Section 71.73 is greater than the sum deposited pursuant to the provisions of this section. 
(c)  Within 35 days after the hauling shall have been completed, the Town shall return to the permittee the difference between the fee due pursuant to the provisions of Section 71.73 and the amount deposited pursuant to the provisions of this section if the fee due pursuant to the provisions of Section 71.73 is less than the sum deposited pursuant to the provisions of this section. 
(d)  The amount deposited pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be returned to the applicant if, prior to the commencement of any hauling operation pursuant to such application, the applicant shall have notified the Town Engineer of his/her intention not to engage in any such hauling operation and demanded the return of the deposit. 
(2)  All notices required pursuant to these provisions shall be in writing and delivered personally to the Town Engineer or transmitted by United States registered or certified mail, postage prepaid, and addressed to him/her at the Town offices, Woodside, California. 
(3)  The amount demanded by the applicant shall be returned to him/her within ten days after such notice shall have been received by the Town Engineer. 
(1975 Code, § 4-3.1311) (Ord. 1958-70, effective - -58; Am. Ord. 1958-74, effective - -74; Am. Ord. 1997-486, effective 6-26-97) 
(B)  Surety bonds. 
(1)  The Town Engineer may require, as a condition to the granting of any permit required by the provisions of Section 71.70 for the hauling of earth, fill, or any other material, that the applicant deposit with the Town Engineer a surety bond, in an amount to be fixed and a form to be specified by the Town Engineer, inuring to the benefit of the Town and guaranteeing that the applicant will faithfully perform all of the conditions and requirements specified in the permit and will repair to the satisfaction of the Town Engineer, or, at the option of the Town Engineer, will reimburse the Town for any damages caused to Town streets or other Town property by the proposed hauling or transportation of material or equipment. Such bond shall be executed by a surety or sureties approved by the Town Engineer as being sufficient in financial responsibility. 
(2)  With the approval of the Town Engineer, the applicant may deposit such bond on an annual or continuing basis to cover one or more of such permits for hauling in the same or different locations. 
(1975 Code, § 4-3.1318) (Ord. 1958-70, effective - -58) 
(C)  Insurance. 
(1)  The Town Engineer may also require, as a condition to the granting of any permit required by the provisions of Section 71.70, that the applicant deposit with the Town Engineer a certificate or policy of a responsible insurance company showing that the Town, and its elective and appointive boards, officers, agents, and employees, are insured in the amounts set forth in this section against any losses or damages arising directly from the operations of the applicant or any firm, person, or corporation acting in his/her, their, or its behalf in carrying on any operation connected directly or indirectly with the hauling for which such permit is issued. Such policies of insurance shall be as follows: 
(a)  Public liability insurance. The public liability insurance shall be in an amount not less than $1,000,000.00 for injuries, including, but not limited to, accidental death to any one person, and, subject to the same limit for each person, in an amount of not less than and $1,000,000.00 on account of one accident. 
(b)  Property damage insurance. The property damage insurance shall be in an amount of not less than $100,000.00. 
(2)  With the approval of the Town Engineer, the applicant may deposit such policies of insurance on an annual or continuing basis to cover one or more of such permits for hauling in the same or different locations. 
(3)  All insurance required in Section 71.71 shall be with an insurance carrier that is licensed in the State of California and is in good standing with the California Department of Insurance, and has a Best Company rating of "A" or better. 
(1975 Code, § 4-3.1319) (Ord. 1958-70, effective - -58; Am. Ord. 1997-486, effective 6-26-97) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see 10.99  
Sec. 71.72 - Limited truck route permit criteria and conditions. 
(A)  Criteria. The application shall be granted by the Town Engineer only if he/she finds as follows: 
(1)  That the public health, safety, or welfare require the hauling and deposit of the earth fill and the use of the route applied for, or such modification thereof as he/she may deem advisable; 
(2)  That the hauling over the route specified will not be injurious to the public health, safety, or welfare; 
(3)  That the Town will be duly protected from liability for injuries to persons and property; and 
(4)  That the Town will be indemnified from injuries to its public streets and other places by reason of the use thereof for such hauling. 
(B)  Conditions. The Town Engineer shall specify the following in granting the permit required by the provisions of Section 71.69: 
(1)  The gross weight limit of each truck or vehicle which shall be authorized to haul under the permit; 
(2)  The time interval between vehicles, and the number of trucks per hour which shall be permitted to travel over the route specified; 
(3)  The hours of the day and the days of the week during which such trucks shall be permitted to travel over such route; 
(4)  The total number of yards of fill which may be hauled subject to the permit; and 
(5)  The period during which the permit shall be effective. 
(1975 Code, §§ 4-3.1312, 4-3.1313) (Ord. 1958-70, effective - -58) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see 10.99  
Sec. 71.73 - Limited truck route permit fees. 
In the event a permit is granted for the hauling of earth or fill, the permittee shall pay to the Town a fee for the privilege of such permit at the rate of $.01 per cubic yard of earth or fill hauled. The Town Council may change the fee herein by resolution. Such fill shall be weighed or measured by the Town from time to time at the time and place and in the manner specified by the Town Engineer, and the amount due pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be paid by the permittee to the Town at the end of each week of haul, if the hauling shall consume more than one week; otherwise the fee shall be paid at the end of the hauling period. The moneys collected from the payment of such fees shall be deposited in the General Fund of the Town and shall be used primarily for the repair and maintenance of limited truck routes and thereafter for general street repair and maintenance. 
(1975 Code, § 4-3.1314) (Ord. 1958-70, effective - -58; Am. Ord. 1973-242, effective - -73; Am. Ord. 1997-486, effective 6-26-97)  
Sec. 71.74 - Revocation of limited truck route permit. 
Any permit granted pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter may be revoked only by the Council as, in its discretion, may seem reasonable and just for any reason for which the issuance of such permit might lawfully be denied or for any failure to comply with any of the provisions of this subchapter or of such permit. The revocation of such permit shall be made only upon a hearing before the Council after at least five days' notice thereof to the permittee. Such notice shall be in writing mailed by United States mail addressed to the permittee at his/her business or residence address as stated in his/her application for a permit. 
(1975 Code, § 4-3.1315) (Ord. 1958-70, effective - -58)  
Sec. 71.75 - Expiration of permit; supplemental permit. 
(A)  In the event any hauling for which a permit has been granted pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter is not commenced within five days after the date of the issuance of such permit, or in the event such hauling is at any time abandoned for a period of five consecutive days, such permit shall automatically expire, without notice, and no further hauling shall be made; provided, however, the conditions expressed in such permit shall remain binding upon the person to whom such permit was issued, and all legal and equitable remedies shall be available against him/her for any breach thereof. When the amount of material hauled equals the number of cubic yards which such permit authorizes to be hauled, or if haulings vary from the terms of the permit, no further haulings may be made until a new or a supplemental permit to haul has been issued. In either event, an application for a supplemental permit to continue the hauling may be filed, setting forth all the information required for the original application and not contained therein. No further filing fee shall be required, but if such supplemental permit is issued, the applicant shall pay the fee set forth in Section 71.73, and the fee so paid shall be subject to the provisions of Section 71.73. The Town Engineer may dispense with any further investigation or hearing if, in his/her opinion, the information furnished him/her by the original investigation is sufficient to enable him/her to determine whether the supplemental permit should be issued and upon what conditions, if any. 
(1975 Code, § 4-3.1316) 
(B)  In the event a supplemental permit shall be refused, the permittee may appeal to the Council for an appeal from the denial of a permit. 
(1975 Code, § 4-3.1317) (Ord. 1958-70, effective - -58; Am. Ord. 2003-520, effective 10-23-03)  
Sec. 71.76 - Reserved.  
Sec. 71.77 - Compliance with other laws. 
Nothing in this subchapter, or in any permit granted pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter, shall be deemed to authorize the doing or omission of any act contrary to any term or provision of any law or license of the Town or without any license or permit otherwise required by such term, provision, law, or license. 
(1975 Code, § 4-3.1325) (Ord. 1958-70, effective - -58)  
CHAPTER 72 - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING  
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 72.01 - Application of provisions. 
(A)  Prohibited stopping, standing, and parking. The provisions of this chapter prohibiting the stopping, standing, or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times set forth in this chapter, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic-control device. 
(B)  Limited standing and parking. The provisions of this chapter imposing a time limit on standing or parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions of the California Vehicle Code or the laws of the Town prohibiting or limiting the standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times. 
(1975 Code, § 4-3.1001) (Ord. 1960-89, effective - -60)  
Sec. 72.02 - Stopping or standing in parkways prohibited. 
No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle within any parkway. 
(1975 Code, § 4-3.1002) (Ord. 1960-89, effective - -60) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see 10.99  
Sec. 72.03 - Maintenance of no stopping zones, no-parking areas, and restricted parking areas. 
(A)  Maintenance. The Town Engineer is hereby authorized to maintain, by appropriate signs or by paint upon the curb surfaces, all no stopping zones, no-parking areas, and restricted parking areas as defined and described in this title. 
(B)  Obedience. When curb markings or signs are in place, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand, or park such vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb marking or sign in violation of the provisions of this title. 
(1975 Code, § 4-3.1003) (Ord. 1960-89, effective - -60) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see 10.99  
Sec. 72.04 - No-parking areas designated. 
No operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand, park, or leave standing such vehicle in any of the following places except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police officer, or other authorized officer, or traffic sign or signal: 
(A)  Within any divisional island unless authorized and clearly indicated with appropriate signs or markings; 
(B)  On either side of any street between the projected property lines of any public walk, public steps, street, or thoroughfare terminating at such street when such area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface; 
(C)  In any area where the Town Engineer determines that the parking or stopping of a vehicle would constitute a traffic hazard or would endanger life or property when such area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface; 
(D)  In any area established by resolution of the Council as a no-parking area when such area is indicated by appropriate signs upon the curb surface; 
(E)  Upon, along, or across any railway track in such a manner as to hinder, delay, or obstruct the movement of any car traveling upon such track; 
(F)  In any area where the parking or stopping of any vehicle would constitute a traffic hazard or would endanger life or property; 
(G)  On any street or highway where the use of such street or highway, or a portion thereof, is necessary for the cleaning, repair, or construction of the street or highway or the installation of underground utilities, or where the use of the street or highway, or any portion thereof, is authorized for a purpose other than the normal flow of traffic, or where the use of the street, highway, or any portion thereof, is necessary for the movement of equipment, articles, or structures of unusual size, and the parking of such vehicle would prohibit or interfere with such use or movement; provided, however, signs giving notice of such no-parking shall be erected or placed at least 24 hours prior to the effective time of such no-parking; 
(H)  At any place within 20 feet of a point on the curb immediately opposite the mid-block end of a safety zone; 
(I)  At any place within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection in the central traffic district or in any business district, except that a bus may stop at a designated bus stop; and 
(J)  Within 20 feet of the approach to any traffic signal, boulevard stop sign, or official electric flashing device. 
(1975 Code, § 4-3.1004) (Ord. 1960-89, effective - -60) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see 10.99  
Sec. 72.05 - Parking for more than 72 hours. 
No person who owns or has the possession, custody, or control of any vehicle shall park such vehicle upon any street or public parking lot or public property, for more than a consecutive period of 72 hours. 
(1975 Code, § 4-3.1005) (Ord. 1960-89, effective - -60; Am. Ord. 1987-353, effective 1-7-88; Am. Ord. 2001-509, effective 6-7-01) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see 10.99  
Sec. 72.06 - Parking vehicles for sale. 
No operator of any vehicle shall park such vehicle upon any street or public parking lot or public property in the Town for the principal purpose of demonstrating or displaying such vehicle for sale. 
(1975 Code, § 4-3.1006) (Ord. 1960-89, effective - -60; Am. Ord. 2001-509, effective 6-7-01) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see 10.99  
Sec. 72.07 - Parking vehicles for greasing or repair. 
No person shall construct, or cause to be constructed, repair, or cause to be repaired, or grease, or cause to be greased, any vehicle, or any part thereof, upon any public street or public parking lot or public property in the Town. Temporary emergency repairs may be made upon a public street. 
(1975 Code, § 4-3.1007) (Ord. 1960-89, effective - -60; Am. Ord. 2001-509, effective 6-7-01) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see 10.99  
Sec. 72.08 - Parking vehicles for washing or polishing for charges. 
No person shall wash, or cause to be washed, or polish, or cause to be polished, any vehicle, or any part thereof, upon any public street or public parking lot or public property in the Town when a charge is made for such service. 
(1975 Code, § 4-3.1008) (Ord. 1960-89, effective - -60; Am. Ord. 2001-509, effective 6-7-01) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see 10.99  
Sec. 72.09 - Parking adjacent to schools. 
(A)  The Town Engineer, where authorized by resolution of the Town Council, shall erect signs indicating no parking upon that side of any street adjacent to any school property where such parking would, in his/her opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation. 
(B)  When official signs are erected prohibiting parking upon that side of a street adjacent to any school property, no person shall park a vehicle in any such designated place. 
(1975 Code, § 4-3.1009) (Ord. 1960-89, effective - -60) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see 10.99  
Sec. 72.10 - Parking on narrow streets. 
(A)  The Town Engineer, where authorized by resolution of the Town Council, shall place signs or markings indicating no parking upon any street where the width of the roadway does not exceed 20 feet or upon one side of a street, as indicated by such signs or markings where the width of the roadway does not exceed 30 feet. 
(B)  When official signs or markings prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow streets, no person shall park a vehicle upon any such street in violation of any such sign or marking. 
(1975 Code, § 4-3.1010) (Ord. 1960-89, effective - -60) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see 10.99  
Sec. 72.11 - Parking on grades. 
No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle unattended on a highway within any business or residence district when upon any grade exceeding three percent without blocking the wheels of such vehicle by turning then against the curb or by other means. 
(1975 Code, § 4-3.1011) (Ord. 1960-89, effective - -60) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see 10.99  
Sec. 72.12 - Parking by peddlers and vendors. 
(A)  Restricted. No person shall stand or park on any street any lunch wagon or eating cart or vehicle, wagon, or pushcart from which goods, wares, merchandise, fruits, vegetables, or foodstuffs are sold, displayed, solicited, or offered for sale or bartered or exchanged, except that such vehicles, wagons, or pushcarts may stand or park only at the request of a bona fide purchaser for a period of time not to exceed ten minutes at any one place. The provisions of this division shall not apply to persons delivering such articles upon the order of, or by agreement with, a customer from a store or other fixed place of business or distribution. 
(B)  Lunch wagons, eating carts, and pushcarts; permits required. No person shall park or stand on any street any lunch wagon, eating cart, vehicle or pushcart from which tamales, peanuts, popcorn, candy, or other articles of food are sold or offered for sale without first obtaining a written permit to do so from the Town Engineer, which permit shall designate the specific location where such cart shall stand. 
(C)  Vehicles for the transportation of property for hire; permits required. No person shall park or stand any vehicle or wagon used, or intended to be used, in the transportation of property for hire on any street while awaiting patronage for such vehicle or wagon without first obtaining a written permit to do so from the Town Engineer, which permit shall designate the specific location where such vehicle may stand. 
(D)  Permits; effect. Whenever any permit is granted pursuant to the provisions of this section and a particular location to park or stand is specified therein, no person shall park or stand any vehicle, wagon, or pushcart in any location other than as designated in such permit. 
(E)  Permits; revocation. In the event such permittee is convicted in any court of competent jurisdiction for violating any of the provisions of this section, such permit shall be forthwith revoked by the Town Engineer upon the filing of the record of such conviction with the Town Engineer, and no permit shall thereafter be issued to such person until six months have elapsed from the date of such revocation. 
(1975 Code, § 4-3.1012) (Ord. 1960-89, effective - -60) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see 10.99  
Sec. 72.13 - Emergency parking signs. 
(A)  Whenever the Town Engineer shall determine that an emergency traffic congestion is likely to result from the holding of public or private assemblages, gatherings, or functions or for other reasons, he/she shall have the power and authority to order temporary signs to be erected or posted indicating that the operation, parking, or standing of vehicles is prohibited on such streets and alleys as the Town Engineer shall direct during the time such temporary signs are in place. Such signs shall remain in place only during the existence of such emergency, and the Town Engineer shall cause such signs to be removed promptly thereafter. 
(B)  When signs authorized by the provisions of this section are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall operate, park, or stand any vehicle contrary to the directions and provisions of such signs. 
(1975 Code, § 4-3.1013) (Ord. 1960-89, effective - -60) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see 10.99  
Sec. 72.14 - Parking disabled commercial vehicles; warning devices. 
Every motor truck having an unladen weight of 4,000 pounds or more, and every truck tractor, irrespective of weight, when operated upon any street or highway during darkness shall be equipped with and carry at least two flares, two red lanterns, or two warning lights or reflectors, which reflectors shall be of a type approved by the Highway Patrol Department of the State. When any such vehicle or any trailer or semitrailer is disabled upon a street or highway outside a business or residence district within the Town and upon which street or highway there is insufficient street lighting to reveal a vehicle at a distance of 200 feet during darkness, the warning signal required to be carried by the provisions of this section shall be immediately placed at a distance of approximately 100 feet in advance of, and 100 feet to the rear of, such disabled vehicle by the driver of such disabled vehicle. The continuous flashing of at least four approved Class A-Type I turn signal lamps, at least two toward the front and at least two toward the rear of the vehicle, shall be considered to meet the requirements of this section until the required devices can be placed in the required locations. Such warning signals shall be displayed continuously during darkness while such vehicle remains disabled upon such street or highway. 
(1975 Code, § 14-3.1014) (Ord. 1960-89, effective - -60) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see 10.99  
Sec. 72.15 - No parking on the roadway in specified areas—Woodside Glens. 
(A)  Parking of vehicles is prohibited on certain portions of the following roads in the Woodside Glens area of the Town as follows: 
(1)  The paved northerly side of Otis from Glenwood Ave., west 100 feet. 
(2)  The paved portions of the roadway, beginning in front of the property at 328 Highland Terrace and including the portion of 320, 312, and to the west edge of the driveway at 240 Highland Terrace. 
(3)  On the paved portion of Alta Vista Road, both sides of the street, adjacent to 151, 143, 148, and 156. 
(4)  On the southwesterly side of Otis Avenue for 30 feet at the first turn on Otis Avenue, approximately 280 feet southwesterly of Glenwood Avenue. 
(5)  From 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m., on the southwesterly side of Otis Avenue for 20 feet at the first turn on Otis Avenue, approximately 300 feet southwesterly of Glenwood Avenue. 
(B)  The Town Engineer is authorized to post No Parking signs to enforce the above no-parking regulations. 
(Ord. 1999-496, effective 10-28-99; Am. Ord. 2007-536, effective 4-12-07)  
Secs. 72.16—72.24 - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING RESTRICTED OR PROHIBITED 
 
Sec. 72.25 - Twenty-four minute parking. 
(A)  Green curb parking shall mean no standing or parking for a period of time longer than 24 minutes at any time between 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on any day, except Sundays and holidays. 
(B)  When authorized signs, parking meters, or curb markings are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand, or park such vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb, marking, sign, or parking meter in violation thereof. 
(1975 Code, § 4-3.1015) (Ord. 1960-89, effective - -60) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see 10.99  
Sec. 72.26 - Forty-minute parking. 
When authorized signs, parking meters, or curb markings are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand, or park such vehicle between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on any day, except Sundays and holidays, for a period of time longer than 40 minutes. 
(1975 Code, § 4-3.1016) (Ord. 1960-89, effective - -60) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see 10.99  
Sec. 72.27 - One-hour parking. 
When authorized signs, parking meters, or curb markings are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand, or park such vehicle between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on any day, except Sundays and holidays, for a period of time longer than one hour. 
(1975 Code, § 4-3.1017) (Ord. 1960-89, effective - -60) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see 10.99  
Sec. 72.28 - Two-hour parking. 
When authorized signs, parking meters, or curb markings are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand, or park such vehicle between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on any day, except Sundays and holidays, for a period of time longer than two hours. 
(1975 Code, § 4-3.1018) (Ord. 1960-89, effective - -60) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see 10.99  
Sec. 72.29 - All night parking. 
No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle on any street for a period of time longer than 30 minutes between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 4:00 a.m. of any day. 
(1975 Code, § 4-3.1019) (Ord. 1960-89, effective - -60) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see 10.99  
Sec. 72.30 - Parallel parking on one-way street. 
(A)  Subject to other and more restrictive limitations, a vehicle may be stopped or parked within 18 inches of the left-hand curb facing in the direction of traffic movement upon any one-way street, unless signs are in place prohibiting such stopping or standing. 
(B)  In the event a highway includes two or more separate roadways and traffic is restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of such one-way roadway, unless signs are in place permitting such standing or parking. 
(C)  The Town Engineer is hereby authorized to determine where standing or parking shall be prohibited upon the left-hand side of any one-way street or where standing or parking may be permitted upon the left-hand side of any one-way roadway of a highway having two or more separate roadways and shall erect signs giving notice thereof. 
(D)  The parallel parking requirements of this section shall not apply in the event any commercial vehicle is actually engaged in the process of loading or unloading freight or goods, in which case such vehicle may be backed up to the curb provided such vehicle does not extend beyond the center line of the street and does not block traffic. 
(1975 Code, § 4-3.1020) (Ord. 1960-89, effective - -60) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see 10.99  
Sec. 72.31 - Diagonal parking. 
(A)  When signs or pavement markings are in place indicating diagonal parking on any of the streets, or portions of streets, established by resolution of the Council as diagonal parking zones, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to park such vehicle except: 
(1)  At the angle to the curb indicated by signs or pavement markings allotting space to parked vehicles and entirely within the limits of the allotted space; and 
(2)  With the front wheel nearest the curb within six inches of the curb. 
(B)  The provisions of this section shall not apply when such vehicle is actually engaged in the process of loading or unloading passengers, freight, or goods, in which event the provisions of Section 72.30(D) shall be applicable. 
(1975 Code, § 4-3.1021) (Ord. 1960-89, effective - -60) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see 10.99  
Sec. 72.32 - Parking space markings. 
(A)  The Town Engineer, where authorized by resolution of the Town Council, shall install and maintain parking space markings to indicate parking spaces adjacent to curbings where authorized parking is permitted. 
(B)  Subject to other and more restrictive limitations, when such parking space markings are placed on the highway, no vehicle shall be stopped, left standing, or parked other than within a single space unless the size or shape of such vehicle makes compliance with the provisions of this section impossible. 
(1975 Code, § 4-3.1022) (Ord. 1960-89, effective - -60) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see 10.99  
Sec. 72.33 - No stopping zones. 
(A)  The Town Engineer, where authorized by resolution of the Town Council, shall designate established no stopping zones by placing and maintaining appropriate signs indicating that the stopping of vehicles is prohibited and indicating the hours and days when stopping is prohibited. 
(B)  During the hours and on the days designated on such signs, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop such vehicle on any of the streets, or parts of streets, established by resolution of the Council as no stopping zones. 
(1975 Code, § 4-3.1023) (Ord. 1960-89, effective - -60) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see 10.99  
Secs. 71.33—71.44 - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - LOADING AND UNLOADING 
 
Sec. 72.45 - Authority to establish loading zones. 
(A)  Authority to determine and mark. The Town Engineer, where authorized by resolution of the Town Council, shall determine and mark loading zones and passenger loading zones as follows: 
(1)  At any place in the central traffic district or any business district; and 
(2)  In front of the entrance to any place of business or in front of any hall or place used for the purposes of public assembly. 
(B)  Limitations. In no event shall more than one-half of the total curb length in any block be reserved for loading zone purposes. 
(C)  Loading zone indications. Loading zones shall be indicated by yellow paint upon the top of all curbs within such zones. 
(D)  Passenger loading zone indications. Passenger loading zones shall be indicated by white paint upon the top of all curbs within such zones. 
(1975 Code, § 4-3.1101) (Ord. 1960-89, effective - -60)  
Sec. 72.46 - Effect of permission to load or unload. 
(A)  The permission granted by the provisions of this subchapter to stop or stand a vehicle for the purposes of loading or unloading materials shall apply only to commercial vehicles and shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor, and in no event for more than 20 minutes. 
(B)  The loading or unloading of materials shall apply only to commercial deliveries and to the delivery or pickup of express and parcel post packages and United States mail. 
(C)  The permission granted by the provisions of this subchapter to stop or park for the purposes of loading or unloading passengers shall include the loading or unloading of personal baggage and shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor, and in no event for more than three minutes 
(D)  Within the total time limits set forth in this section, the provisions of this section shall be enforced so as to accommodate necessary and reasonable loading or unloading but without permitting the abuse of the privileges granted. 
(1975 Code, § 4-3.1103) (Ord. 1960-89, effective - -60)  
Sec. 72.47 - Coach zones. 
(A)  The Town Engineer, where authorized by resolution of the Town Council, shall establish coach zones opposite curb space for the loading and unloading of buses or common carriers of passengers and to determine the location of such zones subject to the directives and limitations set forth in this section. 
(B)  No coach zone shall exceed 80 feet in length, except that when satisfactory evidence has been presented to the Town Engineer showing the necessity therefor, the Town Engineer may extend coach zones not to exceed a total length of 125 feet. 
(C)  Coach zones shall normally be established on the far side of an intersection. 
(1975 Code, § 4-3.1107) (Ord. 1960-89, effective - -60)  
CHAPTER 73 - USE OF MOTOR VEHICLES OFF PUBLIC HIGHWAYS 
 
Sec. 73.01 - Definitions. 
Unless otherwise indicated, the definitions incorporated in the California Vehicle Code shall be utilized for the purposes of this chapter. 
(1975 Code, § 5-8.01) (Ord. 1977-273, effective 6-9-77)  
Sec. 73.02 - Compliance with regulations required. 
No person shall operate a motor vehicle off a public highway or street except as set forth in Sections 73.03 and 73.04. 
(1975 Code, § 5-8.02) (Ord. 1977-273, effective 6-9-77) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see 10.99  
Sec. 73.03 - Operations not requiring permits. 
The following operations of vehicles shall not require permits: 
(A)  The operation of motor vehicles upon parking lots, parking areas, or loading areas when such operation is solely for ingress to, or egress from, such parking lot, parking area, or loading area; 
(B)  The operation of motor vehicles upon private roadways or easements when such operation is solely for ingress to, or egress from, property; 
(C)  The operation of motor vehicles for the purposes of agriculture, construction, maintenance, and repair; 
(D)  The operation of authorized emergency vehicles as defined in California Vehicle Code § 165; and 
(E)  The operation of publicly-owned vehicles by employees or agents of a public agency while discharging the specific responsibilities of their employment or agency. 
(1975 Code, § 5-8.03) (Ord. 1977-273, effective 6-9-77)  
Sec. 73.04 - Exempted operations by property owners requiring permits. 
The following operations by property owners shall require permits: 
(A)  The operation of a motor vehicle upon private roadways or public or private easements by property owners or members of property owners' families where such operations are not within the provisions of Section 73.03; and 
(B)  The operation of a motor vehicle upon unpaved land, public or private, by property owners or members of property owners' families where such operations are not within the provisions of Section 73.03. 
(1975 Code, § 5-8.04) (Ord. 1977-273, effective 6-9-77)  
Sec. 73.05 - Applications for exceptions. 
(A)  Any property owner desiring an exception shall file a verified application with the secretary of the Planning Commission. The application shall set forth the following information: 
(1)  The property owner's name, the assessor's parcel number, the residence and business addresses of the applicant, and the names of the members of the property owner's family who are authorized by the property owner to operate the vehicle; 
(2)  A description and contour map to scale of the area in which a permit for motor vehicle use is desired, showing all roads, trails, paths, and easements for the same, buildings, watercourses, paved areas, and fences locate within the proposed area or within 600 feet of the proposed area; 
(3)  A description of the vehicles to be operated, including the type of vehicle, horsepower, weight, license number, identification number, and registered owner; 
(4)  The purpose for which such operation is desired; 
(5)  The hours and days of the week for which the permit is requested; and 
(6)  Such further information as the Planning Director or Planning Commission may request. 
(B)  An application fee shall be paid at the time an application is filed, and the amount shall be set by Town Council resolution. 
(1975 Code, § 5-8.05) (Ord. 1977-273, effective 6-9-77)  
Sec. 73.06 - Issuance of permits for exceptions. 
(A)  The Planning Director shall review the application and, after such investigation as he/she may deem appropriate, report his/her findings to the Planning Commission and to the applicant. The Planning Commission may issue a permit for an exception provided the Planning Commission makes the following findings: 
(1)  The permitted operation will not create significant dust, erosion, siltation to streams, danger of fire, or cause the destruction of vegetation on the property or adjacent areas and the downstream riparian areas and downslope areas; 
(2)  The permitted operation will not intrude upon equestrian or pedestrian trails or paths upon watercourses or wildlife habitat; and 
(3)  The permitted operation will be sufficiently isolated so that, considering the type of vehicle, any resultant noise, dust, and fumes will not constitute a nuisance. The existence of buildings used for residential or business purposes within 600 feet of the proposed area of operation shall result in a presumption that such a nuisance would exist, and the burden shall be upon the applicant to refute such presumption. 
(B)  The Planning Commission may attach reasonable conditions to the permit as the Planning commission deems necessary to allow the required findings to be made. 
(1975 Code, § 5-8.06) (Ord. 1977-273, effective 6-9-77)  
Sec. 73.07 - Form and contents of permits for exceptions. 
All such permits issued shall contain the following information, and such permits shall be signed by the applicant agreeing to abide to such conditions: 
(A)  Each permit shall be valid for one year after the date of issuance, shall be limited to the hours commencing with 8:00 a.m. and ending at sunset, and shall so state. Each permit shall include limitations so as to prohibit the operation of vehicles in mud or during periods of rainfall when topsoil is most vulnerable to damage. 
(B)  The permit shall not be an expression of opinion that the permitted operation can be done with safety to the operator or to the other persons or property. All such risks shall be assumed by the permittee or property owner, and the permit shall so state. 
(C)  The permit shall include the name, age, address, and any physical description of the permittee; the description, license number, and identification number of the vehicles covered; a description of the areas of operation permitted; the times during which the operation is permitted; the purpose of the permitted operation; and any other information or limitations deemed suitable by the Planning Commission. 
(D)  The property owners shall agree to restore, at any time, to its natural condition, any area damaged by the use of motor vehicles in the exercise of such permits. 
(E)  Any permit shall be subject to suspension by the Planning Director if, after investigation, it is determined by the Planning Director that the conditions of the permit have been violated. The Planning Director shall report his/her action and findings to the Planning Commission which shall hear the matter at its next regular meeting or within 30 days, whichever is less. Within 30 days after such hearing, the Planning Commission shall either suspend, revoke, or overrule the action of the Planning Director. 
(1975 Code, § 5-8.07) (Ord. 1977-273, effective 6-9-77)  
Sec. 73.08 - Operations with permits. 
The operation of a motor vehicle shall conform to the terms of the permit at all times for which a permit is required. The permit shall be kept in the possession of the operator at all times while operating the vehicle and shall be presented to a peace officer or members of the Town staff at the time such vehicle is in operation, upon request. 
(1975 Code, § 5-8.08) (Ord. 1977-273, effective 6-9-77) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see 10.99  
Sec. 73.09 - Reserved.  
Sec. 73.10 - Violations. 
The violation of any provision of this chapter, including operations without a valid permit where one is required, or failure to present the permit when requested, shall be an infraction punishable either under a provision of the California Penal Code or as provided Sections 10.40 through 10.58 and 10.99 of this Code. 
(1975 Code, § 5-8.10) (Ord. 1977-273, effective 6-9-77) 
Cross reference— Code compliance; judicial and administrative remedies, see Sections 10.40 through 10.53  
CHAPTER 74 - TRAFFIC SCHEDULES 
 
Sec. 74.01 - Schedule I—Speed limits. 
Pursuant to the authority contained in California Vehicle Code § 22357, and based upon an engineering and traffic survey that a speed other than 25 miles per hour would facilitate the orderly movement of vehicular traffic, and would be reasonable and safe upon the certain streets otherwise subject to a prima facie limit of 25 miles per hour, the Town Council declares prima facie speed limits of 20, 30, 35 or 40 would be most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic, and are reasonable and safe on the following streets, or parts thereof, where signs are erected giving notice: 
Name of Street or Portion Affected 	Declared Prima Facie Speed Limit 
(m.p.h.) 
Alta Mesa Road 	20 
Cañada Road W-20 	35 
Eleanor Drive W-688 	20 
Glenwood Avenue 	20 
Harcross Road 
 (between Adelante Spanish Immersion School and Fernside Street) 	20 
Highland Terrace 	20 
Hillside Drive 	20 
Kings Mountain Road 
 (between Woodside Road and Entrance Way) W-42-A 	30 
Manzanita Way 	20 
North Gate W-692 	20 
Otis Avenue 	20 
Portola Road W-52-A 
 (defined as running from Woodside Road to Sand Hill Road and Portola Road W-52-B) 	30 
Portola Road W-52-B 
 (defined as running from the northern intersection of Portola Road with Family Farm Road to Town Limit with Portola Valley) 	40 
Ridge Court 	20 
Runnymede Road 	30 
South Gate W-691 	20 
Toyon Court 	20 
Whiskey Hill Road W-50 	35 
 
(1975 Code, § 4-3.1201) (Ord. 1960-89, effective - -60; Am. Ord. 1982-304, effective 4-8-82; Am. Urgency Ord. 1986-341, effective 10-21-86; Am. Urgency Ord. 1988-380, effective 12-13-88; Am. Ord. 1999-493, effective 2-25-99; Am. Ord. 2005-527, effective 8-11-05; Am. Ord. 2012-556, effective 12-27-12; Am. Ord. 2013-561, effective 10-24-13; Am. Ord. 2017-587, effective 6-22-17; Am. Ord. 2019-599 , § 1, effective 4-25-2019) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see 10.99  
Sec. 74.02 - Schedule II—Truck Routes. 
The following streets or highways are hereby declared to be truck traffic routes for the movement of vehicles exceeding a maximum gross weight, including load, of three tons, and the Town Engineer is hereby authorized and directed to designate such streets or highways by appropriate signs as truck traffic routes: 
All of Woodside Road within the corporate limits of the Town. 
(1975 Code, § 4-3.1306) (Ord. 1958-70, effective - -58) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see 10.99  
TITLE IX - GENERAL REGULATIONS 
   
CHAPTER 90. - ABANDONED VEHICLES  
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 90.01 - Findings and determinations. 
In addition to and in accordance with the determination made and the authority granted by the state pursuant to the provisions of Cal. Veh. Code § 22660 to remove abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicles, or parts thereof, as public nuisances, the Council hereby makes the following findings and declarations: the accumulation and storage of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicles, or parts thereof, on private or public property, including highways, is hereby found to create a condition tending to reduce the value of private property, to promote deterioration, to invite plundering, to create fire hazards, blight and an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, to create a harborage for rodents and insects, and to be injurious to the health, safety, and general welfare. Therefore, the presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicle, or parts thereof, on private or public property, not including highways, except as expressly permitted by the provisions of this chapter, is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(1975 Code, § 5-1.01) (Ord. 1971-228, effective - -71; Am. Ord. 1993-467, effective 2-9-93)  
Sec. 90.02 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
Highway. A way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to the use of the public for the purposes of vehicular travel. Highway shall include street. 
Owner of the land. The owner of the land on which the vehicle, or parts thereof, is located as shown on the last equalized assessment roll. 
Owner of the vehicle. The last registered owner and legal owner of record. 
Public property. Shall include "highway." 
Vehicle. A device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved, or drawn upon a highway, except a device moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(1975 Code, § 5-1.02) (Ord. 1971-228, effective - -71; Am. Ord. 1993-467, effective 2-9-93)  
Sec. 90.03 - Exceptions. 
(A)  The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to: 
(1)  A vehicle, or parts thereof, which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where the vehicle is not visible from the street or other public or private property; or 
(2)  A vehicle, or parts thereof, which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer, or junk dealer or when such storage or parking is necessary to the operation of a lawfully conducted business or commercial enterprise. 
(B)  The provisions of this section shall not authorize the maintenance of a public or private nuisance as defined under provisions of law other than Cal. Veh. Code Division 11 Chapter 10 (commencing with § 22660) and this chapter. 
(1975 Code, § 5-1.03) (Ord. 1971-228, effective - -71)  
Sec. 90.04 - Effect of other laws. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not be the exclusive regulation of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicles within the Town. The provisions of this chapter shall supplement and be in addition to the other regulatory codes, statutes, and laws heretofore or hereafter enacted by the Town, the state, or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction. 
(1975 Code, § 5-1.04) (Ord. 1971-228, effective - -71)  
Secs. 90.05—90.14 - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ABATEMENT PROCEDURES 
 
Sec. 90.15 - Authority to abate. 
Upon discovering the existence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicle, or parts thereof, on private or public property within the Town, the Town Clerk shall have the authority to cause the abatement and removal thereof in accordance with the procedure set forth in this chapter. 
(1975 Code, § 5-1.08) (Ord. 1971-228, effective - -71; Am. Ord. 1993-467, effective 2-9-93)  
Sec. 90.16 - Notices of intention. 
A ten-day notice of intention to abate and remove a vehicle, or parts thereof, as a public nuisance shall be mailed by registered mail to the owner of the land and to the owner of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. Such notices of intention shall be in substantially the following forms: 
Notice of Intention to Abate and Remove
an Abandoned, Wrecked, Dismantled, or
Inoperative Vehicle, or Parts Thereof
as a Public Nuisance 
   
(Name and address of the owner of the land) 
  As owner shown on the last equalized assessment roll of the land located at _______, you are hereby notified that the undersigned, pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 90 of the Woodside Municipal Code, has determined that there exists upon said land an (or parts of an) abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicle registered to license number _______, which constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 90 of the Woodside Municipal Code. 
  You are hereby notified to abate said nuisance by the removal of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) within ten days after the date of the mailing of this notice, and, upon your failure to do so, the same will be abated and removed by the Town of Woodside, and the costs thereof, together with administrative costs, shall be assessed to you as owner of the land on which said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) is located. 
  As owner of the land on which said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) is located, you are hereby notified that you may, within ten days after the mailing of this notice of intention, request a public hearing, and, if such a request is not received by the Town Manager of the Town of Woodside within such ten-day period, the Town Manager of the Town of Woodside shall have the authority to abate and remove said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) as a public nuisance and assess the costs as aforesaid without a public hearing. 
  You may submit a sworn written statement within such ten-day period denying responsibility for the presence of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) on said land, with your reasons for denial, and such statement shall be construed as a request for a hearing at which your presence is not required. You may appear in person at any hearing requested by you or the owner of the vehicle or, in lieu thereof, may present a sworn written statement as aforesaid in time for consideration at such hearing. 
Notice mailed ________ 
         (date) 
______________________ 
Town Manager, Town of Woodside 
Notice of Intention to Abate and Remove
an Abandoned, Wrecked, Dismantled, or
Inoperative Vehicle or Parts Thereof,
as a Public Nuisance 
   
(Name and address of the last registered and/or legal owner of record of the vehicle; notice should be given to both if different) 
  As last registered (and/or legal) owner of record of the following described vehicle (make, model, and license number), you are hereby notified that the undersigned, pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 90 of the Woodside Municipal Code, has determined that said vehicle (or parts of a vehicle) exists as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicle at (address of the property on which the vehicle is located) and constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 90 of the Woodside Municipal Code. 
You are hereby notified to abate said nuisance by the removal of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) with ten days from the date of the mailing of this notice. 
   As registered (and/or legal) owner of record of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle), you are hereby notified that you may, within ten days after the mailing of this notice of intention, request a public hearing, and, if such a request is not received by the Town Manager of the Town of Woodside within such ten-day period, the Town Manager of the Town of Woodside shall have the authority to abate and remove said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) without a hearing. 
Notice mailed ________ 
         (date) 
______________________ 
Town Manager, Town of Woodside 
(1975 Code, § 5-1.09) (Ord. 1971-228, effective - -71; Am. Ord. 1993-467, effective 2-9-93)  
Sec. 90.17 - Requested hearings. 
(A)  Upon a request by the owner of the vehicle or the owner of the land received by the Town Manager within ten days after the mailing of the notices of intention to abate and remove, a public hearing shall be held by the Council on the question of the abatement and removal of the vehicle, or parts thereof, as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicle and the assessment of the administrative costs and the costs of the removal of the vehicle, or parts thereof, against the property on which the vehicle, or parts thereof, is located. 
(B)  If the owner of the land submits a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his/her land within such ten-day period, such statement shall be construed as a request for a hearing which does not require his/her presence. Notice of the hearing shall be mailed by registered mail at least ten days before the hearing to the owner of the land and to the owner of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. If such a request for a hearing is not received within ten days after the mailing of the notice of intention to abate and remove, the Town shall have the authority to abate and remove the vehicle, or parts thereof, as a public nuisance without holding a public hearing. 
(C)  All hearings requested by the owners of the vehicles or the owners of the land, as set forth in Section 90.16 and divisions (A) and (B) of this section, shall be held before the Council which shall hear all facts and testimony it deems pertinent. Such facts and testimony may include testimony on the condition of the vehicle or parts thereof, and the circumstances concerning its location on private or public property. The Council shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. The owner of the land may appear in person at the hearing, or present a sworn written statement in time for consideration at the hearing, and deny responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, with his/her reasons for such denial. 
(D)  The Council may impose such conditions and take such other action as it deems appropriate under the circumstances to carry out the purposes of this chapter. The Council may delay the time for the removal of the vehicle, or parts thereof, if, in its opinion, the circumstances so justify. At the conclusion of the public hearing, the Council may find that a vehicle, or parts thereof, has been abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or is inoperative on private or public property, order the same removed from the property as a public nuisance and disposed of as provided in this chapter, and determine the administrative costs and the costs of removal to be charged against the owner of the land. The order requiring removal shall include a description of the vehicle, or parts thereof, and the correct identification number and license number of the vehicle, if available at the site. 
(E)  If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle was placed on the land without the consent of the owner of the land and that he/she has not subsequently consented to the presence of the vehicle on his/her land, the Council shall not assess the costs of administration or removal of the vehicle against the property upon which the vehicle is located or otherwise attempt to collect such costs from such owner of the land. 
(F)  If the owner of the land submits a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his/her land but does not appear, or if an interested party makes a written presentation to the Council but does not appear, such owner of the land or interested person shall be notified in writing of the decision. The decision of the Council shall be final. 
(1975 Code, §§ 5-1.10, 5-1.11) (Ord. 1971-228, effective - -71)  
Sec. 90.18 - Removal; notices. 
(A)  Five days after the adoption of the order declaring the vehicle, or parts thereof, to be a public nuisance, or five days after the date of the mailing of the notice of the decision, if such a notice is required by the provisions of Section 90.17(C) through (F), the vehicle, or parts thereof, may be disposed of by removal to a scrapyard or automobile dismantler's yard. After a vehicle has been removed it shall not thereafter be reconstructed or made operable. 
(1975 Code, § 5-1.12) 
(B)  Within five days after the date of the removal of the vehicle, or parts thereof, notice shall be given to the Department of Motor Vehicles of the State identifying the vehicle, or parts thereof, removed. Notice shall also be sent immediately to the Stolen Vehicle System of the Department of Justice in Sacramento, California. At the same time there shall be transmitted to the Department of Motor Vehicles of the State any evidence of registration available, including registration certificates, certificates of title, and license plates. 
(1975 Code, § 5-1.13) (Ord. 1971-228, effective - -71; Am. Ord. 1993-467, effective 2-9-93)  
Secs. 90.19—90.29 - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 90.30 - Authority of Town Manager; right of entry. 
(A)  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the Town Manager or one or more of his/her duly authorized deputies. In the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter, the Town Manager and his/her deputies may enter upon private or public property to examine a vehicle, or parts thereof, or to obtain information as to the identity of a vehicle and to cause the removal of a vehicle, or parts thereof, declared to be a nuisance pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(1975 Code, § 5-1.05) 
(B)  When the Council has contracted with, or granted a franchise to, any person, such person shall be authorized to enter upon private or public property to remove, or cause the removal of, a vehicle, or parts thereof, declared to be a nuisance pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(1975 Code, § 5-1.06) (Ord. 1971-228, effective - -71; Am. Ord. 1993-467, effective 2-9-93)  
Sec. 90.31 - Administrative costs; assessment. 
(A)  The Council shall from time to time determine and fix an amount to be assessed as administrative costs, excluding the actual cost of the removal of any vehicle, or parts thereof, for the purposes of administering the provisions of this chapter. 
(1975 Code, § 5-1.07) 
(B)  If the administrative costs and the costs of removal which are charged against the owner of a parcel of land pursuant to the provisions of Section 90.17(C) through (F) of this chapter are not paid within 30 days after the date of the order, such costs shall be assessed against the parcel of land pursuant to the provisions of Cal. Gov't Code § 38773.5 and shall be transmitted to the Tax Collector for collection. Such assessment shall have the same priority as other Town taxes. 
(1975 Code, § 5-1.14) (Ord. 1971-228, effective - -71)  
CHAPTER 91. - ANIMALS 
 
Sec. 91.01 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
Animal Control Officer. That person designated as the Animal Control Program Manager of the Division of Animal Control Services for the county and his or her duly authorized officers or deputies, as well as the President of the county's contract agent and his or her duly authorized officers or deputies. 
Animal Control Program. That program within the Division of Animal Control Services of the Environmental Services Agency of the county, or the county's designated contract agent or both, which is specifically charged with regulating and enforcing laws dealing with animal control within its jurisdiction. 
Animal Control Shelter. The facilities provided by the county or the county's designated contract agent for the impounding of animals. 
Dangerous animal. Any animal, except a trained dog assisting a peace officer engaged in law enforcement duties, which because of its disposition, behavior, training or other characteristic constitutes a danger to persons or property, or which demonstrates any or all of the following behavior: 
(1)  Any attack or other behavior which requires a defensive action by any person to prevent bodily injury or property damage or that results in an injury to a person or property; 
(2)  Any aggressive attack or other behavior that constitutes a substantial threat of bodily harm to a person or animal, where such attack, injury or behavior occurs in a place where such person or animal is conducting himself or herself peaceably and lawfully; 
(3)  An attack on another animal or livestock which occurs off the property of the owner of the attacking animal; or 
(4)  Any animal that has been deemed by another governmental jurisdiction as "potentially dangerous," "dangerous," "vicious," or any other similar designation. 
Director of Environmental Services Agency. That person so designated by the governing body of the County of San Mateo. 
Impoundment. The picking up and confining of an animal by the Animal Control Program. 
Licensing program. That program within the Division of Revenue Services of the Employee and Public Services Agency which is specifically charged with regulating and selling animal licenses and registrations in the County of San Mateo. 
Owner of an animal. That person 18 years of age or over who holds the license to the animal, or if the animal is not licensed, that person 18 years of age or over legally entitled to possession of the animal concerned and who has primary responsibility for the care of the animal. 
Severe injury. Any physical injury directly caused by an animal attack that consists of muscle tears, multiple punctures, broken bones or disfiguring lacerations, or which requires multiple sutures or corrective or cosmetic surgery. 
Vicious animal. Any animal, except a trained dog assisting a peace officer engaged in law enforcement duties, which meets any or all of the following criteria: 
(1)  Any animal previously designated as "dangerous," that after investigation by an Animal Control Officer and/or Peace Officer is found under conditions which constitute a violation of this chapter or applicable dangerous animal permit and which demonstrates a significant danger to the public health or safety; 
(2)  Any animal seized under § 599aa of the Cal. Penal Code and/or upon the sustaining of a conviction of the owner or caretaker under Subdivision (a) of the § 597.5 of the Cal. Penal Code; 
(3)  Any animal which inflicts severe injury on or kills a human being or another animal; 
(4)  Any animal which has engaged in any aggressive behavior which demonstrates that the animal represents a clear and present substantial danger to the public health or safety and that due to substantial risk to the public health or safety it is unlikely that the animal could be safely maintained under a dangerous animal permit. 
Wolf hybrid. Any offspring of domestic dogs bred to wild canids (e.g., wolves or coyotes) and their subsequent generations. 
(Ord. 2006-532, effective 10-12-2006)  
Sec. 91.02 - Animal control program. 
(A)  Responsibility. The Animal Control Program is responsible for the enforcement of this chapter, and the duties of the Director thereof and his or her officers, agents, and employees shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  To administer an animal control shelter and keep such records as may be required by law or contract; 
(2)  To impound animals which are in violation of this chapter, or for the safekeeping of the animal to protect its health and welfare; 
(3)  To remove and dispose of the carcass of any animal found on any public highway, street, alley, or other public place; 
(4)  To quarantine animals under the direction of the County Health Officer; 
(5)  To destroy and dispose of animals after due notice to the owner and pursuant to the procedures set forth herein; 
(6)  To sell, when appropriate, impounded animals after due notice to the owner; and 
(7)  To enforce all provisions of this chapter. 
(B)  Scope of authority of Humane Officers and Animal Control Officers. Humane Officers qualified and appointed pursuant to Cal. Corporations Code 14502, who are employees of any public pound, Society for Prevention of Cruelty to Animals or Humane Society which has contracted with the county to provide animal control services, shall have the authority to issue notices to appear in court pursuant to Chapter 5c (commencing with § 853.5 of Title 3 of Part 2 of the Cal. Penal Code of the State of California) for violations of state and local animal control laws. This authority is based on § 14503 of the Cal. Corporations Code. Animal Control Officers shall have the authority provided by state law including but not limited to that described by Cal. Penal Code § 830.9. 
(C)  Right to contract for animal control services. The governing body may contract for animal control services to be performed county wide, including cities, provided agreement is made with other concerned jurisdictions. 
(Ord. 2006-532, effective 10-12-2006)  
Sec. 91.03 - Rabies vaccinations. 
Every dog owner, after his/her dog attains the age of four months of age and/or within ten working days of purchasing a license shall procure from a licensed veterinarian, an anti-rabies vaccination to be administered in the manner prescribed or approved by the State of California Department of Public Health. This vaccination shall be obtained prior to issuing a license for the dog. In addition, proof of vaccination shall be provided to the licensing program. 
(Ord. 2006-532, effective 10-12-2006)  
Sec. 91.04 - Dog licenses. 
(A)  Requirements. An annual license fee shall be paid for every dog over the age of four months owned or harbored in the Town. Said annual license fee shall be first due when the animal reaches four months of age or within 60 days after the dog is acquired and due on the anniversary date of the original purchase date each year thereafter. New residents shall have 60 days in which to acquire such license. Persons renewing their license shall have 30 days following their due date before being delinquent and having to pay a late penalty. The fee for such license shall be as set by resolution of the Council. The fee paid for the licensing of spayed or neutered dogs shall be less than said license fee for unaltered dogs upon presentation of the proper certification. The license fee paid by persons over the age of 60 shall be at a discount. Any person who shall fail to pay such license fee after said fee is due, or said dog is required to be licensed, shall in addition to paying any past due license fee, also pay a penalty fee, the amount of such penalty fee to be set by resolution of the Council. A license shall be obtained, but no license fee shall be payable for the licensing of any dog being raised, trained or used to assist handicapped persons (such as those provided by Canine Companions) including but not limited to any dog which is being trained for guide or hearing purposes by a resident of the county or used for guide or hearing purposes by a handicapped resident of the county and which has come from a guide or hearing dog training facility such as Canine Companions, or for dogs which have served as a member of the armed forces of the United States of America, or any dog used by a local law enforcement agency for the purposes of crime prevention or control. Dog licenses are not transferable between owners; however, if the dog dies and the owner acquires a new dog, the license is transferable to the new dog. The license does not have to be renewed until the original purchase anniversary date. The fee paid for a dog license is not refundable. 
(B)  Exemptions. The licensing provisions in this chapter are not applicable to the following: 
(1)  Dogs used for diagnostic purposes or research, the use having been approved by the California State Department of Health Services pursuant to § 1666 of the Cal. Health and Safety Code; 
(2)  Dogs used for teaching purposes in recognized educational institutions; 
(3)  Dogs owned by veterinarians which are licensed by the state and kept on the premises used by said veterinarians in their practice; or 
(4)  Dogs kept by owners of pet shops for purposes of sale, for circuses, for animal exhibits, or for other enterprises for which a business license has been granted by a local government. 
(C)  Tags. The Licensing Program shall procure plates or tags which bear the number of the license or registration. A record shall be kept with the name of the owner or possessor, together with a description of the dog or wolf hybrid for which the license or registration is issued and the number of the license or registration, and a tag shall be provided to such person upon payment for such license or registration as provided by this Code. 
(D)  Duplicate tags. Whenever a tag has been lost or stolen, the owner or possessor of the dog, or wolf hybrid concerned may request a duplicate tag upon payment of the required fee and on making and subscribing to an affidavit of such loss and filing the same with the Licensing Program. 
(E)  Wearing of tag required. The owner of a dog or wolf hybrid for which a license or registration is required shall affix such tag to a suitable collar, which collar shall remain on the dog or wolf hybrid at all times. 
(F)  Alternative identification/implants. Animals with microchip implants or other permanent identification acceptable to Animal Control Services shall not be required to wear a tag or collar. All other licensing and registration requirements of this section shall apply to such dog, or wolf hybrid. 
(G)  Records. The owner or operator of any kennel, animal breeding facility, pet shop, or any place or establishment where animals are sold shall keep a permanent record of the name, address, and phone number of the purchaser of any dog or wolf hybrid along with the breed, color, sex, and age of each animal sold or given away and shall forward such information to the Animal Control Services within 30 days thereafter. An Animal Control Officer shall have the right to inspect such records during normal business hours, with 48 hours prior notice to the owner or operator. 
(H)  Veterinarian responsibilities. Every veterinarian who vaccinates or causes or directs to be vaccinated in the county any dog or wolf hybrid with anti-rabies vaccine shall certify that such animal has been vaccinated. Every veterinarian shall submit to the licensing authority a copy of the county-approved anti-rabies vaccination form, within ten days of the beginning of each month, for any dog or wolf hybrid which he/she vaccinates or directs to be vaccinated with anti-rabies during the previous month. An Animal Control Officer or Animal Licensing Officer shall have the right to inspect records of rabies vaccinations during normal business hours. 
(Ord. 2006-532, effective 10-12-2006)  
Sec. 91.05 - Three year licenses for dogs. 
Notwithstanding Section 91.04, a three year license may be obtained for a dog (excluding wolf-hybrids) by submitting to the licensing program adequate proof of a three year rabies vaccination of the animal to be licensed and payment of the applicable fees. 
(Ord. 2006-532, effective 10-12-2006)  
Sec. 91.06 - Wolf hybrid registration. 
An annual registration fee shall be paid for every wolf hybrid over the age of four months owned or harbored in the Town. Said registration fee shall be first due when the animal reaches four months of age or within 60 days after the animal is acquired, and due on the anniversary date of the original purchase date each year thereafter. All residents shall have 60 days in which to register their wolf hybrid. Persons renewing their registration shall have 30 days following their due date before being delinquent and having to pay a late penalty. The registration fee for spayed or neutered wolf hybrids shall be less than said registration fee for unaltered wolf hybrids. At the time of registration, the wolf hybrid owner must show proof that the animal has been given anti-rabies vaccination by a licensed veterinarian to be administered in the manner prescribed or approved by the State of California Department of Public Health. 
(Ord. 2006-532, effective 10-12-2006)  
Sec. 91.07 - Public protection from dogs. 
(A)  Every owner or possessor of a dog shall at all times prevent such dog from biting or physically harassing any person engaged in a lawful act and from interfering with the lawful use of public or private property. 
(B)  Every owner or possessor of a dog shall at all times prevent such dog from causing substantial injury to another domestic animal while such domestic animal is lawfully upon public or private property. "Substantial injury" means any injury which results in veterinarian treatment or death. 
(C)  Every owner or possessor of a dog shall desist from commanding or provoking such dog to attack, sic or threaten a person when such person is peaceably and lawfully upon public or private property. 
(D)  Any person who violates any provision of divisions (A), (B) or (C) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor. A trained dog assisting a peace officer engaged in law enforcement duties is excluded from this section. 
(E)  Nothing in division (A) of this section shall authorize the bringing of a criminal action arising out of bite(s) upon or physical harassment of members of the dog owner's or possessor's household. 
(Ord. 2006-532, effective 10-12-2006)  
Sec. 91.08 - Prohibited conduct. 
No owner or possessor of any animal shall cause or permit it to do any of the following: 
(A)  To be upon any public street, sidewalk, park, school ground, or any public property in this jurisdiction unless the animal is properly licensed, if such licensing is necessary hereunder, and under the control of the owner by being saddled, harnessed, haltered, or leashed by a substantial chain, lead rope, or leash, which chain, lead rope, or leash shall be continuously held by some competent person capable of controlling such animal. 
(B)  To trespass upon any private property without the consent of the owner thereof, and to knowingly permit the animal to remain upon the property or to habitually continue to trespass thereon. 
(C)  To suffer or permit such animal to habitually bark or meow or act in such a manner as to continuously disturb the peace of any citizen or to be a public nuisance. 
(D)  To be without proper and adequate food, water, shelter, care, and attention as described to in § 597(f) of the Cal. Penal Code. 
(E)  Division (A) of this section shall not be applicable to cats. 
(Ord. 2006-532, effective 10-12-2006)  
Sec. 91.09 - Protection of animals in motor vehicles. 
(A)  No person, other than an individual actually working a dog or other animal for ranching purposes, shall transport or carry on any public highway or public roadway, any dog or other animal in a motor vehicle unless the dog or other animal is safely enclosed within the vehicle or protected by a cap or container, cage, cross-tether, or other device to prevent the animal from falling from, being thrown from, or jumping from said motor vehicle. As used herein "motor vehicle" includes, without limitation, automobile, pickup truck and trailer. 
(B)  No person shall leave a dog or other animal in any unattended motor vehicle without adequate ventilation, sanitary conditions, or in such a manner as to subject the animal to extreme temperatures which adversely affect the animal's health or safety. 
(C)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, a violation of divisions (A) or (B) of this section shall be an infraction. Any Animal Control Officer or law enforcement officer who witnesses such a violation shall have the right to impound the animal if, in his or her opinion, the animal's health or safety is or will be thereby endangered. 
(Ord. 2006-532, effective 10-12-2006)  
Sec. 91.10 - Release from confinement. 
No person other than the owner or person authorized by the owner of the animal shall release any animal from any confinement, vehicle or restraint unless such release is necessary to the immediate health and safety of the animal. This section shall not apply to Peace Officers or Animal Control Officers. 
(Ord. 2006-532, effective 10-12-2006)  
Sec. 91.11 - Dangerous animal permit required. 
(A)  No person shall knowingly keep, have, maintain, sell, trade or let for hire an animal designated under the provisions of this chapter as dangerous without obtaining a dangerous animal permit from the Animal Control Officer. The animal owner shall comply with all conditions of the dangerous animal permit including but not limited to all requirements of Section 91.15 of this chapter. Any animal which is determined to be dangerous under this chapter and for which a permit has not been obtained shall be surrendered to an Animal Control Officer for appropriate disposition including humane destruction. 
(B)  If an Animal Control Officer or Peace Officer has investigated and determined that an animal is dangerous, the Animal Control Officer and/or Peace Officer shall deliver written notice of such determination to the owner of the animal. Should the animal pose a threat to the public health and safety, an Animal Control Officer may immediately impound the animal. 
(C)  If, after investigation by an Animal Control Officer or Peace Officer, that officer determines that probable cause does not exist to believe the animal is dangerous, any interested person may appeal that determination by submitting within five calendar days of the decision a written request to the Animal Control Officer or Peace Officer for a hearing and paying the required fee. The hearing shall be conducted according to the procedures set forth in Section 91.14 of this chapter. 
(D)  In determining whether or not an animal shall be declared dangerous, the Animal Control Officer, Peace Officer or Hearing Officer appointed pursuant to Section 91.14, may consider, as a mitigating factor or factors, whether, at the time of the injury, attack or molestation, the person or animal suffering the injury, attack or molestation: 
(1)  Provoked, tormented, teased, abused or assaulted the animal thereby causing or contributing to the alleged behavior; 
(2)  Committed a wilful trespass or other tort upon the private property of the owner or caretaker of the animal; 
(3)  Threatened or committed an unjustified attack or assault against the owner, caretaker or person in control of the animal; 
(4)  Or any other mitigating factors deemed appropriate for consideration by the Animal Control Officer, Peace Officer or Hearing Officer. 
(E)  Upon receipt of written or oral notification by the Animal Control Officer and/or Peace Officer that an animal is dangerous as defined in this chapter, the owner shall submit an application for a dangerous animal permit to the Animal Control Officer within five calendar days. The application for a permit shall contain the name of the applicant, applicant's address, the applicant's home and business phone numbers, the address and description of the proposed location of where the animal will be kept, if different from applicant's, a complete description and a photograph of the animal. The permit shall contain all of the requirements of Section 91.15 and any additional conditions or requirements deemed necessary by the Animal Control Officer or Peace Officer to protect the public health or safety. 
(F)  Should the owner of the animal wish to contest the dangerous animal designation, the owner may request a hearing, to be conducted according to the procedures set forth in Section 91.14 of this chapter. The owner shall submit a written request for a Dangerous Animal Hearing to the Animal Control Officer and/or Peace Officer within five calendar days of written notification by the Animal Control Officer and/or Peace Officer that the animal has been declared dangerous. Should the owner not submit a request for a hearing within five calendar days of notification, the hearing process shall be deemed waived by the owner, and the dangerous animal declaration will be considered final by the County Director of the Environmental Services Agency, or the city having jurisdiction. In that event, the County Director of the Environmental Services Agency or the city having jurisdiction may allow the dangerous animal permit to be issued without a hearing. Unless a dangerous animal permit is immediately obtained, the animal shall be impounded at the owner's expense pending appropriate disposition as determined by the Animal Control Officer and/or Peace Officer. 
(Ord. 2006-532, effective 10-12-2006)  
Sec. 91.12 - Declaration of vicious animals. 
(A)  No person shall keep, have, maintain, sell, trade or let for hire an animal which has been designated as vicious pursuant to this chapter. 
(B)  If an Animal Control Officer and/or Peace Officer has investigated and determined that an animal is vicious, the Animal Control Officer and/or Peace Officer shall deliver to the owner of the animal written notice of that determination. The Animal Control Officer and/or Peace Officer shall immediately impound or cause to be impounded the animal and shall cause the animal to be humanely destroyed unless the owner requests a hearing under division (C) of this section. 
(C)  If the owner of the animal disputes the designation of an animal as a vicious animal by the Animal Control Officer and/or Peace Officer he or she may submit a written request for a hearing to the Animal Control Officer and/or Peace Officer within five calendar days of notification. Such hearing shall be conducted according to the procedures set forth in Section 91.14 of this chapter. Failure of the owner to request a hearing shall result in the animal being declared vicious and humanely destroyed. The vicious animal declaration will be considered final by the County Director of the Environmental Services Agency, or the city having jurisdiction. 
(D)  If, after investigation by an Animal Control or Peace Officer, that officer determines that probable cause does not exist to believe that the animal is vicious, any interested person may appeal that determination by submitting within five calendar days of the decision a written request to the Animal Control Officer or Peace Officer for a hearing and paying the required fee. 
(E)  In determining whether or not an animal shall be declared vicious, the Animal Control Officer, Peace Officer or Hearing Officer may consider, as a mitigating factor or factors, whether at the time of the injury, attack or behavior, the person or animal suffering the injury, attack or behavior for which the animal is being determined vicious: 
(1)  Provoked, tormented, teased, abused or assaulted the animal thereby causing or contributing to the alleged behavior; 
(2)  Committed a wilful trespass or other tort upon the private property of the owner or caretaker of the animal; 
(3)  Threatened or committed an unjustified attack or assault against the owner, caretaker or person in control of the animal; 
(4)  Or any other mitigating factors deemed appropriate for consideration by the Animal Control Officer, Peace Officer or Hearing Officer. 
(Ord. 2006-532, effective 10-12-2006)  
Sec. 91.13 - Issuance of permit for dangerous animal. 
(A)  No permit obtained under this section is transferable. If the owner's address or the location where the animal is kept changes or the owner transfers ownership of the animal, the permit shall become null and void and an application for a new permit must be submitted to the Animal Control Officer. 
(B)  A permit issued under this chapter is subject to renewal and approval each year and is subject to conditions and requirements existing as of the date of renewal. The permittee shall pay an annual fee for this permit pursuant to the procedures established by the Division of Animal Control Services. If permittee fails to file an application for renewal or pay the permit fee prior to the permit anniversary date the permit shall automatically become void. The fee for such permit shall be as set forth by resolution of the Council. This fee shall not be refundable. 
(C)  If the owner or permittee has a history of multiple violations of this chapter or of the conditions of any previously issued dangerous animal permit, the Animal Control Officer or Hearing Officer may deny the permit and impound the animal for appropriate disposition as determined by the Animal Control Officer or Hearing Officer. 
(Ord. 2006-532, effective 10-12-2006)  
Sec. 91.14 - Hearing procedures. 
(A)  The hearing pursuant to this section shall be conducted by a hearing officer or designated representative appointed by the Director of the Environmental Services Agency. Any city contracting with the county for animal control services may elect to utilize the services of any San Mateo County designated hearing officer to hold hearings under that city's animal control ordinances. The hearings shall be scheduled no less than five working days and no more than 15 working days from the receipt of the request for the hearing unless agreed upon by the involved Animal Control Officer or Peace Officer and the animal owner. A hearing may be continued if the Hearing Officer deems it necessary and proper or if the owner, or Animal Control Officer and/or Peace Officer shows good cause. 
(B)  The hearing shall be conducted in an informal manner consistent with due process of law. Both the owner of the animal and Animal Control Officer and/or Peace Officer may be represented by counsel. The parties may present relevant evidence and call and cross-examine witnesses. The strict rules of evidence shall not be applicable. Any relevant evidence may be admitted if it is the sort of evidence on which responsible persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs. The hearing shall be tape-recorded and all documentary evidence submitted at the hearing shall be preserved. Any party may arrange for a court reporter to be present. Any party desiring the presence of a court reporter shall make all necessary arrangements and shall be responsible for payment of all costs. 
(C)  The Hearing Officer may exclude disorderly or disruptive persons from the hearing or make other orders as necessary to ensure the fair and orderly conduct of the hearing. 
(D)  The Hearing Officer may decide all issues for or against the owner of the animal should the owner fail to appear at the hearing. 
(E)  Within five working days of the hearing, the Hearing Officer or designated representative shall render a brief written decision, which decision shall be final at the administrative level. The written decision shall be mailed to the parties by certified mail and include a declaration or proof of mailing which includes the date on which the decision was mailed to the parties. 
(F)  Unless the Hearing Officer for good cause otherwise determines, the owner of the animal is liable for all costs related to such hearing not to exceed $350.00. 
(G)  The failure to conduct a hearing required by this section shall have no bearing on any criminal prosecution for violation of any provisions of this chapter. 
(H)  In the case of animals determined by an Animal Control Officer or Peace Officer to be dangerous or vicious, the Hearing Officer may decide any or all of the following: 
(1)  That the animal be designated "vicious" and the owner of the animal lose all rights of ownership and control of the animal and the animal shall be humanely destroyed; 
(2)  That the animal be designated "dangerous" and the owner must apply for and obtain a dangerous animal permit as provided by this chapter within five calendar days of receipt of the decision letter in order to maintain the animal and the owner must comply with all mandatory dangerous animal permit rules and regulations as defined in Section 91.15; and/or 
(3)  That the dangerous animal permit shall contain additional permit conditions to supplement the mandatory dangerous animal permit rules and regulations as defined in Section 91.15, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(a)  That the owner keep the animal muzzled at all times when the animal is off the owner's property; 
(b)  That the owner prove financial responsibility by posting a bond or certificate of insurance for an amount of $1,000,000.00 per animal as determined by the Hearing Officer; 
(c)  That the owner provide private behavioral and obedience training to the animal, at the owner's expense and within the time set forth by the Hearing Officer following the issuance of a dangerous animal permit. Proof of participation, a report of behavioral assessment, and/or a certificate of satisfactory completion from an animal behaviorist or organization approved by the Hearing Officer shall be provided to the Animal Control Officer within seven calendar days following any required training; 
(d)  That the owner comply with any other permit requirement the Hearing Officer deems necessary to protect the public health or safety; 
(e)  That the owner reimburse the victim for the victim's medical expenses or the victim animal's veterinary expenses; 
(f)  Pursuant to Section 91.19 of this chapter, that the dangerous animal permit be modified as ordered by the Hearing Officer, or revoked and the animal humanely destroyed. 
(Ord. 2006-532, effective 10-12-2006)  
Sec. 91.15 - Mandatory dangerous animal permit requirements. 
Any owner of a dangerous animal shall ensure compliance with the following rules and regulations which shall be mandatory requirements for any dangerous animal permit: 
(A)  When the animal is off the property of its owner, the owner must ensure that the animal is restrained with a leash not to exceed four feet in length and having a minimum tensile strength of 300 pounds and shall be under the direct control and supervision of the owner or a person of such age, size and strength as can easily control such animal. Extraordinary care shall be taken by the owner to ensure that such restraint is sufficient to control the animal in a manner which it will not endanger other persons or animals. 
(B)  The owner shall maintain the animal so that it is not a threat to any mail carrier, sanitation worker, meter person, or other person who has the lawful right to enter the property. 
(C)  The owner shall ensure that the animal is not kept upon any unenclosed premises unless it is leashed and controlled by a person capable of controlling such animal. The owner shall ensure that the animal is not tethered, tied or staked at any unenclosed premises. The owner shall ensure that the animal is not kept in a house or structure when the windows or doors are open or screen doors are the only obstacle preventing the animal from exiting the structure. 
(D)  The owner shall ensure that the animal is kept in a fenced yard, kennel, run or enclosure approved by the Animal Control Officer or Peace Officer. The owner shall ensure that all structures used to confine the animals are locked with a key or combination lock when such animals are within the structure. The owner shall regularly inspect the fenced yard, kennel, run or enclosure to ensure that it is secure to maintain the animal. 
(E)  The owner shall open premises upon which an animal is maintained at any reasonable hour for inspection by the Animal Control Officer or Peace Officer and said premises shall be surrendered for inspection by the owner upon the request of the Animal Control Officer or Peace Officer. The owner shall pay a fee for the costs incurred by county for the inspection or reinspection of property. Such fee shall be set forth in a resolution adopted by the Council. 
(F)  The owner of the dangerous animal shall post the entrances to the property where the animal is kept with a legible sign conspicuous to the public warning persons of the presence of a dangerous animal. The owner of the dangerous animal shall obtain an approved sign from the Animal Control Program for a non-refundable fee and shall surrender such sign in the event of the revocation of the permit, death of animal, or approved relocation of the animal, or upon any other reasonable demand by an Animal Control Officer. 
(G)  The owner of any dangerous animal must advise all members who reside in the same household and on the same premises of the conditions established by the permit for keeping or maintaining said dangerous animal. 
(H)  The owner shall strictly comply with all local and state laws regarding the care, use, control, and maintenance of animals. 
(I)  In addition to a license, the owner shall ensure that the animal shall at all times wear a separate tag issued by the Division of Animal Control Services which designates it as a dangerous animal. The owner shall ensure that the dangerous animal be microchipped and registered with the Animal Control Program within 30 calendar days from the date the permit was issued. The animal owner shall be responsible for payment of said fee which shall be utilized by the Animal Control Program to offset the cost of the chip and to maintain the registration program. 
(J)  The owner shall have the animal spayed or neutered by a licensed veterinarian, at the owner's expense, within 15 calendar days from the date the permit was issued. The owner shall present written proof to the Animal Control Officer that the surgery was performed. In the event an animal cannot be safely spayed or neutered due to medical reasons, the owner shall present written proof from a licensed practicing veterinarian to the Animal Control Officer that said animal cannot be spayed or neutered. 
(K)  The owner may not sell, transfer or otherwise dispose of such animal to another county or city without notifying Animal Control at least 24 hours before such sale, transfer or disposal. Animal Control will notify the proper authorities of the jurisdiction to which the dangerous animal is transferred. Should the owner of a dangerous animal wish to transfer ownership of the animal to another individual within San Mateo County, the new owner must submit to a property inspection, apply for and obtain a new dangerous animal permit, pay all requisite fees, and comply with all provisions of this chapter and the requirements of the permit. Transfer within San Mateo County may be denied by the Animal Control Officer for just cause. 
(L)  No more than two dangerous animals may be kept at any one household. 
(M)  The owner shall not allow any animal designated "dangerous" as the result of aggression against human(s) to be kept on property or within a household in which a juvenile person under the age of 18 resides. 
(N)  The owner of a dangerous animal must notify the Animal Control Officer of the animal's death within 24 hours and shall produce the animal's body for verification upon request. The owner of a dangerous animal must notify the Animal Control Officer immediately in the event the animal becomes lost or stolen. 
(O)  The owner must pay all permit and property inspection fees as established by Council resolution. 
(P)  The owner shall comply with any other permit conditions or requirements imposed pursuant to Section 91.14 or Section 91.11(A). 
(Ord. 2006-532, effective 10-12-2006)  
Sec. 91.16 - Misdemeanor violations. 
(A)  A person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction except as otherwise specifically provided. 
(B)  A person violating any provision of division (A) of Section 91.11 or division (A) of Section 91.12 of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 2006-532, effective 10-12-2006)  
Sec. 91.17 - Possession of animals after revocation of dangerous animal permit or vicious declaration. 
No person who has been determined to be in possession or ownership of a vicious animal or a dangerous animal for which a permit has been revoked under this chapter shall be granted any dangerous animal permit for a period of three years following such determination or revocation. 
(Ord. 2006-532, effective 10-12-2006)  
Sec. 91.18 - Inspection fee. 
A fee shall be charged for the costs incurred by county for the inspection or reinspection of property. The fee charged shall be paid by the owner or person who has custody of the animal. Such fee shall be established by Council resolution. 
(Ord. 2006-532, effective 10-12-2006)  
Sec. 91.19 - Revocation or modification of permit. 
(A)  Subject to the provision of division (B), any permit issued pursuant to this section may be revoked or modified by the inclusion of additional requirements or otherwise, if the Animal Control Officer has reasonable cause to believe any of the following to be true: 
(1)  The dangerous animal owner or any person the owner has allowed to have possession of the animal has violated any local animal ordinances, or is in violation of any Zoning, Health and Safety or Building Ordinance or Penal Code section relating to the keeping, care or use of any animals; 
(2)  The owner or any person the owner has allowed to have possession of the animal has violated any rules, regulations or conditions of this chapter including but not limited to dangerous animal permit conditions, or any requirement imposed by the Animal Control Officer, Peace Officer or Hearing Officer as necessary to ensure the animal will not endanger the peace, health or safety of any person or property; or 
(3)  The owner has changed the location of his or her residence or his or her place of business or sells, assigns, transfers, donates, leases, or otherwise disposes of the animal for which the permit was issued. 
(B)  In the event that it is reasonably necessary to protect against a threat to the health or safety of the public, or of any animal, the Animal Control Officer or Peace Officer may impound or cause to be impounded the animal while an investigation is taking place. 
(C)  If, after investigation, the Animal Control Officer or Peace Officer concludes that it is probable that one or more of the above grounds for revocation or modification of the permit has occurred, it shall cause written notice thereof to be transmitted to the owner. Said notice shall specify the grounds of revocation or modification of the permit. Should the owner of the animal wish to contest the revocation or modification of the permit, he or she may request a hearing to be held before a hearing officer not previously involved with the permit issuance or investigation, as designated by the Director of the Environmental Services Agency within five calendar days of receiving the notice of intent to modify or revoke permit. Said hearing date shall be not less than five working days or more than 15 working days subsequent to the date the request for hearing is received. The hearing shall be conducted as set forth in Section 91.14 of this chapter. After the hearing, the Officer conducting the hearing may modify the terms of the permit or revoke the permit, depending upon the permittee's ability to comply with the requirements of this chapter and to control the animal so that the health, safety and property of the public are protected. 
(D)  Upon written or oral notification by the Animal Control Officer, or Hearing Officer if a hearing was held, of any modifications to a dangerous animal permit, the owner shall immediately comply with such modified permit requirements. 
(E)  Upon written or oral notification by the Animal Control Officer, or Hearing Officer if a hearing was held, of the revocation of a permit for a dangerous animal, the owner of such animal shall within two calendar days of such notification surrender said animal to an Animal Control Officer to be humanely destroyed or provide written proof to Animal Control Officer in the form of declaration(s) under penalty of perjury that such animal has been permanently removed from the County of San Mateo and declaring the new location or new address where the animal is to be kept. 
(Ord. 2006-532, effective 10-12-2006)  
Sec. 91.20 - Animals to be impounded. 
(A)  Every animal kept or found by an Animal Control Officer or Peace Officer under conditions which constitute a violation of this chapter or other state or local law may be impounded or caused to be impounded by an Animal Control Officer or Peace Officer. The animal's owner shall be charged with all costs incurred or fees applicable with respect to such impoundment. 
(B)  When the Animal Control Officer or Peace Officer has reasonable cause to believe that any animal is dangerous or vicious the Animal Control Officer or Peace Officer may also impound or cause to be impounded the animal and keep it for such period not to exceed 15 days in order to observe, examine and determine whether or not such animal is dangerous or vicious. 
(C)  Any animal subject to dangerous or vicious animal proceedings may be impounded at the discretion of the Animal Control Officer or Peace Officer pending notice, hearings and determinations hereunder and until any required permit is obtained. 
(D)  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or state law, an impounded animal may be redeemed by the owner, after payment of the required fees and charges and compliance with licensing requirements. In the event such animal is not so redeemed within the time set forth by state law, it may be disposed of in the manner determined by an Animal Control Officer. 
(Ord. 2006-532, effective 10-12-2006)  
Sec. 91.21 - Notice of impounded animals. 
Within 24 hours of the impoundment of any animal, the Animal Control Officer shall mail a written notice thereof to the place of business or residence of the owner of the animal if known. In the event the animal may not be redeemed as provided by division (D) of Section 91.20, the owner may request a hearing under Section 91.14, divisions (A) through (G) of this chapter or applicable state law. The Animal Control Officer shall maintain records of said impoundment pursuant to Section 91.22. 
(Ord. 2006-532, effective 10-12-2006)  
Sec. 91.22 - Record of impounded animals. 
The Animal Control Program shall keep a record of all animals impounded, which record shall include a description of the animal, the date of its receipt, the date and manner of disposal, the name of the person redeeming or purchasing, and the fees and charges and proceeds of sales received on account thereof, and such additional matters as may be necessary and incidental to implementing this chapter. Said records shall be kept for four years. 
(Ord. 2006-532, effective 10-12-2006)  
Sec. 91.23 - Field return fee. 
A fee shall be charged for any animal impounded by an Animal Control Officer and returned by the officer in the field to the owner or person who has custody of the animal. The fee charged shall be paid by the owner or person who has custody of the animal. Such fee shall be established by Council resolution. 
(Ord. 2006-532, effective 10-12-2006)  
Sec. 91.24 - Redemption. 
Except as otherwise provided by this chapter or by any other law, the owner or person entitled to the control or custody of any animal impounded may, at any time before the sale or other disposition thereof, redeem the animal by paying all proper fees assessed by Animal Control Services. Animal Control Services shall issue to the owner duplicate receipts for the amount of the fee paid. 
(Ord. 2006-532, effective 10-12-2006)  
Sec. 91.25 - Redemption fees. 
Fees for animal shelter services shall be established by Council resolution. No animal shall be released to its owner or possessor unless and until such fees are paid in full. 
(Ord. 2006-532, effective 10-12-2006)  
Sec. 91.26 - License fee to be paid upon redemption. 
No impounded dog may be redeemed unless and until its license fee, and applicable penalty has been paid. 
(Ord. 2006-532, effective 10-12-2006)  
Sec. 91.27 - Epidemics. 
The County Department of Health Services may determine and declare that rabies or other contagious diseases are epidemic or that other health and safety hazards exist among dogs or other animals within the county. Upon the making of such a declaration, the County Health Officer shall prepare and promulgate such orders, rules, and regulations as are necessary for appropriate control of all the animals concerned within the county. Said rules and regulations of the County Health Officer may include, but are not limited to, impoundment, quarantine, vaccination, or destruction. It shall be the duty of Animal Control Officers to assist the County Health Officer in carrying out such rules and regulations. 
(Ord. 2006-532, effective 10-12-2006)  
Sec. 91.28 - Bite reporting requirements. 
It is the duty of every person having knowledge that any animal has bitten a human being to report that fact immediately to the County Department of Health Services, Animal Control Program or to the local law enforcement agency having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 2006-532, effective 10-12-2006)  
Sec. 91.29 - Quarantine fee. 
A fee shall be charged for the costs incurred by county for the quarantine of animals, including but not limited to investigation, inspection of property, confinement, examination and release of the animal from quarantine. The fee charged shall be paid by the owner or person who has custody of the animal. Such fee shall be in addition to the actual costs of the Health Officer or his or her designee in housing, feeding and otherwise caring for a quarantined animal. Such fee shall be established by Council resolution. 
(Ord. 2006-532, effective 10-12-2006)  
Sec. 91.30 - Service fees. 
Animal Control Service fees for redemption of impounded animals, relinquishment, adoption, disposal, abatement, rescue, veterinary treatment or other services not specified in Section 91.31 shall be reviewed by the Director of Environmental Services Agency or his/her designee for reimbursement of costs. The Director of the Environmental Services Agency or his/her designee shall have the authority to determine the fee charged for said services. The fee charged shall be paid by the owner or person who has custody of animal(s) for which said services have been provided. 
(Ord. 2006-532, effective 10-12-2006)  
Sec. 91.31 - Schedule of fees and charges. 
(A)  Animal Control fees and charges shall be established by Council resolution. 
(B)  The Division of Animal Control may establish license discounts for recognized animal rescue organizations and adoption discounts for senior citizens. 
(Ord. 2006-532, effective 10-12-2006)  
Sec. 91.32 - Penalty for violation. 
Except as specifically stated elsewhere, any violation of the provisions of this chapter, including those provisions relating to required fees, shall be punishable as an infraction, the penalty for which shall be as follows: 
(A)  A fine not exceeding $100.00 for a first violation; 
(B)  A fine not exceeding $200.00 for a second violation of the same ordinance within one year; 
(C)  A fine not exceeding $500.00 of each additional violation of the same ordinance within one year. 
(Ord. 2006-532, effective 10-12-2006)  
Sec. 91.33 - Use of license and other revenue. 
All revenue derived from the fee schedule and from fines, forfeitures, and penalties related to the enforcement of this chapter shall be used to offset the cost of enforcement and administration of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2006-532, effective 10-12-2006)  
Sec. 91.34 - Scope. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be in effect in the unincorporated areas of this county and in the Town. 
(Ord. 2006-532, effective 10-12-2006)  
CHAPTER 92. - BINGO GAMES  
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 92.01 - Bingo defined. 
For the purposes of this chapter, bingo shall mean a game of chance in which prizes are awarded on the basis of designated numbers or symbols on a card, which numbers or symbols conform to numbers or symbols selected at random. 
(1975 Code, § 5-9.01) (Ord. 1977-277, effective 12-8-77)  
Secs. 92.02—92.09 - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - OPERATING REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 92.10 - Authorized organizations. 
Pursuant to Cal. Penal Code § 326.5, those organizations exempt from the payment of taxes by Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code § 23701(a), (b), (d), (e), (f), (g), and (l), as well as mobile home park associations and senior citizens organizations, are hereby allowed to conduct bingo games in the Town if such organizations have complied with this chapter. 
(1975 Code, § 5-9.02) (Ord. 1977-277, effective 12-8-77)  
Sec. 92.11 - Staffing and operation. 
Bingo games shall be operated and staffed only by members of the authorized organization which organized them. Only the organization authorized to conduct a bingo game shall operate such game or participate in the promotion, supervision, or any other phase of such game. 
(1975 Code, § 5-9.07) (Ord. 1977-277, effective 12-8-77) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 92.99.  
Sec. 92.12 - Profits, wages and salaries unlawful. 
No person shall receive or pay a profit, wage, or salary from any bingo game authorized by this chapter. 
(1975 Code, § 5-9.03) (Ord. 1977-277, effective 12-8-77) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 92.99.  
Sec. 92.13 - Location. 
An authorized organization shall conduct a bingo game only on property owned or leased by it, and which property is used by such organization for an office or for the performance of the purposes for which the authorized organization is organized. Nothing in this section shall be construed to require that the property owned or leased by the authorized organization be used or leased exclusively by such authorized organization. 
(1975 Code, § 5-9.05) (Ord. 1977-277, effective 12-8-77) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 92.99.  
Sec. 92.14 - Open to the public; minors prohibited; physical presence required. 
(A)  All bingo games shall be open to the public, not just to members of the authorized organization. 
(1975 Code, § 5-9.06) 
(B)  No minor shall be allowed to participate in any bingo game. 
(1975 Code, § 5-9.04) 
(C)  No person shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game unless the person is physically present at the time and place in which the bingo game is being conducted. 
(1975 Code, § 5-9.10) (Ord. 1977-277, effective 12-8-77) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 92.99.  
Sec. 92.15 - Financial interests. 
No individual, corporation, partnership, or other legal entity, except the organization authorized to conduct a bingo game, shall hold a financial interest in the conduct of such bingo game. 
(1975 Code, § 5-9.08) (Ord. 1977-277, effective 12-8-77) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 92.99.  
Sec. 92.16 - Funds and accounts. 
With respect to organizations exempt from the payment of the bank and corporation tax by Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code § 23701d, all profits derived from bingo games shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. Such profits shall be used only for charitable purposes. With respect to other organizations authorized to conduct bingo games pursuant to this chapter, all proceeds derived from bingo games shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. Such proceeds shall be used only for charitable purposes, except as follows: 
(A)  Such proceeds may be used for prizes; and 
(B)  A portion of such proceeds, not to exceed ten percent of the proceeds after the deduction for prizes, or $500.00 per month, whichever is less, may be used for the rental of property and overhead and administrative expenses. 
(1975 Code, § 5-9.09) (Ord. 1977-277, effective 12-8-77) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 92.99.  
Sec. 92.17 - Total value of prizes. 
The total value of prizes awarded during the conduct of any bingo game shall not exceed $250.00 in cash or kind, or both, for each separate game which is held. 
(1975 Code, § 5-9.11) (Ord. 1977-277, effective 12-8-77) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 92.99.  
Sec. 92.18 - Hours of operation. 
All bingo games shall be conducted only during the hours from noon until midnight. 
(1975 Code, § 5-9.12) (Ord. 1977-277, effective 12-8-77) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 92.99.  
Sec. 92.19 - Records. 
Each organization conducting a bingo game shall maintain detailed records of all profits, expenditures, prizes, and other expenses associated with the operation of bingo games. Such records shall be retained for such periods of time as required by state and federal laws but in no event for a period of less than three years for the purposes of this chapter. No organization required to keep records shall refuse to allow authorized representatives of the Town to examine such records at reasonable times and places. 
(1975 Code, § 5-9.13) (Ord. 1977-277, effective 12-8-77) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 92.99.  
Secs. 92.20—92.29 - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PERMITS 
 
Sec. 92.30 - Permit required. 
No individual, corporation, partnership, or other legal entity shall conduct a bingo game without first obtaining a permit from the Town Manager to do so. 
(1975 Code, § 5-9.14) (Ord. 1977-277, effective 12-8-77) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 92.99.  
Sec. 92.31 - Application. 
Any organization desiring to conduct a bingo game shall file an application for a permit with the Town Clerk. The issuing authority shall be the Town Manager. Such application shall be under penalty of perjury and shall contain the following information: 
(A)  The name of the organization and the names and addresses of all the officers of the organization and the signatures of at least two officers, including the presiding officer of the organization; 
(B)  The days and hours of the operation of bingo games; 
(C)  A copy of the certificate or letter from the Franchise Tax Board of the State evidencing exempt status under Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code § 23701 subsections (a), (b), (d), (e), (f), (g), and (l) if so exempt; 
(D)  If the applicant claims eligibility as a mobile home association or a senior citizens organization, a statement describing the membership and purpose of the organization should be submitted; 
(E)  The address of the premises where bingo games will be conducted; 
(F)  A statement of ownership or lease of the premises; 
(G)  The purposes for which such premises are used by the organization; 
(H)  A statement of consent for the Sheriff to inspect any bank account containing profits derived from bingo games; 
(I)  The name of each individual, corporation, partnership, or other legal entity which has a financial interest in the conduct of the bingo games; 
(J)  The name of the person responsible for the operation of bingo games; 
(K)  A statement that the profits derived shall be used for charitable purposes only; and 
(L)  Such further information as may be required by the Town Manager to effectuate the purposes of this chapter. 
(1975 Code, § 5-9.15) (Ord. 1977-277, effective 12-8-77)  
Sec. 92.32 - Investigation of applicants. 
Upon the receipt of the completed application, the Town Manager shall refer the application to interested departments of the Town, including, but not limited to, the Town Attorney, Sheriff's Department, Fire Department, and Planning Department, for investigation as to whether or not all of the statements in the application are true, and whether or not the property of the applicant qualifies, and the extent to which it qualifies as property on which bingo games may lawfully be conducted as to fire, occupancy, and other applicable restrictions. 
(1975 Code, § 5-9.16) (Ord. 1977-277, effective 12-8-77)  
Sec. 92.33 - Suspension of operations; revocation of permit. 
(A)  If any bingo game is conducted in violation of this chapter, the Sheriff or his/her representative may stop any bingo game in progress and initiate proceedings in accordance with this section. 
(B)  If a permit has been issued and the Town Manager determines that the permit is revocable because of a violation of this chapter, he/she shall serve the permittee a notice of intent with the reason for the proposed revocation. The notice shall provide for revocation within seven days after the service of the notice, unless the permittee requests an informal hearing with the Town Manager. 
(C)  The Town Manager shall give at least five days' prior written notice of the time and place of the hearing. A written decision shall be issued within seven days following the decision. 
(1975 Code, § 5-9.17) (Ord. 1977-277, effective 12-8-77)  
Sec. 92.34 - Reserved.  
Sec. 92.35 - Permit fees. 
(A)  The fee for a general permit and each renewal shall be set by resolution of the Town Council. 
(B)  The fee for a special permit shall be $25.00 payable at the time the application for such permit is made. 
(C)  If an application for a permit is denied, one-half of any permit fee paid shall be refunded to the organization. 
(1975 Code, § 5-9.19) (Ord. 1977-277, effective 12-8-77)  
Sec. 92.36 - Permit term; permit nontransferable. 
(A)  General permits shall be granted for one-year terms; each term shall be renewable annually. Written applications for the renewal of a general permit shall be made to the Town Manager more than 15 days prior to its expiration date. 
(B)  Special permits shall be granted only for a one-day term for each bingo game. Such special permits shall not be renewable. 
(C)  Permits granted under this chapter shall not be transferable, either as to the permittee or the location. Any attempt to transfer shall render the permit in question invalid. 
(1975 Code, §§ 5-9.20, 5-9.21) (Ord. 1977-277, effective 12-8-77)  
Sec. 92.99 - Penalty. 
(A)  Any person who violates the provisions of Sections 92.10 through 92.15, 92.17 through 92.19, 92.30, 92.31, 92.35 or 92.36(C) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(B)  A violation of the provisions of Section 92.12 of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $10,000.00 which fine shall be deposited in the general fund of the Town. 
(1975 Code, § 5-9.22) (Ord. 1977-277, effective 12-8-77)  
CHAPTER 93. - FIRE PREVENTION  
ARTICLE I. - EXPLOSIVES AND BLASTING AGENTS 
 
Sec. 93.01 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
Approved. Approved by the authority having jurisdiction. 
Blasting agent. Any material or mixture, consisting of a fuel and oxidizer, intended for blasting, not otherwise classified as an explosive, and in which none of the ingredients are classified as an explosive provided the finished product, as mixed and packaged for use or shipment, cannot be detonated by means of a No. 8 test blasting cap when unconfined. 
Class A explosive. An explosive possessing, detonating, or otherwise having a maximum hazard, such as dynamite, nitroglycerin, picric acid, lead azide, fulminate of mercury, black powder, blasting caps, and detonating primers. 
Class B explosive. An explosive possessing a flammable hazard, such as propellant explosives, photographic flash powders, and some special fireworks. 
Class C explosive. Includes certain types of manufactured articles which contain Class A or Class B explosives, or both, as components, but in restricted quantity. 
Explosive. Any chemical compound, mixture, or device the primary or common purpose of which is to function by explosion, unless such compound or mixture is otherwise specifically classified by the Interstate Commerce Commission. Explosive shall include all material which is classified as a Class A, Class B, or Class C explosive by the Interstate Commerce Commission and shall include, but shall not be limited to, dynamite, black powder, pellet powder, initiating explosives, blasting caps, electric blasting caps, safety fuses, fuse lighters, fuse igniters, squibs, cordeau detonant fuses, instantaneous fuses, igniter cords, igniters, and some special fireworks. 
Forbidden or not accepted explosive. An explosive which is forbidden for transportation in accordance with the regulations of the Interstate Commerce Commission. 
Highway. Any public street, public alley, or public road. 
Inhabited building. A building or structure regularly used in whole or in part as a place of human habitation. Inhabited building shall also mean any church, school, store, or any other building or structure where people are accustomed to congregate or assemble, but excluding any building or structure occupied in connection with the transportation, storage, or use of explosives. 
Jurisdiction. The Town. 
Magazine. Any building or structure approved for the storage of explosives. 
Motor vehicle. Any self-propelled vehicle, truck, tractor, semi-trailer, or truck fuel trailer used for the transportation of freight over public highways. 
Permit. The written authority of the Town Manager issued pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter to transport, store, or use an explosive. 
Person. Any individual, firm, corporation, or association, including any trustee, receiver, assignee, or personal representative thereof. 
Town Manager. The Official Representative of the Town or his duly authorized agent. 
(1975 Code, § 4-2.103) (Ord. 1967-184, passed - -67; Am. Ord. 1997-486, effective 6-26-97)  
Sec. 93.02 - Compliance required. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any person to transport, store, or use any Class A, Class B, or Class C explosive or blasting agent in violation of the provisions of this subchapter. 
(1975 Code, § 4-2.101) 
(B)  The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to the transportation of explosives or blasting agents when under the jurisdiction of and in compliance with the regulations of the Interstate Commerce Commission, the United States Coast Guard, the United States armed forces, or the state militia. The provisions of this subchapter shall, however, apply to state and municipal supervision as to compliance with federal regulations within the jurisdiction of a state or a municipality. The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to the transportation and use of explosives or blasting agents in the normal and emergency operations of federal agencies, such as the Bureau of Mines, Federal Bureau of Investigation, and Secret Service, nor to state or municipal fire and police departments, providing they are acting in their official capacity and in the proper performance of their duties. 
(1975 Code, § 4-2.102) (Ord. 1967-184, passed - -67; Am. Ord. 1997-486, effective 6-26-97) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 93.03 - Permits required; application and fee. 
A permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter shall be obtained from the Town for the transportation, storage, or use of any Class A, Class B, or Class C explosive or blasting agent within the Town. 
(A)  Applications for the permits required by the provisions of this subchapter shall be made directly to the Town and shall be accompanied by a permit fee of $10.00. 
(B)  Applications for such permits shall be made at least 96 hours in advance of such intended use, excluding Saturdays and Sundays. 
(C)  The applicants for such permits shall submit a letter to the Town Manager stating the name and address of the person making the application, the explosive transportation route, the maximum explosive storage, the type of explosive, and the date, time, and location where the use is to be accomplished. The letter shall also state the name of the person who shall be in charge of the storage or use of the explosive or blasting agent and the emergency telephone numbers in each instance. 
(D)  The applicants for such permits shall submit a diagram showing the magazine locations, the type of magazine, and the construction design. 
(E)  Such permits shall be nontransferable. 
(F)  Such permits shall be valid for such periods as may be specified, but shall not exceed one year, shall be revocable licenses, and shall expire when revoked. 
(G)  Such permits shall not be issued for any building or structure occupied as a dwelling, school, theater, hotel, sanatorium, hospital, or other place of public assemblage nor for retail stores of any kind possessing any unusual fire hazard. 
(1975 Code, §§ 4-2.104, 4-2.105) (Ord. 1967-184, passed - -67; Am. Ord. 1997-486, effective 6-26-97)  
Sec. 93.04 - Bonds. 
Before a permit to do blasting or demolition work shall be issued, the applicant for such permit shall file a bond in an amount deemed adequate by the Town Manager in each case, but in no case less than $5000.00 which bond shall become available for the payment of any damages arising from the blasting by the recipient of the permit or his agents or employees. 
(1975 Code, § 4-2.106) (Ord. 1967-184, passed - -67; Am. Ord. 1997-486, effective 6-26-97)  
Sec. 93.05 - Storage regulations. 
(A)  Magazines. 
(1)  All Class A, Class B, and Class C explosives shall be kept in magazines which meet the requirements of this section. 
(2)  Blasting caps, electric blasting caps, detonating primers, and prime cartridges shall not be stored in the same magazine with other explosives. 
(3)  The ground around magazines shall slope away for drainage. The land surrounding magazines shall be kept clear of brush, dried grass, leaves, and other combustible materials for a distance of at least 50 feet. 
(4)  Class I magazines shall be required where the quantity of explosives stored is more than 50 pounds. Class II magazines may be used where the quantity of explosives stored is 50 pounds or less, except that the authority having jurisdiction may authorize the use of Class II magazines for the temporary storage at blasting sites of larger quantities of explosives. 
(5)  Class I magazines shall be located away from inhabited buildings, public highways, and other magazines in conformity with the American Table of Distances for the storage of explosives. 
(6)  When used for temporary storage at a site for blasting operations, Class II magazines shall be located at least 150 feet away from the work in progress when the quantity of explosives kept therein is in excess of 25 pounds and at least 50 feet away from the work in progress when the quantity of explosives is 25 pounds or less. The authority having jurisdiction may require a greater separation between Class II magazines and the work in progress where conditions warrant. 
(B)  Blasting sites. 
(1)  Empty boxes and paper and fiber packing materials which have previously contained high explosives shall not be used again for any purpose but shall be destroyed by burning at an approved isolated site located out of doors, and no person shall be within 100 feet after the burning has started. 
(2)  No spark producing metal tool shall be used for opening packages of explosives at blasting sites. 
(3)  Explosives which are obviously deteriorated or damaged shall not be used. 
(4)  No explosive shall be abandoned. 
(1975 Code, § 4-2.107) (Ord. 1967-184, passed - -67; Am. Ord. 1997-486, effective 6-26-97) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 93.06 - Transportation regulations. 
(A)  No person shall transport any explosive within the Town in violation of the Interstate Commerce Commission regulations or regulations of the State. 
(B)  No person shall transfer an explosive from one vehicle to another without the express permission of the authority having jurisdiction and upon receiving approval, shall notify the Fire Chief and Police Chief. 
(C)  Blasting agents shall not be transported in the same vehicle with explosives without the express permission of the authority having jurisdiction. 
(D)  All vehicles used for transporting explosives shall be marked or placarded on the sides, fronts, and rears of such vehicles with the word "Explosives" in letters not less than three inches in height in contrasting colors. 
(E)  Except in emergency conditions, no vehicle transporting explosives shall be parked before reaching its destination, even though attended, on any public street adjacent to or in proximity to any bridge, tunnel, dwelling, building, or place where people work, congregate, or assemble. 
(F)  No explosive shall be delivered to a destination between the hours of sunset and sunrise without the express permission of the authority having jurisdiction. 
(G)  Explosive deliveries shall only be made to authorized persons and into authorized magazines or approved temporary storage or handling areas. 
(1975 Code, § 4-2.108) (Ord. 1967-184, passed - -67; Am. Ord. 1997-486, effective 6-26-97) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 93.07 - Use regulations. 
(A)  The handling of explosives may be performed by the person holding the permit to use explosives or by any other employee directly under his supervision providing such employee is at least 21 years of age. 
(B)  While explosives are being handled or used, smoking shall not be permitted, and no one near the explosives shall possess matches, an open light, or other fire or flame. No person shall handle explosives while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or narcotics. 
(C)  Original containers or Class II magazines shall be used for taking detonators or other explosives from storage magazines to the blasting area. 
(D)  When blasting is done in congested areas or in close proximity to a structure, building, highway, or any other installation which may be damaged, the blast shall be covered, where possible, before firing with a mat constructed so that it is capable of preventing fragments from being thrown. 
(E)  Persons authorized to conduct blasting operations or to prepare blasting charges shall use every reasonable precaution, including, but not limited to, warning signals, flags, barricades of woven wire mats to ensure the safety of the general public and workmen. 
(F)  Blasting operations, except by special permission of the authority having jurisdiction, shall be conducted during daylight hours only (9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.). 
(G)  Whenever blasting is being conducted in the vicinity of gas, electric, water, fire alarm, telephone, telegraph, and steam utilities, the blaster shall notify the appropriate representatives of such utilities at least 24 hours in advance of the blasting, specifying the location and intended time of such blasting. Verbal notice shall be confirmed with a written notice. In an emergency such time limit may be waived by the local authority having jurisdiction. 
(H)  Due precautions shall be taken to prevent the accidental discharge of electric blasting caps from current induced by radar, radio transmitters, lightning, adjacent power lines, dust storms, or other sources of extraneous electricity. 
(1975 Code, § 4-2.109) (Ord. 1967-184, passed - -67; Am. Ord. 1997-486, effective 6-26-97) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 93.08 - Loading. 
(A)  All drill holes shall be sufficiently large to admit freely the insertion of the cartridges of explosives. 
(B)  Tamping shall be done only with wood rods without exposed metal parts, but nonsparking metal connectors may be used for jointed poles. Plastic tamping poles may be used provided they have been approved by the local authority having jurisdiction. Violent tamping shall be avoided. 
(C)  No holes shall be loaded except those to be fired in the next round of blasting. After loading, all remaining explosives shall be immediately returned to an authorized magazine. 
(D)  Drilling shall not be started until all remaining butts of old holes are examined with a wooden stick for unexploded charges. If any are found, they shall be refired before work proceeds. 
(E)  No person shall be allowed to deepen drill holes which have contained explosives. 
(F)  After loading for a blast is completed, all excess blasting caps or electric blasting caps and other explosives shall immediately be returned to their separate storage magazines. 
(1975 Code, § 4-2.110) (Ord. 1967-184, passed - -67; Am. Ord. 1997-486, effective 6-26-97) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 93.09 - Discharging. 
(A)  Only electric blasting caps shall be used for blasting operations in congested districts, or on highways, or adjacent to highways open to traffic, except where sources of extraneous electricity make such use dangerous. 
(B)  When a fuse is used, the blasting cap shall be securely attached to the safety fuse with a standard ring-type cap crimper. All primers shall be assembled at least 50 feet from any magazine. 
(C)  Primers shall be made up only as required for each round of blasting. 
(D)  No blasting cap shall be inserted in an explosive without first making a hole in the cartridge for the cap with a wooden punch of proper size or standard cap. 
(E)  Explosives shall not be extracted from a hole that has once been charged or has misfired unless it is impossible to detonate the exploded charge by the insertion of a fresh additional primer. 
(F)  If there are any misfires while using a cap and fuse, all persons shall remain away from the charge for at least one hour. If electric blasting caps are used and a misfire occurs, such one-hour waiting period may be reduced to one-half hour. Misfires shall be handled under the direction of the person in charge of the blasting, and all wires shall be carefully traced, and a search shall be made for unexploded charges. 
(G)  Blasters, when testing circuits to charged holes, shall use only blasting galvanometers designed for this purpose. 
(H)  Only the person making the leading wire connections in electrical firing shall fire the shot. All connections should be made from the bore hole back to the source of the firing current, and the leading wires shall remain shorted and not be connected to the blasting machine until the charge is to be fired. 
(I)  Before a blast is fired, a loud warning signal shall be given by the person in charge, who has made certain that all surplus explosives are in a safe place, all persons and vehicles are at a safe distance or under sufficient cover, and that an adequate warning has been sounded. 
(1975 Code, § 4-2.111) (Ord. 1967-184, passed - -67; Am. Ord. 1997-486, effective 6-26-97) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 93.10 - Blasting agents. 
Unless otherwise set forth in this subchapter, blasting agents shall be transported, stored, and used in the same manner as explosives. 
(1975 Code, § 4-2.112) (Ord. 1967-184, passed - -67; Am. Ord. 1997-486, effective 6-26-97) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 93.11 - Magazine construction. 
(A)  General. 
(1)  Magazines shall be constructed in conformity with the provisions of this section or may be of substantially equivalent construction satisfactory to the authority having jurisdiction. 
(2)  Magazines for the storage of explosives, other than black powder and Class B and Class C explosives, shall be bullet resistant, weather resistant, fire resistant, and ventilated sufficiently to protect the explosives in the specific locality. Magazines used only for the storage of black powder and Class B and Class C explosives shall be weather resistant and ventilated. 
(3)  The property upon which Class I magazines are located and property where Class II magazines are located outside of buildings shall be posted with signs reading "Explosives—Keep Off." Such signs shall be located so as to minimize the possibility of a bullet traveling in the direction of the magazine if anyone shoots at the sign. 
(4)  Magazines shall not be provided with artificial heat or lights, except that if artificial lights are necessary, an electric safety flashlight or safety lantern shall be used. 
(B)  Class I magazines. 
(1)  Class I magazines shall be of masonry, wood, or metal construction, or a combination of these types. The thickness of masonry units shall not be less than eight inches. Hollow masonry units used in construction, required to be bullet resistant, shall have hollow spaces filled with weak cement or well-tamped sand. Wood constructed walls, required to be bullet resistant, shall have at least six inches space between the exterior and interior sheathing which shall be filled with well-tamped sand. Metal wall construction, when required to be bullet resistant, shall be lined with brick at least four inches in thickness or shall have at least a six-inch sand fill between the exterior and interior walls. 
(2)  The floors and roofs of masonry magazines may be of wood construction. Wood floors shall be tongue and grooved lumber having a thickness of not less than one inch. 
(3)  Roofs required to be bullet resistant shall be protected by a sand tray located at the line of the eaves and covering the entire area, except that necessary for ventilation. The sand in the sand tray shall be maintained at a depth of not less than four inches. 
(4)  All wood at the exterior of the magazine, including the eaves, shall be protected by being covered with black or galvanized steel or aluminum metal of a thickness not less than No. 26 gauge. All nails exposed to the interior of magazines shall be well countersunk. 
(5)  The foundations for magazines shall be of substantial construction and be arranged to provide good cross ventilation. 
(6)  The magazines shall be ventilated sufficiently to prevent dampness and the heating of stored explosives. Ventilating openings shall be screened to prevent the entrance of sparks. 
(7)  The openings to magazines shall be restricted to those necessary for the placement and removal of stocks or explosives. The doors for openings in magazines for Class A explosives shall be bullet resistant. The doors for magazines not required to be bullet resistant shall be designed to prevent unauthorized entrance. The authority having jurisdiction may accept doors for openings in magazines when in substantial conformity with the requirements of this section if such construction is considered as sufficiently bullet resistant. 
(8)  The magazines shall be provided with substantial means for locking. Locks shall be provided, and the magazine doors shall be kept locked, except during the time of the placement and removal of stocks of explosives. 
(9)  Provisions shall be made to prevent the piling of stocks of explosives directly against masonry walls, brick lined or sand filled metal walls, and single thickness walls. Such protection, however, shall not interfere with the proper ventilation of the side and end walls. 
(C)  Class II magazines. 
(1)  Class II magazines shall be of wood or metal construction. 
(2)  Class II wood magazines shall have the sides, bottoms, and covers constructed of two-inch hardwood boards well braced at the corners and protected by being entirely covered with sheet metal of not less than No. 20 gauge. All nails exposed to the interior of the magazine shall be well countersunk. All Class II metal magazines shall have the sides, bottoms, and covers constructed of sheet metal and shall be lined with 3/8-inch plywood, or the equivalent. The edges of the metal covers shall overlap the sides at least one inch. 
(3)  The covers for both Class II wood and metal constructed magazines shall be provided with substantial strap hinges and shall be provided with substantial means for locking. The covers shall be kept locked, except during the placement or removal of explosives. 
(4)  Class II magazines shall be painted red and shall bear lettering in white, on all sides and top, at least three inches high, "Explosives—Keep Fire Away." Class II magazines, when located in warehouses and in wholesale or retail establishments, shall be provided with substantial wheels or casters to facilitate easy removal in the case of fire. Where necessary due to climatic conditions, Class II magazines shall be ventilated. 
(1975 Code, §§ 4-2.113, 4-2.114, 4-2.115) (Ord. 1967-184, passed - -67; Am. Ord. 1997-486, effective 6-26-97) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 93.12 - Storage in magazines. 
(A)  Packages of explosives shall be laid flat with the top side up. Black powder, when stored in magazines with other explosives, shall be stored separately. Black powder stored in kegs shall be stored on the ends, bung down, or on the side seams down. Corresponding grades and brands shall be stored together in such a manner that the brands and grade marks show. All stocks shall be stored so as to be easily counted and checked. Packages of explosives shall be piled in a stable manner. When any kind of explosive is removed from a magazine for use, the oldest explosive of that particular kind shall always be taken first. 
(B)  Packages of explosives shall not be unpacked or repacked in a magazine, nor within 50 feet of a magazine, nor in close proximity to other explosives. Tools used for opening packages of explosives shall be constructed of nonsparking materials, except that metal slitters may be used for opening fiberboard boxes. A wood wedge and a fibre, rubber, or wood mallet shall be used for opening or closing wood packages of explosives. Open packages shall be securely closed before returning such open packages to a magazine. 
(C)  Magazines shall not be used for the storage of any metal tools nor any commodity, except explosives but this restriction shall not apply to the storage of blasting agents and blasting supplies. 
(D)  Magazine floors shall be swept regularly and shall be kept clean, dry, and free of grit, paper, empty used packages, and rubbish. Brooms and other cleaning utensils shall not have any spark producing metal parts. Sweepings from the floors of magazines shall be properly disposed of. 
(E)  When any explosive has deteriorated to an extent that it is unstable or in a dangerous condition, the person in charge or possession of such explosives shall immediately report the fact to the authority having jurisdiction and, upon his authorization, shall proceed to destroy such explosives in accordance with the instructions of the manufacturer. Only experienced persons shall do the work of destroying explosives. 
(F)  When magazines need inside repairs, all explosives shall be removed therefrom and the floors cleaned. In making outside repairs, if there is a possibility of causing sparks or fire, the explosives shall be removed from the magazine. Explosives removed from the magazine under repair shall either be placed in another magazine or be placed a safe distance from the magazine where they shall be properly guarded and protected until the repairs have been completed when they shall be returned to the magazine. 
(G)  Smoking, matches, open flames, spark producing devices, and firearms shall be prohibited inside of or within 50 feet of magazines. Combustible materials shall not be stored within 50 feet of magazines. 
(H)  Magazines shall be in charge of a competent person at all times who shall be at least 21 years of age and who shall be held responsible for the enforcement of all safety precautions. 
(1975 Code, § 4-2.116) (Ord. 1967-184, passed - -67; Am. Ord. 1997-486, effective 6-26-97) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 93.13 - Inspections. 
The Town Manager may, at reasonable hours, inspect the premises, buildings, installations, or equipment for the storage, handling, or use of explosives or blasting agents. If a violation of the provisions of this subchapter is found to exist, he shall file with the owner, occupant, or operator a notice citing the violation and ordering its correction. If such order is not complied with, he may suspend the permit. 
(1975 Code, § 4-2.117) (Ord. 1967-184, passed - -67; Am. Ord. 1997-486, effective 6-26-97) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 93.14 - General regulations. 
(A)  No person shall transport, store, or use any explosive or blasting agent when such storage, transportation, or use constitutes an undue hazard to life or property. 
(B)  No person shall use or explode any explosive or blasting agent for purposes other than blasting or demolition operations, except upon the approval of the authority having jurisdiction. 
(C)  No person shall sell or give away any explosive or blasting agent to any unauthorized person. 
(D)  The provisions of this subchapter shall not be construed to prohibit the use of explosives in the form prescribed by the official United States Pharmacopoeia. 
(E)  Governmental and industrial laboratories of technical institutes, colleges, universities, and similar institutions may be permitted to keep, store, and use explosives or blasting agents when confined to the purpose of scientific or technical instruction or research provided the storage and use of such explosives or blasting agents is under experienced and competent supervision and not more than 15 pounds of explosives or blasting agents are kept on hand at any time in such laboratories. 
(F)  The authority having jurisdiction may restrict the quantity of explosives or blasting agents which may be handled at any location within the Town. 
(1975 Code, § 4-2.118) (Ord. 1967-184, passed - -67; Am. Ord. 1997-486, effective 6-26-97) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 93.15 - Reserved.  
Sec. 93.16 - Violations. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this subchapter or any order of the Town Manager made pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter for the protection of the public safety, welfare, health, or comfort. Any person violating any of the provisions of this subchapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as set forth in Sections 10.40 through 10.58 of this Code. 
(1975 Code, § 4-2.120) (Ord. 1967-184, passed - -67; Am. Ord. 1997-486, effective 6-26-97) 
Cross reference— Code compliance; judicial and administrative remedies, see Sections 10.40 through 10.53.  
Secs. 93.17—93.29 - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FIREWORKS 
 
Sec. 93.30 - Fireworks unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to do any of the following: 
(A)  Manufacture, import, export, possess, or sell any fireworks at wholesale or retail for any use, including agricultural purposes or wild life control; 
(B)  Discharge dangerous fireworks, as defined in Cal Health & Safety Code §§ 12500 et seq., in any place; 
(C)  Make a public display of fireworks; and 
(D)  Transport fireworks, except as a public carrier. 
(1975 Code, § 4-2.201) (Ord. 1957-34, effective - -57) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
CHAPTER 94. - HEALTH AND SANITATION 
 
Sec. 94.01 - Chemical toilets. 
(A)  Chapter 7 of the Environmental Health Code of the County, as set forth in Part 2 of Division IV of the San Mateo County Ordinance Code, establishing health standards for chemical toilets, is hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this Code as though set forth in this Code in full. 
(1975 Code, § 6-2.01) 
(B)  Section 8509.10 of the San Mateo County Ordinance Code, relating to the cleaning of chemical toilets, is hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this Code as though set forth in this Code in full. 
(1975 Code, § 6-2.02) (Ord. 1977-275, effective 8-11-77)  
Sec. 94.02 - Food establishments. 
Chapter 2 of the Environmental Health Code of the County, as set forth in Part 2 of Division IV of the San Mateo County Ordinance Code, establishing health standards for restaurants, itinerant restaurants, mobile food vendors, caterers, and food equipment, is hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this Code as though set forth in this Code in full. 
(1975 Code, § 6-3.01) (Ord. 1977-275, effective 8-11-77)  
Sec. 94.03 - Rodent and insect control. 
Chapter 8 of the Environmental Health Code of the County, as set forth in Part 2 of Division IV of the San Mateo County Ordinance Code, establishing health standards for rodent and insect control, is hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this Code as though set forth in this Code in full. 
(1975 Code, § 6-8.01) (Ord. 1977-275, effective 8-11-77)  
Sec. 94.04 - Hazardous material storage permits. 
The Hazardous materials storage permits ordinance, Ord. No. 1983-315, effective 1-12-84, is hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this Code the same as if set forth in full herein.  
CHAPTER 95. - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS  
ARTICLE I. - ENCROACHMENTS 
 
Sec. 95.01 - Encroachment permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation, public or private, to construct or install within the public rights-of-way of the Town any side road or private driveway, or any culvert or other drainage facility, or any other improvement or structure unless and until an encroachment permit has been obtained from the Town Engineer. 
(1975 Code, § 7-2.01) (Ord. 1958-61, effective - -58) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 95.02 - Applications. 
(A)  Applications for the encroachment permits required by the provisions of this chapter shall be made to the Town Engineer and shall be accompanied by a fee in an amount fixed annually by resolution of the Council. 
(1975 Code, § 7-2.02) 
(B)  Any application for an encroachment permit required by the provisions of this chapter which would establish more than one private driveway to serve any single lot or parcel shall be referred to the Planning Commission for review and recommendation. The Town Engineer shall thereafter act on the permit, taking into consideration the recommendations of the Planning Commission. 
(1975 Code, § 7-2.03) (Ord. 1958-61, effective - -58)  
Sec. 95.03 - Establishment of grade lines. 
After the issuance of the encroachment permit required by the provisions of this chapter, the Town Engineer shall establish for the permittee the location and grade lines for all improvements or facilities to be located in the public right-of-way and shall specify other conditions necessary to protect the public safety and property. 
(1975 Code, § 7-2.04) (Ord. 1958-61, effective - -58)  
Sec. 95.04 - Standard plans and standard specifications. 
All work and improvements installed in the public right-of-way shall conform with the standard plans and standard specifications of the Town and shall be installed to the satisfaction of the Town Engineer. 
(1975 Code, § 7-2.05) (Ord. 1958-61, effective - -58) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 95.05 - Appeals. 
The Council may consider appeals from the provisions of this chapter, from the recommendations of the Planning Commission, and from the determinations of the Town Engineer. Such appeals shall be filed with the Town Clerk and shall set forth all of the pertinent factual material on which the appeal is based. The Council may make determinations of alternate methods, standards, or materials when, in its opinion, the strict compliance with the provisions of this chapter, the recommendations of the Planning Commission, or the decisions of the Town Engineer are unnecessary. 
(1975 Code, § 7-2.06) (Ord. 1958-61, effective - -58)  
Secs. 95.06—95.14 - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - SPECIAL EVENTS 
 
Sec. 95.15 - Purpose and findings. 
(A)  Purposes. The purposes of this chapter are: 
(1)  To protect the residential, rural atmosphere of the Town and its small commercial area; 
(2)  To protect the safety of persons using the Town's public roads; 
(3)  To assure traffic circulation in compliance with the Town's general plan; 
(4)  To maintain the quality of life for the residents of the Town; and 
(5)  To prevent excessive burdens on the Town's staff and emergency personnel. 
(B)  Findings. The Council finds that: 
(1)  Town roads are being used by large groups of persons for various special events, including running, bicycling, and equestrian events; 
(2)  Traffic circulation has been impeded, there have been full and partial Town road closures, and the safety of persons using the roads has been affected by such events; 
(3)  The residential, rural atmosphere of the Town has been adversely affected; and 
(4)  It is necessary to adopt regulations controlling the use of the Town's streets for special events. 
(1975 Code, § 4-4.01) (Ord. 1988-358, effective 4-7-88)  
Sec. 95.16 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
Encroachment permit. A permit to hold a special event issued pursuant to this chapter. 
Intermittent traffic break. The slowing down of traffic for a period of time in excess of three minutes. 
Road closure. Any closure of any road or lane of any road or path or trail within the public right-of-way or a stoppage of traffic which exceeds three minutes in duration. An intermittent traffic break shall be considered a road closure. 
Special event. An organized procession or assemblage in which in excess of 50 people take part on a public road under the jurisdiction of the Town which procession or assemblage would interfere with the unrestricted movement of public traffic, require special traffic control, or create a safety problem. Examples of special events include, but are not limited to, parades, wedding processions, funeral processions, demonstrations, marches, races, marathons, bikeathons, walkathons, other bicycling or jogging events, celebrations, fairs, and other similar activities. Notwithstanding the foregoing, activities which do not interfere with public traffic and safety and which conform to the Vehicle Code of the State shall not be deemed to be special events. A road closure shall be deemed an interference with unrestricted movement of public traffic. 
Special Event Traffic Monitor. A person who shall monitor a special event and who has completed a traffic control program approved by the California Highway Patrol in accordance with the provisions of Cal. Veh. Code § 21100 subsection (e). 
Sponsor. A person, organization, association, club, city, corporation, or other entity managing, organizing, or conducting, or planning to manage, organize, or conduct, an event. 
(1975 Code, § 4-4.02) (Ord. 1988-358, effective 4-7-88)  
Sec. 95.17 - Encroachment permit required. 
(A)  No person shall conduct a special event unless an encroachment permit has been issued covering such event. 
(B)  The sponsor of any special event issued a permit shall conduct the event solely in accordance with the terms and conditions shown on the permit and not otherwise. 
(C)  The Town shall issue no more than two encroachment permits in any calendar month. 
(1975 Code, § 4-4.03(a)—(c)) (Ord. 1988-358, effective 4-7-88) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 95.18 - Application process. 
(A)  The Council may issue a written encroachment permit for the holding of a special event as defined in this chapter. Before a special event can be carried out, the sponsor thereof shall apply for an encroachment permit on a form prescribed by the Town Clerk. The application shall include the following information: 
(1)  The name, address, and telephone number of the sponsor of the event and the address and telephone number of all officers of any entity which is managing or sponsoring the event; 
(2)  The proposed date and hours of the event; 
(3)  The proposed route; 
(4)  The number of persons expected to participate; 
(5)  The number and types of vehicles, bicycles, or animals expected to participate; 
(6)  The road closures requested, if any; 
(7)  The parking plans; 
(8)  The assembly and dispersal points and plans for parking vehicles; 
(9)  Whether and to what extent food, beverages, or alcoholic drinks are to be served and the plans for cleanup; 
(10)  Whether and to what extent toilet facilities will be provided; 
(11)  The proposed use of sound equipment; 
(12)  Whether the event is to be conducted for profit; 
(13)  Whether contributions are being solicited and their purpose; 
(14)  A description of similar events held by the sponsor anywhere in the United States within the last two years; 
(15)  Any other information necessary to determine the terms and conditions of the permit as described in Section 95.20 of this chapter; and 
(16)  The names, addresses and telephone numbers of proposed special event traffic monitors and a statement and proof of their respective qualifications. 
(B)  All applications for encroachment permits shall be filed with the Town Clerk not less than 120 days nor more than one year prior to the event. The Council for good cause may waive the requirements of this division. 
(C)  Applicants shall pay a fee set by Council resolution to cover the cost of processing the application. The Council for good cause may waive the requirements of this division. 
(D)  A sponsor may file an application for informational purposes only without requesting a permit. 
(1975 Code, § 4-4.04) (Ord. 1988-358, effective 4-7-88)  
Sec. 95.19 - Review by Council; approval or disapproval. 
(A)  The Council shall review all completed applications made pursuant to this chapter within 45 working days, or a completed application shall be deemed approved. 
(B)  The Council shall approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove an application in accordance with the purposes and findings of this chapter. If an application is disapproved, the Council shall state the reasons for disapproval. 
(C)  The Council shall not grant encroachment permits for special events which are expected to be held during periods of high peak traffic flow or during the time period extending from one hour before sunset and one hour after sunrise. 
(D)  Where an applicant has been approved for an encroachment permit by the Town Council, and applies in the next year (or years) for a new encroachment permit for substantially the same event, the Town Manager shall review and approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the application in place of Town Council, under this chapter. The action of the Town Manager shall be appealable to the Town Council within ten days of the date of the Manager's decision. 
(1975 Code, § 4-4.05) (Ord. 1988-358, effective 4-7-88; Am. Ord. 1996-484, effective 7-11-96)  
Sec. 95.20 - Conditions for permits. 
Encroachment permit terms and conditions, in addition, shall regulate the following matters where applicable: 
(A)  The event starting and ending times; 
(B)  The Town roads which will be traveled or closed; 
(C)  The maximum number of participants allowed; 
(D)  Advance posting of at least 30 days of the location or route; 
(E)  The traffic-control signs and barricades; 
(F)  Event participant monitors; 
(G)  Whether special event traffic monitors shall be required. The Council shall require such monitors as a condition to granting an encroachment permit only where necessary for the safety of the public and only if a training program is or has been available for the appropriate training; 
(H)  The parking; 
(I)  The off-road staging areas; 
(J)  The sanitation facilities; 
(K)  The emergency services; 
(L)  The route signs, markings, directions, or maps; 
(M)  The provisions to pick up injured or fatigued participants, route signs, barricades, cones, or other traffic-control devices, and litter; 
(N)  The communication to participants of road use responsibilities; 
(O)  The return, replacement, or repair of traffic-control devices or other equipment provided by the Town or its officers, employees, or agents; 
(P)  Any other matter which, in the discretion of the Council, significantly and reasonably affects the safety or welfare of event participants or traffic; 
(Q)  Adequate detours for road closures in excess of 15 minutes total; and 
(R)  The plans and routes shall be reviewed by the Sheriff's Department. If a special patrol is needed, an estimate shall be prepared and the amount thereof deposited with the Town to be used for the actual cost of the additional Sheriff's protection. 
(1975 Code, § 4-4.06) (Ord. 1988-358, effective 4-7-88)  
Sec. 95.21 - Indemnification. 
As a condition to the issuance of an encroachment permit, all applicants shall indemnify, hold harmless, and defend the Town, and each and all of its officers, employees, and agents, from any and all liability actions, claims, damages, costs, and expenses, including reasonable attorneys' fees, costs, and expenses of legal actions, which may be asserted by any person or entity, including the permittee, arising out of or in connection with the wilful act or negligence of the permittee. 
(1975 Code, § 4-4.07) (Ord. 1988-358, effective 4-7-88)  
Sec. 95.22 - Insurance requirement. 
As a condition to the issuance of an encroachment permit, the Council may require an applicant to file a certificate of insurance showing the maintenance of insurance in an amount appropriate to cover the liability of the permittee for property damages and injuries to persons in connection with the activities conducted in accordance with the permit. The amount of insurance shall be based upon the size and nature of the event, the risks foreseeably involved, and the cost and availability of such insurance and shall not exceed $1,000,000.00. The certificate of insurance shall name the Town, and its agents and employees, as additional insureds. 
(1975 Code, § 4-4.08) (Ord. 1988-358, effective 4-7-88)  
Sec. 95.23 - Supervision of activities. 
(A)  The Town and its officers, employees, and agents assume no responsibility for the supervision of the activities conducted under the authority of the permit required by this chapter. The permittee shall be responsible for the supervision of event activities. 
(B)  Whenever special event traffic monitors are required as a condition of such permit, the permittee shall provide the name of the person responsible for the monitors. 
(1975 Code, § 4-4.09) (Ord. 1988-358, effective 4-7-88)  
Sec. 95.24 - Revocation of permit. 
The Council or the Town Manager may revoke the permit required by this chapter or cancel, postpone, interrupt, or terminate a special event in the event of public disaster or disorder, or if conditions are present which significantly affect the safety of event participants or traffic, or if the permittee violates any condition of the permit. Revocation may be oral or written. If in writing, the revocation notice shall be personally delivered to the permittee or mailed by first-class mail to the permittee's address. 
(1975 Code, § 4-4.10) (Ord. 1988-358, effective 4-7-88)  
CHAPTER 96. - PARKS AND RECREATION  
ARTICLE I. - PUBLIC TRAILS 
 
Sec. 96.01 - Purpose of regulations. 
(A)  Public trails are valuable recreational facilities which are recognized as being a part of the rural character of the Town and, as such, are developed and maintained primarily for use by residents of the Town and their guests. 
(B)  In order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare of the residents and property owners, it is essential to maintain public trails and at the same time protect the privacy and safety of private property. 
(C)  This chapter is specifically designed to implement the Town General Plan, Circulation and Scenic Highways Elements, Trails (General Plan Sections 2427 through 2434). 
(1975 Code, § 5-10.01) (Ord. 1981-295, effective 5-14-81)  
Sec. 96.02 - Obstructions restricted. 
(A)  General. Obstructions to public trails shall be prohibited and shall not be installed, placed, or maintained on a public trail unless authorized by the Town. Obstructions shall consist of, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Fences or gates installed in or across any public trail; 
(2)  Trees, bushes, shrubs, or other plantings, unless trimmed or maintained so as not to obstruct the safe and convenient use of the trail; 
(3)  Structures of any kind, including, but not limited to, sheds, irrigation systems, and wells; 
(4)  Corrals or pastures for livestock, all or a portion of which encroach into the public trail easement; 
(5)  Pens or runs for fowl or animals; 
(6)  Vehicle parking; 
(7)  Paving by the use of any impervious substance; and 
(8)  Movable objects, such as firewood, lumber, pipe, or loads of gravel, sand, or debris, which are upon or extend within the public trails easement. 
(B)  Fences and gates. 
(1)  Trails on public road rights-of-way or privates. No fence, gate, wall, planting, or other obstruction shall be installed, placed, or maintained on a public trail located within the right-of-way of any public street, road, or highway or any private road. 
(2)  Dedicated trail easements adjacent to and parallel to public road rights-of-way or private roads. Fences shall not be permitted along trail easement boundaries adjacent to public road rights-of-way or private roads. Fences shall be permitted along a trail easement boundary nearest to the interior portion of the private property on which such trail easement is located provided no part of such fence shall encroach into or upon the public trail easement. 
(3)  All other public trail easements. No gate shall be installed, placed, or maintained within a public trail easement, except that the Town may permit a gate to be installed at the intersection of a public trail easement and a public or private road. No fence, planting, or other obstruction shall be installed, placed, or maintained within a public trail easement without the permission of the Town. 
(1975 Code, §§ 5-10.02, 5-10.03) (Ord. 1981-295, effective 5-14-81) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 96.03 - Supplemental rules and regulations; violations. 
The Council, from time to time, may adopt by resolution rules and regulations for the purpose of controlling the use of trails and implementing this chapter. Each violation of such rules and regulations duly adopted shall be deemed to be an infraction and subject to the penalties set forth in Section 10.99 of this Code. 
(1975 Code, § 5-10.04) (Ord. 1981-295, effective 5-14-81)  
Sec. 96.04 - Prohibited uses. 
Any use of a public trail other than for the use or purpose for which the public trail was dedicated shall be prohibited. 
(1975 Code, § 5-10.05) (Ord. 1981-295, effective 5-14-81) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 96.05 - Violations. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. Each violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor, except a violation of Section 96.03 which shall be an infraction, and subject to the penalties set forth in Section 10.99 of this Code. 
(1975 Code, § 5-10.06) (Ord. 1981-295, effective 5-14-81)  
CHAPTER 97. - SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES 
 
Sec. 97.01 - Findings and purpose. 
The Town Council finds that: 
(A)  Numerous studies have found that tobacco smoke is a major contributor to indoor air pollution: 
(1)  In the United States Surgeon General's report on the health consequences of second-hand tobacco smoke the medical community has generally concluded that non-smokers subjected to tobacco smoke are at risk for the development of lung cancer. In addition, there are serious health consequences including respiratory malfunctions and irritation that may result from inhaling tobacco smoke. 
(2)  The California Legislature, by the California Indoor Clean Air Act of 1976, and Cal. Health & Safety Code § 25940 et seq., has found and declared that tobacco is a hazard to the health of the general public; 
(B)  Reliable studies have shown that breathing smoke exhaled or otherwise produced or caused by others ("second-hand smoke") is a significant health hazard, particularly for certain population groups, including elderly people, individuals with cardiovascular disease, and individuals with impaired respiratory functions including asthmatics and those with obstructive airway disease; 
(C)  Health hazards induced by breathing second-hand smoke include lung cancer, respiratory infection, decreased respiratory functions, bronchoconstriction, and bronchospasm; 
(D)  Nonsmokers with allergies, respiratory diseases and those who suffer other ill effects of breathing second-hand smoke may experience a loss of job productivity or may be forced to take periodic sick leave because of adverse reactions to the same; 
(E)  Numerous studies have shown that a majority of both nonsmokers and smokers desire to have restrictions on smoking in public places and places of employment; and 
(F)  Smoking is a documented cause of fires; 
(G)  Non-smokers should have a right to be free from exposure to second-hand tobacco smoke from those who use tobacco; 
(H)  The Town Council concurs in the findings of the California Legislature and the United States Attorney General and in addition finds that the California Indoor Clean Air Act of 1976, as amended, should be expanded by local regulation not inconsistent with the provisions thereof, and as authorized by Cal. Health & Safety Code §§ 25946 and 25949.6; 
(I)  The Town Council further finds that the regulations enacted in this chapter are not within the provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act in that the effect of the ordinance codified in this chapter is to have a beneficial effect on the public health, safety and welfare rather than an adverse effect and therefor this chapter is not a project under the California Environmental Quality Act; 
(J)  Accordingly, the Town Council finds and declares that the purposes of this chapter are to protect the public health and welfare by prohibiting smoking in public places except in designated smoking areas, and by regulating smoking in places of employment; and strike a reasonable balance between the needs of smokers and the need of nonsmokers to breathe smoke-free air, and to recognize that, where these needs conflict, the need to breathe smoke-free air shall have priority. 
(1975 Code, § 5-13.01) (Ord. 1990-439, effective 11-9-90)  
Sec. 97.02 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
Bar. An area which is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages and in which the service of food is adjacent to or incidental to the consumption of such beverages. 
Business. Any sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, corporation, or other business entity formed for profit-making purposes, including retail establishments where goods or services are sold or rendered as well as professional corporations and other entities where legal, medical, dental, engineering, architectural, or other professional services are delivered. 
Dining area. Any enclosed area containing a counter or tables upon which meals are served. 
Employee. Any person who is employed by an employer in consideration, for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit, and any person who volunteers his/her services for a nonprofit entity. 
Employer. Any person, partnership, corporation, or nonprofit entity, including a municipal corporation, who or which employs the services of one or more persons. 
Enclosed. Closed in by roof and four walls or windows with appropriate openings for ingress and egress. 
Nonprofit entity. Any corporation, unincorporated association, or other entity created for charitable, educational, political, social, or other similar purposes, the net proceeds from the operations of which are committed to the promotion of the objects or purposes of the organization and not to private financial gain. A public agency is not a nonprofit entity within the meaning of this section. 
Place of employment. Any enclosed area under the control of a public or private employer which employees normally frequent during the course of employment, including, but not limited to, work areas, employee lounges, restrooms, conference rooms, classrooms, cafeterias and hallways, provided, however, that: 
(1)  A private residence is not a place of employment unless it is used as a child care facility, family day care home, foster care home, group home, or a health care facility; and 
(2)  The dining area of a restaurant is not a "place of employment." 
Public place. Any enclosed area, not a residence, to which the public is invited, or in which the public is permitted, including, but not limited to: banks, offices, educational facilities, health facilities, public transportation facilities, retail food production and marketing establishments, retail service establishments and retail stores. 
Restaurant. Any eating establishment, organization or club, which gives or offers food for sale to the public, guests, patrons, or employees. 
Smoking. Inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted pipe, cigar, or cigarette of any kind, or any other combustible substance. 
(1975 Code, § 5-13.02) (Ord. 1990-439, effective 11-9-90)  
Sec. 97.03 - Prohibition of smoking in public places. 
(A)  Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed public places within the Town, including, but not limited to, the following places: 
(1)  Restrooms; 
(2)  Retail stores and service facilities, except areas in said stores not open to the public; 
(3)  Retail food marketing establishments, including grocery stores and supermarkets, except areas thereof not open to the public, which may be otherwise regulated by this chapter; 
(4)  All areas available to and customarily used by the general public in all businesses and nonprofit entities patronized by the public, including, but not limited to, business offices and banks; 
(5)  Restaurants, provided, however, that this prohibition does not prevent the designation of a contiguous area within a restaurant that contains a maximum of 50 percent of the seating capacity of the restaurant as a smoking area, or providing separate rooms designated as smoking rooms, so long as said rooms do not contain more than 50 percent of the seating capacity of the restaurant; 
(6)  Public areas of libraries; 
(7)  Every room, chamber, and place of meeting or public assembly and polling places, including school buildings under the control of any board, council, commission, committee or agencies of the Town or any political subdivisions of the state during such time as a public meeting is in progress, to the extent such place is subject to the jurisdiction of the Town. 
(B)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, any owner, operator, manager, or other person who controls any establishment described in this section may declare that the entire establishment is a nonsmoking establishment. 
(1975 Code, § 5-13.03) (Ord. 1990-439, effective 11-9-90) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 97.99.  
Sec. 97.04 - Regulation of smoking in places of employment. 
(A)  It shall be the responsibility of employers to provide smokefree areas for nonsmokers within existing facilities to the maximum extent possible, but employers are not required to incur any expenses to make structural or other physical modifications in providing these areas, nor shall a smoke-free area be required to be maintained in areas designated as smoking areas in this section. 
(B)  Within 90 days of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section, each employer and each place of employment located within the Town shall adopt, implement, make known, and maintain a written smoking policy which shall contain, at a minimum, the following requirements: 
(1)  Any employee in a place of employment, other than in a properly designated smoking area, shall be given the right to designate his/her work area as a nonsmoking area, and to post the same with an appropriate sign or signs to be provided by the employer. Smoking shall not be permitted in any such properly posted nonsmoking area, nor shall smoke from other work areas be allowed to pollute such nonsmoking areas; 
(2)  Shared work areas must be designated nonsmoking areas unless every member in the work area voluntarily and wilfully agrees otherwise, or unless the work area is a properly designated smoking area; 
(3)  Prohibition of smoking in auditoriums, classrooms, conference and meeting rooms, hallways, restrooms, and any other areas where smoking is prohibited by this section; 
(4)  Provision and maintenance of separate but substantially equal nonsmoking areas if smoking is allowed in employee lounges or other similar areas provided for the use and enjoyment of employees during breaks and not open to the general public. Smoking shall be prohibited in cafeterias or other areas designated for employee eating; 
(5)  In any dispute arising under the smoking policy, the rights of the nonsmoker shall be given precedence, except as to the right of the employer to maintain adequate smoking areas as set forth in this chapter; 
(6)  A copy shall be posted in a conspicuous, accessible place upon the premises readily readable by employees; 
(7)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, every employer shall have the right to designate any place of employment or any portion thereof as a nonsmoking area; 
(8)  A private enclosed office work place occupied exclusively by smokers may be declared a smoking area unless otherwise prohibited by this section, even though such an office or work place may be visited by nonsmoking employees. 
(1975 Code, § 5-13.04) (Ord. 1990-439, effective 11-9-90) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 97.99.  
Sec. 97.05 - Areas not subject to regulations. 
(A)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the contrary, the following areas shall not be subject to the smoking restrictions of this chapter: 
(1)  Private residences, except when used as a child care facility, family care home, foster care home, group home, or a health care facility; 
(2)  Retail tobacco stores; 
(3)  A private enclosed space occupied exclusively by persons who choose to smoke, even though such a place may be visited by persons who do not smoke or who choose not to smoke, excepting places where smoking is prohibited by other law, ordinance or regulation, or government authority acting pursuant thereto. 
(B)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, any owner, operator, manager, or other person who controls any establishment described in this section may declare that the entire establishment, or any portion thereof, is a nonsmoking establishment. 
(1975 Code, § 5-13.05) (Ord. 1990-439, effective 11-9-90) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 97.99.  
Sec. 97.06 - Posting of signs. 
(A)  "Smoking" or "no smoking" signs, whichever are appropriate, with letters of not less than one inch in height, or the international "no smoking" symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of a cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it) shall be clearly, sufficiently and conspicuously posted in every building or other place where smoking is controlled by this chapter, by the owner, operator, manager, or other person having control of such building or place. 
(B)  Every restaurant owner, manager or operator shall post at every entrance thereto, a sign clearly stating that a nonsmoking section is available and the size of that section. The host or hostess of every restaurant (if such person is employed) and the person taking reservations for such restaurant shall request each patron's preference for smoking or nonsmoking seating. 
(1975 Code, § 5-13.06) (Ord. 1990-439, effective 11-9-90) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 97.99.  
Sec. 97.07 - Nonretaliation. 
No person or employer shall discharge, refuse to hire, or in any manner retaliate against any employee or applicant for employment because such employee or applicant exercises any rights afforded by this section. Said person or employer shall be liable to the employee or applicant in the sum of $500.00 as damages and attorneys' fees in the event retaliation or unlawful discharge or failure to hire occurs as a result of exercising such rights. 
(1975 Code, § 5-13.08) (Ord. 1990-439, effective 11-9-90) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 97.99.  
Sec. 97.08 - Violations. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any area in which smoking is prohibited by the provisions of this chapter. 
(B)  It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, manages, operates, or otherwise controls the use of any premises subject to the restrictions and regulations of this chapter to wilfully fail to comply with its provisions. 
(1975 Code, § 5-13.07(a), (b)) (Ord. 1990-439, effective 11-9-90) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 97.99.  
Sec. 97.99 - Penalty. 
(A)  Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable by: 
(1)  A fine not exceeding $100.00 for a first violation; 
(2)  A fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $200.00 for a second violation within one year; and 
(3)  A fine of not less than $250.00 nor more than $500.00 for each additional violation within one year; 
(B)  Notwithstanding the criminal penalties in this chapter, nothing in this section shall limit the right of the Town to bring a civil action to obtain compliance with this chapter. 
(1975 Code, § 5-13.07(c)) (Ord. 1990-439, effective 11-9-90)  
CHAPTER 98. - BARKLEY FIELDS AND PARK 
 
Sec. 98.01 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
Park. Barkley Fields and Park, including the adjacent parking lot. 
(Ord. 2008-540, effective 5-8-08)  
Sec. 98.02 - Purpose of chapter. 
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the use of Barkley Fields and Park for the use and enjoyment of residents of Woodside; to establish standards to prevent the misuse and destruction of the facilities; and to establish regulations to ensure the safety and comfort of users of the facilities as well as persons residing or owning property in the vicinity of the Park. 
(Ord. 2008-540, effective 5-8-08)  
Sec. 98.03 - Use of Park—Reservations. 
The Town shall only accept and approve field usage applications from official, organized youth leagues that serve the residents of the Town of Woodside. No other reservations shall be permitted. Reservations and scheduling shall be administered by the Town Manager or his or her designee. Reservations for seasonal field usage by qualified youth leagues may be made up to 60 days in advance of the beginning of league play. The Town shall post the approved reservation schedule, including the approved user(s) and their activities and their approved time of use on the grounds of the Park. Only the approved user(s) identified on the schedule may use the field during the approved time indicated on the schedule. 
(Ord. 2008-540, effective 5-8-08)  
Sec. 98.04 - Fees. 
A schedule of fees for use of the fields shall be adopted and periodically amended by Town Council resolution. 
(Ord. 2008-540, effective 5-8-08)  
Sec. 98.05 - Security deposit. 
A security deposit shall be required in an amount adopted and periodically amended by Town Council resolution. 
(Ord. 2008-540, effective 5-8-08)  
Sec. 98.06 - Liability insurance. 
The Town may require an applicant for the use of the Park to file a certificate of insurance showing the maintenance of insurance in an amount appropriate to cover the liability of the applicant for property damages and injuries to persons in connection with the activities conducted by the applicant. The amount of insurance shall be based upon the scope of the activity, the risks foreseeably involved, and the cost and availability of such insurance and shall not exceed $1,000,000.00. The certificate of insurance shall name the Town, its officers, agents, employees and volunteers, as additional insureds. 
(Ord. 2008-540, effective 5-8-08)  
Sec. 98.07 - Use of park—No reservations. 
Teams other than those specified in Section 98.03 may use the field on a first come, first served basis during those times when the field has not been reserved and when weather and field conditions permit. 
(Ord. 2008-540, effective 5-8-08)  
Sec. 98.08 - Use of park—No tournament play. 
The Park shall not be used for tournament play, except that single tournament games may be scheduled in which an official youth league that serves the residents of the Town of Woodside is a participant and that meets all Town operating policies, regulations, and laws. 
(Ord. 2008-540, effective 5-8-08)  
Sec. 98.09 - Animals. 
Licensing and control of animals in the Park shall conform to § 91.08(A) of the Municipal Code. Dogs shall be allowed only on designated paths in the Park. Dog training shall be prohibited in the Park. 
(Ord. 2008-540, effective 5-8-08)  
Sec. 98.10 - No amplified sound. 
No amplified sound shall be permitted in the Park, except as specified in Section 98.13. 
(Ord. 2008-540, effective 5-8-08)  
Sec. 98.11 - Prohibited activities in the park. 
The following activities are prohibited in the Park: 
(A)  Private or commercial activities, other than youth sports, including, but not limited to, weddings, concerts, reunions, private sports lessons, dog training, and private club activities; 
(B)  Lighting or maintaining fires of any kind, including the use of barbeque grills; 
(C)  Possessing or consuming alcoholic beverages; 
(D)  Possessing or consuming recreational drugs of any kind; 
(E)  Smoking, as defined in Section 97.02 of the Municipal Code; 
(F)  Possessing or discharging weapons, except those carried by duly sworn law enforcement personnel; 
(G)  Placing litter or debris anywhere other than in designated containers; 
(H)  Removal of turf, soil, grass, tree, shrub, or portion thereof; except work that may be done by authorized Town employees or agents; 
(I)  Tampering with any component of the field irrigation system; 
(J)  Causing, creating, encouraging, or threatening to cause any disturbance which may reasonably result in injury or property damage, or disturb the peace, comfort and security of Park patrons. 
(Ord. 2008-540, effective 5-8-08)  
Sec. 98.12 - Park closed at night. 
The Park shall be closed for use one-half hour after sunset until sunrise. No person shall enter, use, cross, or remain in the Park or the parking lot adjacent to the Park during the hours the Park is closed. Law enforcement personnel, employees or agents of the Town may, in the course of their duties, be in the Park during the hours the Park is closed. 
(Ord. 2008-540, effective 5-8-08)  
Sec. 98.13 - Annual anniversary celebration. 
The Town may utilize the Park for a Town-sponsored annual anniversary of the Park's opening. The Town may use amplified sound for an official program not exceeding 60 minutes. However, no amplified music shall be allowed. 
(Ord. 2008-540, effective 5-8-08)  
CHAPTER 99. - CANNABIS REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 99.01 - Purpose and authority. 
(A)  On November 8, 2016, California voters passed Proposition 64, known as the Adult Use of Marijuana Act, which legalized the use, sale and consumption of recreational cannabis by persons aged 21 and older. In June 2017, the California legislature passed SB 94, which consolidated state regulation of medicinal and recreational cannabis into the Medicinal and Adult-Use Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act (MAUCRSA). The MAUCRSA provides base standards for personal cultivation of cannabis and allows local jurisdictions to legislate additional standards. The MAUCRSA permits commercial cannabis activities subject to state licensure but preserves local government's authority to regulate or ban commercial cannabis activities. The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety and welfare by banning non-personal cannabis activities and implementing reasonable regulations for personal cannabis activity. 
(B)  The Town adopts this chapter under its authority granted by California Constitution Article XI, Section 7, and reserved to the Town by the "Medicinal and Adult Use Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act." 
(Ord. 2018-595 , § 2, effective 7-26-18)  
Sec. 99.02 - Definitions. 
The following words and terms as used in this chapter shall have the following meaning: 
Cannabis. All parts of the plant Cannabis sativa Linnaeus, Cannabis indica, or Cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin. "Cannabis" also means the separated resin, whether crude or purified, obtained from cannabis. "Cannabis" does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination. For the purpose of this Title, "cannabis" does not mean "industrial hemp" as defined by § 11018.5 of the Cal. Health and Safety Code. 
Commercial cannabis activity. Cannabis business or activity licensed under the Cal. Business and Professions Code, Division 10, Cannabis, § 26000 et seq. (as amended from time to time), including cultivation, possession, manufacture, distribution, processing, storing, laboratory testing, packaging, labeling, transportation, delivery or sale of cannabis and cannabis products, and any other activities which may be licensed. "Commercial cannabis activity" includes medical cannabis dispensaries. "Commercial cannabis activity" does not include personal uses allowed by Cal. Health and Safety Code §§ 11362.1 and 11362.2 or personal medicinal uses allowed by §§ 11362.765 and 11362.77, as amended from time to time. 
Cultivation. Any activity involving the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of cannabis. 
Medical cannabis dispensary. A facility, whether mobile or fixed, where cannabis is made available for medicinal purposes in accordance with any provision of state law that authorizes the use of cannabis for medicinal purposes. 
(Ord. 2018-595 , § 2, effective 7-26-18)  
Sec. 99.03 - Prohibited activities. 
(A)  Prohibition of commercial activities. All commercial cannabis activity is prohibited within the Town of Woodside. 
(B)  Exception for qualified delivery services. Notwithstanding the prohibition in subdivision (A) above, delivery of cannabis from a business located outside the Town of Woodside is permitted subject to the conditions of Cal. Business and Professions Code § 26090, as amended from time to time. This section does not permit any temporary, persistent, or fixed physical presence used for commercial cannabis activities besides delivery vehicles in the active state of making a delivery to a specific person and location. 
(Ord. 2018-595 , § 2, effective 7-26-18)  
Sec. 99.04 - Personal cannabis. 
(A)  It is not a violation of Section 99.03 for a person 21 years or older to possess, plant, cultivate, harvest, dry or process not more than six living cannabis plants, whether indoor or outdoor, and possess the cannabis produced by the plants, in compliance with Cal. Health and Safety Code § 11362.2(a), and the following local requirements: 
(1)  Odor from cultivation must not be detectible off the grounds of the private residence or from any place accessible to the public. 
(2)  Cultivation must comply with and not contribute to violation of the State Housing Law and the California Buildings Standards Codes as locally adopted and amended, the regulations for existing buildings in California Code of Regulations, Title 25. 
(3)  Cultivation must at all times be a secondary use to an occupied private residence. 
(4)  Cultivation shall not occur in the front , side or rear yard setback of the property as defined in Chapter 153, Zoning Subsection 153.005 and measured per Subsection 153.207. 
(B)  It is not a violation of Section 99.03 for a person described in Cal. Health and Safety Code § 11362.1(a), to engage in the conduct described in § 11362.1(a)(1—5). 
(C)  This section is inoperative if Cal. Health and Safety Code § 11362.1(a), is preempted by federal law or is otherwise unconstitutional. 
(Ord. 2018-595 , § 2, effective 7-26-18)  
Sec. 99.05 - Enforcement. 
The Town may enforce this chapter and its regulations in any manner permitted by law, and is entitled to recover all costs, including attorney fees, related to enforcement. The violation of this chapter is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall, at the discretion of the Town , create a cause of action for injunctive relief. 
(Ord. 2018-595 , § 2, effective 7-26-18)  
TITLE XI - BUSINESS REGULATIONS 
   
CHAPTER 110. - GENERAL BUSINESS LICENSES  
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 110.01 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
Auctioneer. Any person who sells or offers for sale any real or personal property or service at any auction, public auction, or auction sale or by public outcry, whether at a fixed place of business in the Town or not. 
Business. Professions, trades, and occupations and all and every kind of calling or enterprise carried on for profit or livelihood. 
Contractor. Any person who shall do any type of construction work for an agreed price, or who shall hold himself out to the public as in such business, or who shall erect, construct, alter, or repair any building or structure for the support, shelter, and enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or movable property of any kind requiring in its construction the use of more than two unrelated building trades or crafts, or who shall do or superintend the whole or any part thereof. 
Employee. Any person who regularly works in a place of business within the Town during any 24-hour period within the 12-month period ending on June 30 next preceding the date of an application for a license. 
Fiscal year. The 12-month period commencing July 1 and ending June 30, both inclusive. 
Fixed place of business. A place of business regularly kept open, with someone in charge thereof, for the transaction of the particular business engaged in during the hours customary to transact such business. 
Floor area. The gross floor area of a building. 
License collector. The Town official designated as the License Collector. 
Licensee. Any person to whom a business license has been issued pursuant to this chapter. 
Peddler. Any hawker, itinerant merchant, or transient vendor of merchandise not having a fixed place of business in the Town, who solicits orders for the sales of goods, wares, and merchandise and/or peddles or hawks the same and/or who sells the same in any structure or stand on any street or public place in the Town. 
Person. Natural persons of either sex, firms, associations, copartnerships, corporations, syndicates, joint ventures, clubs, and any officer or agent therefor, whether acting by themselves or by a servant, agent, or employee. 
Personal and repair service. Any person selling personal and repair services at retail. 
Professional. Any person practicing a profession for which a license to practice issued by the state or a professional board established and regulated by the state legislature is required. 
Retailer. Any person who sells goods, wares, or merchandise at retail. 
Sale. The transfer, in any manner or by any means whatsoever, of the title to property for a consideration; the serving, supplying, or furnishing for a consideration of any property; or a transaction whereby the possession of property is transferred and the seller retains the title as security for the payment of the price. 
Solicitor/vendor. Any person, including a salesman and vendor, who engages in the business of going from house to house, place to place, or in or along the streets within the Town selling or taking orders for, or offering to sell or take orders for, goods, wares, merchandise, services, or other things of value, for present or future delivery or for services to be performed immediately or in the future, to persons other than manufacturers, wholesalers, jobbers, or retailers in such commodities or services. In the event the activities of a solicitor/vendor require his/her entry upon private residential property within the Town, such entry shall be with the prior consent, request, or invitation of the owner or occupant of such private residence. 
Specialty contractor. A contractor whose operations as such are the performance of construction work requiring special skills or equipment and whose principal contracting business involves the use of specialized building trades or crafts. 
Sworn statement. An affidavit sworn to before a person authorized to take oaths or a declaration or certification made under penalty of perjury. 
Vehicle. Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is to be transported or drawn upon a public street excepting devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. A trailer shall be treated as a separate vehicle. 
(1975 Code, § 3-1.01) (Ord. 1978-279, effective 6-8-78)  
Sec. 110.02 - Compliance with other regulations. 
Any person required to pay a business license tax under this chapter shall not be relieved from the payment of any license tax for the privilege of doing such business required under any other provision of this Code and shall remain subject to the regulatory provisions of other chapters of this Code. 
(1975 Code, § 3-1.201) (Ord. 1988-358, effective 4-7-88)  
Sec. 110.03 - Exemptions and exclusions. 
(A)  Businesses. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed or construed as applying to any person transacting, engaging in, and carrying on any business exempt by virtue of the Constitution or applicable statutes of the United States or of the state relating to the payment of the taxes prescribed in this chapter. 
(1975 Code, § 3-1.203) 
(B)  Charitable organizations. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed or construed to require the payment of any license tax by any institution or organization which is conducted, managed, or carried on wholly for the benefit of charitable purposes and from which profit is not derived, either directly or indirectly by any person. 
(1975 Code, § 3-1.204) 
(C)  Disabled veterans. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed or construed to require the payment of any license tax by any honorably discharged or relieved veteran named in Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code §§ 16001 and 16001.5, respectively, as amended, who is physically unable to earn a livelihood by manual labor, and who is a voter or resident, respectively, of the state, and who desires to hawk, peddle, or vend goods, wares, or merchandise owned by him/her or to distribute circulars. Such disabled veterans shall file with the License Collector a certificate by a regularly licensed and practicing physician, dated within a month from such application, to the effect that such applicant is physically unable to obtain a livelihood by manual labor and stating the nature of such incapacitation. 
(1975 Code, § 3-1.205) (Ord. 1988-358, effective 4-7-88)  
Sec. 110.04 - Entry on private residential property. 
The entry in and upon a private residence in the Town by any solicitor, peddler, street vendor, hawker, itinerant merchant, or transient vendor not having been previously requested or invited to do so by the owner and/or occupant of such private residence for the purpose of soliciting orders for the sales of contracts, services, goods, wares, or merchandise, and/or peddling or hawking the same, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and punishable as such nuisance as a misdemeanor. 
(1975 Code, § 3-1.206) (Ord. 1988-358, effective 4-7-88)  
Sec. 110.05 - License collector. 
(A)  The Town Clerk is hereby designated the License Collector of the Town. 
(1975 Code, § 3-1.301) 
(B)  It shall be the duty of the License Collector to administer this chapter in accordance with the terms of this chapter. It shall further be the duty of the License Collector, and the License Collector shall have such powers, to require the regular and prompt licensing of all businesses regulated by this chapter and to cause the collection of the taxes therefor. 
(1975 Code, § 3-1.302) (Ord. 1988-358, effective 4-7-88)  
Sec. 110.06 - Violations. 
With the exception of a violation of Section 110.04, the violation of any provision of this chapter, including the failure to produce a license for inspection pursuant to Section 110.22(B), shall be an infraction, punishable as set forth in Sections 10.40 through 10.58 and 10.99 of this Code. 
(1975 Code, § 3-1.503) (Ord. 1978-279, effective 6-8-78)  
Secs. 110.07—110.14 - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - LICENSES 
 
Sec. 110.15 - Licenses required. 
No person shall transact, engage in, or carry on any business within the Town without first having procured a license from the Town to so do, and having paid the tax prescribed by this chapter, and having complied with any and all applicable regulations concerning the use and occupancy of the premises from which the business is to be conducted. 
(1975 Code, § 3-1.401) (Ord. 1988-358, effective 4-7-88) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 110.16 - Application. 
Each person making an application for the first license to be issued under this chapter, or for a license for a newly established business, shall furnish to the License Collector a sworn statement, on a form provided by the License Collector, setting forth the following information: 
(A)  The exact nature or kind of business for which a license is requested; 
(B)  The place where such business is to be carried on, and if the business is not to be carried on at any fixed place of business, the place of residence of the owners of the business; 
(C)  If the license is to be issued to a person doing business under a fictitious name, the names and places of residences of the owners of the business; 
(D)  If the license is to be issued to a corporation or a partnership, the names and places of residence of the officers or partners thereof; 
(E)  The number and description of any coin- operated devices owned by the applicant, together with the serial number of each device and the address of the location of such device; and 
(F)  Any further information related to the applicant's business to be licensed which the License Collector may require to enforce this chapter. 
(1975 Code, § 3-1.402) (Ord. 1988-358, effective 4-7-88)  
Sec. 110.17 - Issuance. 
The License Collector shall issue the licenses required to be obtained under this chapter upon persons making applications therefor, furnishing the sworn statement when required, and paying the license tax imposed. Each such license issued shall state upon its face: 
(A)  The name of the person to whom issued; 
(B)  The kind of business licensed; 
(C)  The location of such business; 
(D)  The date of the expiration of the license; and 
(E)  Such other information as shall be deemed necessary by the License Collector to enforce this chapter. 
(1975 Code, § 3-1.403) (Ord. 1988-358, effective 4-7-88)  
Sec. 110.18 - Compliance with other regulations required. 
The payment of a license tax and the issuance of a license to any person by the Town shall not entitle the licensee to carry on any business unless he/she has complied with all the requirements of this Code and all other applicable laws, nor to engage in or to carry on any business in any building or in any premises designated in such license in the event such building or premises are situated in an area or locality in which the conduct of such business is in violation of this Code or any other law. 
(1975 Code, § 3-1.404) (Ord. 1978-279, effective 6-8-78) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 110.19 - Licenses nontransferable; amended licenses. 
No license issued to any person shall be transferable to any other person. If a license is issued authorizing a person to transact, engage in, and carry on a business at a particular place, such licensee, upon an application therefor and the payment of a fee, may have the license amended to authorize the transacting, engaging in, and carrying on of such business under the license at another location to which the business has been or is to be moved. A transfer of ownership of any business for which a license has been issued to another person, under such circumstances that the real or ultimate ownership after the transfer is substantially similar to the ownership existing before the transfer, shall not constitute a transfer requiring the amendment of the license. 
(1975 Code, § 3-1.405) (Ord. 1978-279, effective 6-8-78)  
Sec. 110.20 - Duplicate license. 
Upon an application therefor and the payment of $3.00, the License Collector may issue a duplicate of any unexpired license which has been lost or destroyed. 
(1975 Code, § 3-1.406) (Ord. 1978-279, effective 6-8-78)  
Sec. 110.21 - Renewal. 
When applying for the renewal of any license previously issued, the licensee shall submit to the License Collector, on a form provided by the License Collector, a sworn statement setting forth such information concerning the licensee's business during the preceding year as may be required to enable the License Collector to ascertain the amount of the license tax to be paid. 
(1975 Code, § 3-1.407) (Ord. 1978-279, effective 6-8-78)  
Sec. 110.22 - Keeping and posting of license; producing for inspection. 
(A)  Any person transacting, engaging in, and carrying on a business at a fixed place of business in the Town shall keep the license issued under this chapter posted in a conspicuous place upon the premises where such business is carried on. Any person transacting, engaging in, and carrying on a business, but not operating at a fixed place of business in the Town, shall keep the license issued under this chapter upon his/her person at all times while transacting, engaging in, and carrying on such business. 
(1975 Code, § 3-1.408) 
(B)  It shall be unlawful for any person to whom a license has been issued to fail or refuse to produce the license for inspection when required to do so by the License Collector or by any employee of the Town working under the direction of the License Collector. 
(1975 Code, § 3-1.409) (Ord. 1978-279, effective 6-8-78) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 110.23 - Sworn statements. 
(A)  No sworn statement required to be filed shall be conclusive as to the matters set forth therein. The filing of a sworn statement shall not preclude the Town from collecting any sum of money actually due and payable under this chapter by appropriate action. 
(1975 Code, § 3-1.410) 
(B)  If any person shall fail to file any required statement within the time prescribed, or if, after demand thereof made by the License Collector, such person shall fail to file a corrected statement, or if any person subject to the tax imposed by this chapter shall fail to apply for a license, the License Collector shall proceed in such manner as he/she may deem best to obtain the facts and information on which to base his/her estimate of the tax due. In the event such determination is made, the License Collector shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the person so assessed at his/her last known place of address. 
(1975 Code, § 3-1.411) (Ord. 1978-279, effective 6-8-78)  
Sec. 110.24 - Determination of taxes. 
(A)  The person so assessed, within 15 days after the serving or mailing of the notice referred to in Section 110.23(B), may make an application in writing to the License Collector for a hearing on the amount of the license tax assessed. If an application for a hearing is not made within the time prescribed, the tax and penalties, if any, determined by the License Collector shall become final and conclusive and immediately due and payable. If such an application is made, the License Collector shall give not less than ten days' written notice in the manner set forth in Section 110.23(B) to the person to show cause at a time and place fixed in the notice (which shall be not more than 15 days after the receipt of the application for a hearing) why the amount specified therein should not be fixed for such tax and penalties. At such hearing the person may appear and offer evidence why such specified tax and penalties should not be so fixed. 
(1975 Code, § 3-1.412) 
(B)  After a hearing on the amount of the tax assessed, the License Collector shall determine the proper tax to be paid and shall thereafter give written notice to the person so assessed in the manner set forth in Section 110.23(B) for giving notice of an assessment. The amount determined to be due shall be payable 15 days after the date of the mailing of such notice, unless an appeal is made as provided in this chapter. 
(1975 Code, § 3-1.413) (Ord. 1978-279, effective 6-8-78)  
Sec. 110.25 - License revocation. 
(A)  Licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by the Town if the licensee shall conduct, engage in, or carry on his/her business in any unlawful manner or fail to comply with the provisions of this chapter or this Code. 
(1975 Code, § 3-1.601) 
(B)  Prior to the revocation of any license, the licensee shall be given notice of the proposed action in the manner set forth in Section 110.23(B) and shall be given an opportunity to be heard. If, within ten days after such notice of proposed action has been mailed to the licensee, he/she requests a hearing on the proposed revocation, the Town Manager shall conduct the hearing, and if, as a result thereof, such license is ordered revoked, such holder shall have the right to appeal such action to the Council in the manner set forth in Chapter 36 of this Code. 
(Ord. 2003-520, effective 10-23-03)  
Secs. 110.26—110.34 - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - LICENSE TAX PAYMENTS 
 
Sec. 110.35 - Due dates. 
(A)  Annual license tax shall be due and payable for each respective licensee on the anniversary date the licensee first obtained a business license. The tax shall become delinquent 30 days after the due date. 
(B)  Daily license taxes shall be due and payable on each day in advance. 
(C)  Unless otherwise specifically provided, license taxes shall not be prorated, and no refund shall be issued for any business which ceases to exist or changes ownership after an annual license tax is paid. 
(1975 Code, § 3-1.501) (Ord. 1978-279, effective 6-8-78; Am. Ord. 1987-344, effective 5-14-87; Am. Ord. 1987-352, effective 1-7-88)  
Sec. 110.36 - Delinquencies. 
(A)  For failure to pay a license tax when due, the License Collector shall add to the amount due a penalty of ten percent of the amount of the license tax on the last day of each month after the due date thereof until paid; provided, however, the amount of such penalty to be added shall in no event exceed 100 percent of the amount of the license tax due. 
(B)  Every daily license which is not paid at the close of business on the day when the license tax is due and payable is hereby declared to be delinquent, and the License Collector shall add to such license and collect a penalty of ten percent of such license tax as delinquent. 
(1975 Code, § 3-1.502) (Ord. 1978-279, effective 6-8-78; Am. Ord. 1987-352, effective 1-7-88)  
Sec. 110.37 - Payment required prior to license issuance. 
The License Collector shall not issue any license, or reissue a license previously revoked, whether for the same or another business, to any person who, at the time of an application thereof, is indebted to the Town for any delinquent license tax until such person shall have paid any delinquent license tax, together with any penalty and shall have furnished to the License Collector any sworn statement required by this chapter. 
(1975 Code, § 3-1.504) (Ord. 1978-279, effective 6-8-78)  
Sec. 110.38 - Refund; filing period. 
Whenever the amount of any tax or penalty has been overpaid, or paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the Town, such tax or penalty may be refunded provided a claim in writing there for, stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the License Collector within three years after the last day of the calendar month following the period of time for which the amount which is the subject of the claim was paid. No refund shall be paid unless the claimant establishes his/her right thereto by written records showing entitlement thereto. 
(1975 Code, § 3-1.505) (Ord. 1978-279, effective 6-8-78)  
Sec. 110.39 - Taxes debt to Town. 
The amount of any license tax and penalty, and all other fees and charges required to be paid under this chapter, shall be deemed a debt to the Town. The Town may maintain a civil action thereon in its own name in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount thereof, together with its court costs. Such civil action shall not be a bar to any action provided by law or by this chapter. 
(1975 Code, § 3-1.506) (Ord. 1978-279, effective 6-8-78)  
Secs. 110.40—110.49 - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - LICENSE TAXES 
 
Sec. 110.50 - Imposition; amount of tax. 
There is hereby imposed a business license tax upon all entities and persons transacting, engaging in, or carrying on any business in the Town as follows: 
Business Type 	Annual
License Tax 
General contractors 	$ 250.00 
Subcontractors with one or more employees 	150.00 
Subcontractors with no employees 	100.00 
Retail with less than ten employees 	120.00 
Retail with ten or more employees 	200.00 
Professional occupations (doctors, lawyers, accountants, architects, realtors, engineers, insurance brokers, and related occupations) 	
 Per professional 	120.00 
 Maximum per year per business 	480.00 
Daily businesses (persons or entities which do business in the Town less than 30 days per year, including auctioneers and solicitors), maximum per year 	180.00 
Contractors or subcontractors doing work valued at less than $10,000.00 and working on one project for a period not to exceed 30 days 	25.00 / job 
less than 
$1,000.00 
	50.00 / job 
$1,000.00 
or more 
 
(1975 Code, § 3-1.701) (Ord. 1978-279, effective 6-8-78; Am. Ord. 1987-352, effective 1-7-88; Am. Ord. 1992-452, effective 1-14-92)  
Sec. 110.51 - Businesses not specifically licensed. 
Every person conducting any wholesale, retail, or jobbing business or otherwise engaged in the selling of services, goods, wares, or merchandise or other things of value, and not otherwise specifically licensed by this chapter or by any other law of the Town, and every person conducting, managing, or carrying on any business which is specifically not licensed by this chapter or any other law of the Town, which such business is carried on at a fixed place of business within the Town, shall pay an annual license tax of $120.00 for each such business. 
(1975 Code, § 3-1.702) (Ord. 1978-279, effective 6-8-78; Am. Ord. 1987-352, effective 1-7-88)  
CHAPTER 111. - ALARM SYSTEMS 
 
Sec. 111.01 - Purpose. 
This chapter is enacted pursuant to Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code § 7592.8. The purpose of this chapter is to establish rules and regulations concerning the use of alarms in residential and commercial locations in the Town, to enhance the effectiveness of such devices and to minimize law enforcement responses to false alarms caused by the improper use or abuse of such systems. 
(1975 Code, § 5-11.01) (Ord. 1986-338, effective 8-7-86)  
Sec. 111.02 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
Alarm system. Any device designed to signal the presence of an emergency situation or the commission of a criminal act and to which police or other emergency agencies are expected to respond. 
Alarm user. Any individual or business using an alarm system. 
Audible alarm. Any alarm device which, when activated, generates an audible sound on the premises protected. 
Automatic calling device. Any device used in conjunction with an alarm system which device generates a telephone message for the purposes of summoning emergency assistance to the premises. 
Calendar year. That period of time starting on January 1 and ending on December 31 of any given year. 
False alarm. An alarm signal necessitating response by the Town where there has been no emergency situation or the commission of a criminal act. 
Responsible party. Any person designated by an alarm user as having responsibility for the operation and maintenance of an alarm system or as having responsibility for responding to the premises when an alarm system is activated. 
(1975 Code, § 5-11.12) (Ord. 1986-338, effective 8-7-86)  
Sec. 111.03 - Permit required. 
(A)  No person shall install or operate an alarm system on any premises under his/her control without first obtaining a permit as required by this chapter. A permit for an alarm system shall be obtained from the Town Manager. 
(1975 Code, § 5-11.02) 
(B)  Any person who installed an alarm system on his/her premises before August 7, 1986, shall obtain a permit for the alarm system as required by this chapter if the alarm system is still in operation. The permit shall be obtained on or before February 3, 1987. 
(1975 Code, § 5-11.03) 
(C)  Any person who installs or operates an alarm system without a valid permit shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(1975 Code, § 5-11.11) (Ord. 1986-338, effective 8-7-86; Am. Ord. 1997-486, effective 6-26-97) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 111.04 - Exclusions. 
This chapter shall not apply to alarm systems in motor vehicles or alarm systems operated by public agencies. 
(1975 Code, § 5-11.04) (Ord. 1986-338, effective 8-7-86)  
Sec. 111.05 - Application and fee. 
Each person who installs or operates an alarm system on any premises under his/her control shall complete and submit to the Town Manager a permit application on a form containing all the information required by the Town. Each person shall pay a fee for processing the permit. The Council shall set the amount of the fee by resolution. The Town will process the application in cooperation with the County Sheriff's Department. 
(1975 Code, § 5-11.05) (Ord. 1986-338, effective 8-7-86; Am. Ord. 1997-486, effective 6-26-97)  
Sec. 111.06 - Prohibitions. 
No audible alarm system may emit a sound the same as or similar to sirens used on emergency vehicles or civil defense or Fire Department stationary sirens. 
(1975 Code, § 5-11.06) (Ord. 1986-338, effective 8-7-86) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 111.07 - Automatic shut-off devices. 
No audible alarm system may be operated or installed which does not have a device which automatically shuts off the sound within 15 minutes after the alarm is activated. If an audible alarm system will not shut off, and a responsible party cannot be located to shut it off, the Town may call any alarm service company to shut off the alarm. The alarm user will be billed and shall pay for any expense incurred. 
(1975 Code, § 5-11.07) (Ord. 1986-338, effective 8-7-86)  
Sec. 111.08 - Restrictions on automatic calling devices. 
No alarm system shall utilize an automatic calling device which places a call to any emergency police, fire, or medical service telephone number, other than the number provided by the Town. The alarm user will be provided with a telephone number for automatic calling devices upon obtaining a permit. Only such telephone number shall be used with such devices. 
(1975 Code, § 5-11.08) (Ord. 1986-338, effective 8-7-86) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 111.09 - Revocation of permit. 
The Town Manager may revoke any alarm system permit if it is determined that the system does not comply with the provisions of this chapter. The alarm user will be notified in writing of the revocation. Such notice shall be sent to the premises upon which the alarm system is located by first class mail or shall be personally delivered to an adult occupant thereof. The revocation of the permit will be effective after notice of the revocation is mailed. The alarm user may appeal in writing to the Council any decision to revoke an alarm system permit pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 36 of this Code. 
(1975 Code, § 5-11.09) (Ord. 1986-338, effective 8-7-86; Am. Ord. 2003-520, effective 10-23-03)  
Sec. 111.10 - False alarms. 
(A)  The intentional activation of a false alarm will result in the permanent revocation of the alarm permit. 
(B)  The activation of a false alarm due to the negligence of the alarm user or authorized operator will result in the assessment of a service charge to the user to defray the cost of responding to the alarm location. The amount of the charge may be set by resolution of the Town Council from time to time. 
(C)  The activation of three false alarms caused by malfunctioning of the alarm due to events not under the control of the alarm user or the fault of the alarm system shall constitute grounds for revocation. 
(D)  The alarm user in his/her application shall provide the names, addresses, and telephone numbers of two persons to respond to the premises when the alarm system is activated. If a designated person fails to respond to an alarm signal, that shall be grounds for the revocation of an alarm permit. 
(E)  The Town may revoke an alarm permit for failure to pay any charges or fees required by this chapter. 
(1975 Code, § 5-11.10) (Ord. 1986-338, effective 8-7-86)  
CHAPTER 112. - AMUSEMENT DEVICES 
 
Sec. 112.01 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
Distributor. Any person, firm, or corporation who, as owner, agent, employee, or otherwise, shall distribute, place, install, or deliver a mechanical amusement device to any premises in the Town or who shall keep or store within the Town any mechanical amusement device for the purpose of distributing, placing, installing, or delivering such mechanical amusement device. 
Mechanical amusement device. Any machine, device, contrivance, or apparatus the operation or use of which is permitted, controlled, allowed, or made possible by the deposit or placing of any coin, plate, disk, slug, or key into any slot, receptacle, crevice, or other opening, or by the payment of any, fee for its use as a game or contest of any description, or which may be used for any such game or contest and the use or possession of which is not prohibited by any law of the state. 
Operator. Any person, firm, or corporation who, as owner, lessee, agent, employee, or otherwise, shall operate, install, keep, maintain, or permit, or allow to be operated, installed, or maintained, any mechanical amusement device in or upon any premises owned, leased, managed, operated, or controlled by such person, firm, or corporation within the Town. 
(1975 Code, § 5-2.01) (Ord. 1957-22, effective - -57)  
Sec. 112.02 - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, for himself or any other person, firm, or corporation, to distribute, operate, install, or maintain, or allow to be distributed, operated, installed, or maintained, any mechanical amusement device in any place in the Town for commercial purposes, without having first obtained a license to distribute, install, operate, or maintain such device as set forth in this chapter. 
(1975 Code, § 5-2.02) (Ord. 1957-22, effective - -57; Am. Ord. 1997-486, effective 6-26-97)  
Sec. 112.03 - Application form. 
(A)  Form. Every person desiring a license required by the provisions of this chapter shall make a written application therefor to the Police Chief. The application shall be verified and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant and all persons financially interested in the operation or distribution of the mechanical amusement devices; 
(2)  The date and place of birth of the applicant; 
(3)  Whether the applicant desires a license as a distributor or an operator for the establishment in which the machines are to be maintained and operated; 
(4)  If an operator's license is desired, the place where the machines are to be installed and operated, together with the number of machines to be installed and operated in the establishment; 
(5)  Whether the applicant is a citizen of the United States; 
(6)  Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a crime; 
(7)  A statement that the device for which the license is sought is not intended to be and will not be permitted to be used for any gambling purposes whatsoever; and 
(8)  The nature of the interest of the applicant in or title to the device for which the license is sought. 
(B)  Investigations. Upon the receipt of such application, the Police Chief shall conduct such investigation as he/she may deem necessary and proper as to the character and morals of the applicant and the persons financially interested in the distribution or operation of the machines for which such license is sought. 
(C)  Recommendations. After completing his/her investigation, the Police Chief shall transfer the application to the Council, together with his/her recommendation as to whether or not such application for a license should be granted. 
(D)  Approval or denial. The Council shall consider the application for the license and shall approve or deny such application within 30 days after the receipt thereof and shall return the application to the Police Chief. 
(E)  Issuance of license . If the application for a license is approved by the Council, the Police Chief shall issue a license in favor of the applicant, which license shall be serially numbered. All licenses shall expire on the last day of the calendar year in which issued. 
(1975 Code, § 5-2.03) (Ord. 1957-22, effective - -57)  
Sec. 112.04 - License fees. 
(A)  The licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be forwarded by the Police Chief to the office of the Town Clerk who shall deliver such licenses to the applicants upon the receipt of the fees which shall be paid in accordance with the following schedule: 
(1)  The fee for a distributor's license shall be $100.00 per year. 
(2)  The fee for an operator's license shall be $60.00 per year for each machine. 
(B)  Fees for licenses issued after February 1 in any calendar year shall be prorated so that the licensee shall only pay a proportionate amount of the annual fee in accordance with the amount of time remaining in such year. 
(1975 Code, § 5-2.04) (Ord. 1957-22, effective - -57)  
Sec. 112.05 - Posting of license. 
Operator's licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the establishment for which such license is issued, and such license shall remain until a new or different license is issued therefor and shall show the number of machines authorized to be maintained therein. 
(1975 Code, § 5-2.05) (Ord. 1957-22, effective - -57) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 112.06 - License nontransferable. 
Licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall not be transferable from one person to another or from one establishment to another. 
(1975 Code, § 5-2.06) (Ord. 1957-22, effective - -57)  
Sec. 112.07 - Revocation of license; appeal on denial or revocation. 
(A)  The Town Manager, or designee, may revoke any license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter when, in his/her opinion, the licensee is violating or attempting to violate any of the provisions of this chapter, any law of the state, or any other law of the Town. 
(B)  The licensee may appeal any revocation of license to the Town Council pursuant to Chapter 36 of this Code. 
(1975 Code, § 5-2.07) (Ord. 1957-22, effective - -57; Am. Ord. 2003-520, effective 10-23-03)  
Sec. 112.08 - Minors prohibited from operating. 
It shall be unlawful for any minor to operate a mechanical amusement device in any manner or for any purpose. It shall be unlawful for the holder of any license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, or for any person in the employment of such licensee, to permit any minor to operate a mechanical amusement device. Evidence that any minor has operated any mechanical amusement device in a place of business owned or controlled by such licensee shall be sufficient to establish prima facie evidence of a violation of the provisions of this chapter by such licensee. Each holder of an operator's license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall at all times keep posted in a conspicuous place in the same room in which any such device is located the following notice in printed letters not less than one inch in height: "Minors are prohibited by law from operating any mechanical amusement device on these premises." 
(1975 Code, § 5-2.08) (Ord. 1957-22, effective - -57)  
Sec. 112.09 - Illegal devices, certain gambling devices prohibited. 
(A)  The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to permit the licensing, maintenance, distribution, or operation of any mechanical device or apparatus which is contrary to any of the laws of the state, the county, or the Town, nor shall the provisions of this chapter be construed to permit the operation of any mechanical playing device licensed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter in such a manner as to be contrary to any of such laws. Any mechanical playing device operated in violation of the provisions of this chapter may be seized and held by the Police Chief as set forth in Section 112.11. 
(1975 Code, § 5-2.09) 
(B)  No license shall be issued to any applicant for any mechanical amusement device which, for each coin, slug, or token inserted, makes available to the player, for actual plays only one ball or marble; nor shall any license be issued to any applicant for any mechanical amusement device which permits, or is adapted to, the insertion of additional coins, slugs, or tokens during the playing of or before the completion of the game for which the original coin, slug, or token was inserted in the device, and it shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or operate or allow such machines to be maintained or operated. 
(1975 Code, § 5-2.10) (Ord. 1957-22, effective - -57) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 112.10 - Unlawful acts. 
(A)  No award, payoff, or delivery of anything of value, or representing, or exchangeable, or redeemable for anything of value, shall be made in any contest, tournament, league, or individual play on any mechanical amusement device; and it shall be unlawful for any licensee issued a license pursuant to the provisions of this chapter or any owner or operator of a mechanical amusement device to cause, permit, or allow the award, payoff, or delivery of anything of value, or representing, or exchangeable, or redeemable for anything of value. 
(B)  It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, or operator of a mechanical amusement device to cause, permit, or allow such mechanical amusement device to be located, operated, or maintained within 300 feet of the nearest entrance to or exit from any public playground or public or private school of elementary or high school grades. 
(1975 Code, § 5-2.11) (Ord. 1957-22, effective - -57) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 112.11 - Violations; seizure of device. 
(A)  Any person who distributes, installs, operates, or maintains, or allows to be distributed, installed, operated, or maintained, a mechanical amusement device without obtaining a license as provided in this chapter, or any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as set forth in Sections 10.40 through 10.58 and 10.99 of this Code. 
(B)  Any mechanical amusement device installed, operated, or maintained upon premises or establishments not licensed as provided for in this chapter may be seized and held by the Police Chief until such premises or establishments are properly licensed. If a license is not applied for within 30 days after such seizure, the machine may be destroyed and any money found therein deposited in the Town treasury. 
(1975 Code, § 5-2.12) (Ord. 1957-22, effective - -57) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
CHAPTER 113. - CABLE TELEVISION 
 
Sec. 113.01 - Intent. 
(A)  The Town, pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code § 53066, is authorized to grant one or more nonexclusive revocable franchises to construct, operate, maintain and reconstruct cable television systems within the Town limits. 
(B)  The Town Council finds that the development of cable television and communications systems has the potential of having great benefit and impact upon the people of the Town. Because of the complex and rapidly changing technology associated with cable television, the Town Council further finds that the public convenience, safety and general welfare can best be served by establishing regulatory powers which should be vested in the Town or such persons as the Town shall designate. It is the intent of this chapter and subsequent amendments to provide for and specify the means to attain the best possible cable television service to the public and any franchises issued pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed to include this finding as an integral part thereof. 
(1975 Code, § 7-1.01) (Ord. 1990-432, effective 5-10-90)  
Sec. 113.02 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
Basic cable service. Any service tier which includes the retransmission of local television broadcast signals. 
Cable communications system or system also referred to as cable television systems or cable system. A facility consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment, that is designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within a community, but such term does not include: 
(1)  A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more television broadcast stations. 
(2)  A facility that serves only subscribers in one or more multiple unit dwellings under common ownership, control, or management, unless such facility uses any public rights-of-way. 
(3)  A facility of a common carrier, except that such facility shall be considered a cable system to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers; or 
(4)  Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility system. 
Cable service. Total of the following: 
(1)  The one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or other programming service; and 
(2)  Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection of such video programming or other programming service. 
Channel or cable channel. A portion of the electromagnetic frequency spectrum which is used in a cable system and which is capable of delivering a television channel as defined by the Federal Communications Commission. 
Council. The Town Council of the Town of Woodside. 
Franchise. An initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by the Town Council, whether such authorization is designated as a franchise, permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate, agreement, or otherwise, which authorizes the construction or operation of a cable system. 
Franchise agreement. A franchise grant ordinance, or a contractual agreement, containing the specific provisions of the franchise granted, including references specifications, requirements and other related matters. 
Franchise fees. Any tax, fee or assessment of any kind imposed by a franchising authority or other governmental entity on a grantee or cable subscriber, or both, solely because of their status as such. The term franchise fee does not include: 
(1)  Any tax, fee or assessment of general applicability (including any such tax, fee, or assessment imposed on both utilities and cable operators or their services, but not including a tax, fee or assessment which is unduly discriminatory against cable operators or cable subscribers); 
(2)  Capital costs which are required by the franchise to be incurred by grantee for public, educational, or governmental access facilities; 
(3)  Requirements or charges incidental to the awarding or enforcing of the franchise, including payments for bonds, security funds, letters of credit, insurance, indemnification, penalties, or liquidated damages; or 
(4)  Any fee imposed under Title 17, United States Code. 
Grantee. Any person receiving a franchise pursuant to this chapter and under the granting franchise ordinance or agreement, and its lawful successor, transferee or assignee. 
Grantor. The Town of Woodside as represented by the Council or any delegate acting within the scope of its jurisdiction. 
Gross annual receipts. The annual gross receipts received by a grantee from all sources of operations of the cable communications system within the Town utilizing the public streets and rights-of-way for which a franchise is required in order to deliver such cable service, excluding refundable deposits, except that any sales, excise or other taxes collected for direct pass-through to local, state or federal government shall not be included. 
Initial service area. The area of the Town which will receive service initially, as set forth in the franchise agreement. 
Installation. The connection of the system to subscribers' terminals, and the provision of service. 
Public, educational or government access facilities or PEG access facilities. The total of the following: 
(1)  Channel capacity designated for public, education, or governmental use; and 
(2)  Facilities and equipment for the use of such channel capacity. 
Section. Any section, subsection, or provision of this chapter. 
Service area or franchise area. The entire geographic area within the Town designated in a franchise agreement to receive cable service. 
Service tier. A category of cable service or other services provided by a grantee and for which a separate rate is charged by the grantee. 
State. The State of California. 
Street. Each of the following which have been dedicated to the public or are hereafter dedicated to the public and maintained under public authority or by others and located within the Town limits: streets, roadways, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, sidewalks, easements, rights-of-way and solar public property and areas that the grantor shall permit to be included within the definition of street from time to time. 
Subscriber. Any person who or which elects to subscribe to, for any purpose, a service provided by the grantee by means of or in connection with the cable system. 
Town. The Town of Woodside. 
(1975 Code, § 7-1.02) (Ord. 1990-432, effective 5-10-90)  
Sec. 113.03 - Purpose of franchise. 
A franchise granted by the Town under the provisions of this chapter shall encompass the following purposes: 
(A)  To engage in the business of cable television service and the distribution and sale of such service to subscribers within the designated service area; 
(B)  To erect, install, construct, repair, rebuild, reconstruct, replace, maintain, and retain, cable, lines, related electronic equipment, supporting structures, appurtenances, and other property in connection with the operation of a cable system in, on, over, under, upon, along and across streets or other public places within the designated service area; 
(C)  To maintain and operate the franchise properties for the origination, reception, transmission, amplification, and distribution of television and radio signals and for the delivery of cable services; 
(D)  To set forth the obligations of a grantee under the franchise. 
(1975 Code, § 7-1.03) (Ord. 1990-432, effective 5-10-90)  
Sec. 113.04 - Franchise required; term; territory. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, install or operate a cable television system in the Town within any public street or right-of-way without a properly granted franchise awarded pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(1975 Code, § 7-1.04) 
(B)  A franchise granted hereunder shall be for a term established in the franchise agreement, commencing on the effective date of the franchise agreement, or upon the grantor's adoption of an ordinance authorizing the franchise. 
(C)  A franchise granted hereunder may be renewed upon application by the grantee pursuant to the provisions of applicable state and federal law and of this chapter. 
(1975 Code, § 7-1.05) 
(D)  Any franchise shall be within all or a specified portion of the territorial limits of the Town, and within any area henceforth added to the territorial limits of the Town during the term of the franchise. 
(1975 Code, § 7-1.06) (Ord. 1990-432, effective 5-10-90) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 113.05 - Federal or state jurisdiction. 
(A)  This chapter shall be construed in a manner consistent with all applicable federal and state laws. Whenever the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) or Public Utilities Commission (PUC) of the State of California or any other federal or state agency shall now or hereafter exercise any paramount jurisdiction over any specific provisions of this chapter, such paramount jurisdiction shall preempt or preclude the exercise of like jurisdiction by the Town. Any modification of such federal or state law shall to the extent applicable be considered a part of this chapter as of the effective date of such modification. 
(B)  In the event that the state or federal government discontinues preemption in any area of cable communication over which it currently exercises jurisdiction in such manner as to expand rather than limit municipal regulatory authority, grantor may, if it so elects adopt rules and regulations in these areas, provided that such rules and regulations shall not apply to any franchise issued pursuant to this chapter prior to the adoption of such rules and regulations to the extent they materially adversely affect such franchise, including without limitation requirements with respect to system rebuilds, channel capacity, system design, construction and performance requirements, public, educational or governmental access facilities, support for any such facilities, interconnect commitments, activation of interactive capability or institutional networks. Such new municipal regulatory powers may, however, affect existing franchises with respect to franchise renewal procedures, franchise fees, consumer protection provisions, regulation of rates, technical standards and related provisions. 
(1975 Code, § 7-1.07) (Ord. 1990-432, effective 5-10-90)  
Sec. 113.06 - Franchise nontransferable. 
(A)  Grantee shall not sell, transfer, lease, assign, sublet or dispose of, in whole or in part, either by forced or involuntary sale, or by ordinary sale, contract, consolidation or otherwise, the franchise or any of the rights or privileges therein granted, without the prior consent of the Council and then only upon such terms and conditions as may be prescribed by the Council, which consent will not be unreasonably denied or delayed. Any attempt to sell, transfer, lease, assign or otherwise dispose of the franchise without the consent of the Council shall be null and void. 
(B)  The requirements of division (A) above shall apply to any change in the control of grantee. The word "control" as used herein is not limited to major stockholders or partnership interests, but includes actual working control in whatever manner exercised. In the event that grantee is a corporation, prior approval of the Council shall be required where ownership or control of more than ten percent of the voting stock of grantee is acquired by a person or group of persons acting in concert, none of whom own or control the voting stock of the grantee as of the effective date of the franchise, singularly or collectively. 
(C)  Grantee shall notify grantor in writing of any foreclosure or any other judicial sale of all or a substantial part of the franchise property of the grantee or upon the termination of any lease or interest covering all or a substantial part of said franchise property. Such notification shall be considered by grantor as notice that a change in control of ownership of the franchise has taken place and the provisions under this section governing the consent of grantor to such change in control of ownership shall apply. 
(D)  For the purpose of determining whether it shall consent to such change, transfer, or acquisition of control, grantor may inquire into the qualifications of the prospective transferee or controlling party, and grantee shall assist grantor in any such inquiry. In seeking grantor's consent to any change of ownership or control, grantee shall have the responsibility of insuring that transferee completes an application in form and substance reasonably satisfactory to grantor, which application shall include the information required under Section 113.09(A) subsections (2) through (6). An application shall be submitted to grantor not less than 60 days prior to the date of transfer. Grantee or its proposed transferee shall reimburse the grantor all its costs associated with processing and evaluating the proposed transfer. The transferee shall be required to establish that it possesses the qualifications and financial and technical capability to operate and maintain the system and comply with all franchise requirements for the remainder of the term of the franchise. 
(E)  Any financial institution having a pledge of the franchisee or its assets for the advancement of money for the construction and/or operation of the franchise shall have the right to notify the grantor that it or its designee satisfactory to the grantor shall take control of and operate the cable communications system, in the event of a grantee default in its financial obligations. Further, said financial institution shall also submit a plan for such operation within 30 days of assuming such control that will ensure continued service and compliance with all franchise requirements during the term the financial institution exercises control over the system. The financial institution shall not exercise control over the system for a period exceeding one year unless extended by the grantor in its discretion and during said period of time it shall have the right to petition the grantor to transfer the franchise to another grantee. If, after considering the legal, financial, character, technical and other public interest qualities of the applicant and determining that they are satisfactory, the grantor finds that such transfer is acceptable, the grantor shall transfer and assign the rights and obligations of such franchise as in the public interest. The consent of the grantor to such transfer shall not be unreasonably denied or delayed. 
(1975 Code, § 7-1.08) (Ord. 1990-432, effective 5-10-90)  
Sec. 113.07 - Geographical coverage. 
(A)  Grantee shall design, construct and maintain the cable television system to have the capability to pass every dwelling unit in the territorial limits of the Town. 
(B)  After service has been established by activating trunk and/or distribution cables for any area, grantee shall provide service to any requesting subscriber within that area within 30 days from the date of request, provided that the grantee is able to secure all rights-of-way necessary to extend service to such subscriber within such 30-day period on reasonable terms and conditions. 
(1975 Code, § 7-1.09) (Ord. 1990-432, effective 5-10-90)  
Sec. 113.08 - Nonexclusive franchise. 
Any franchise granted shall be nonexclusive. The grantor specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional franchises for a cable communications system or any component thereof, as it deems appropriate, provided however, that such additional grants shall not operate to modify, revoke or terminate any rights then held by any grantee. 
(1975 Code, § 7-1.10) (Ord. 1990-432, effective 5-10-90)  
Sec. 113.09 - Application for franchise; fee. 
Any person desiring a franchise or franchise renewal for a cable television system shall file an application with the Town. A nonrefundable application fee established by the Town shall accompany the application or renewal application to cover all costs associated with processing and reviewing the application, including without limitation costs of administrative review financial, legal and technical evaluation of the applicant, consultants, including technical and legal experts, and all costs incurred by such experts, notice and publication requirements with respect to the consideration of the application and document preparation expenses. In the event such costs exceed the application fee, the selected grantee(s) shall pay the difference to the Town within 30 days following receipt of an itemized statement of such costs. 
(A)  Contents. An application for a franchise for a cable television system shall contain, where applicable: 
(1)  Designation of specific area to be served by franchise; 
(2)  Resume of prior history of applicant, including the expertise of applicant in the cable television field; 
(3)  List of the partners, general and limited, of the applicant, if a partnership, or the percentage of stock owned or controlled by each shareholder, if a corporation; 
(4)  List of officers, directors and managing employees of applicant, together with a description of the background of each such person; 
(5)  The names and addresses of any parent or subsidiary of applicant or any other business entity owning or controlling applicant in whole or in part, or owned or controlled in whole or in part by applicant; 
(6)  A current financial statement of applicant verified by a CPA audit or otherwise certified to be true, complete and correct to the reasonable satisfaction of the Town; 
(7)  Proposed construction and service schedule; 
(8)  Any reasonable additional information that the Town deems applicable. 
(B)  Solicitation of applications. 
(1)  The Council may, by advertisement or any other means, solicit and call for applications for cable television system franchises, and may determine and fix any date upon or before which the same shall be received by the Town, and may specify any other times, terms, conditions, or limitations respecting the soliciting and receiving of such applications. 
(2)  Upon receipt of any application for a franchise, the Council shall refer the same to the Town Manager, who shall prepare a report and make his/her recommendations respecting such application. 
(3)  A public hearing shall be set prior to any franchise grant, at a time and date approved by the Council. 
(4)  Within 30 days after the close of the hearing, the Council shall make a decision based upon the evidence received at the hearing as to whether or not the franchise(s) should be granted, and, if granted, subject to what conditions. The Council may grant one or more franchises, or may decline to grant any franchise. 
(C)  Fee. Following the issuance and acceptance of the franchise, the grantee shall pay to the grantor a franchise fee in the amount set forth in the franchise agreement. 
(1975 Code, §§ 7-1.11, 7-1.12, 7-1.13, 7-1.15) (Ord. 1990-432, effective 5-10-90)  
Sec. 113.10 - Minimum service standards. 
Minimum service standards and standards governing consumer protection and response by grantee to subscriber complaints not otherwise provided for in this chapter may be established in the franchise agreement, and grantee shall comply with such standards in the operation of the cable television system. A verified and continuing pattern of noncompliance may be deemed a breach of the franchise. 
(1975 Code, § 7-1.14) (Ord. 1990-432, effective 5-10-90)  
Sec. 113.11 - Security fund. 
(A)  Grantor may require grantee to deposit into an interest bearing account established by grantor a sum established in the franchise agreement as a security fund. This sum shall be maintained on deposit throughout the term of the franchise, with any interest payable to grantee. 
(B)  The security fund shall be available to grantor to satisfy any and all claims, lines and/or taxes due grantor from grantee which arise by reason of construction, operation, or maintenance of the system, and to satisfy any remedies or liquidated damages arising out of a franchise breach, subject to the procedures and amounts designated in the franchise agreement. 
(C)  Subject to grantor approval, the security fund requirements may be satisfied by conveyance of an irrevocable letter of credit to the grantor, in a form approved by grantor. 
(1975 Code, § 7-1.16) (Ord. 1990-432, effective 5-10-90)  
Sec. 113.12 - Design and construction requirements; technical standards. 
(A)  Design and construction requirements. 
(1)  Grantee shall not construct any cable system facilities until grantee has secured the necessary permits from grantor, or other cognizant public agencies. 
(2)  In those areas of the Town where transmission or distribution facilities of the public utilities providing telephone and electric power service are underground, the grantee likewise shall construct, operate and maintain its transmission and distribution facilities therein underground. 
(3)  In those areas of the Town where grantee's cables are located on the above-ground transmission or distribution facilities of the public utility providing telephone or electric power service, and in the event that the facilities of both such public utilities subsequently are placed underground, then the grantee likewise shall reconstruct, operate and maintain its transmission and distribution facilities underground, at grantee's cost. 
(B)  Technical standards. 
(1)  The grantee shall construct, install, operate and maintain its system in a manner consistent with all applicable laws, ordinances, construction standards, governmental requirements, FCC technical standards, and any detailed standards set forth in its franchise agreement. In addition, the grantee shall provide to the grantor, upon request, a written report of the results of the grantee's annual proof of performance tests conducted pursuant to FCC standards and guidelines. 
(2)  Failures to maintain specified technical standards shall constitute a breach of the franchise. 
(1975 Code, §§ 7-1.17, 7-1.18) (Ord. 1990-432, effective 5-10-90) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 113.13 - Indemnification. 
The grantee shall indemnify, defend and hold grantor, its officers, agents and employees harmless from any liability, claims, damages, costs or expenses, including reasonable attorneys' fees, arising from injury to persons or damages to property to the extent caused by any conduct undertaken by the grantee, its agents or employees, by reason of the franchise. Grantee shall at its sole cost and expense, upon demand of grantor, appear in and defend any and all suits, actions or other legal proceedings, whether judicial, quasi-judicial, administrative, legislative or otherwise, brought or instituted or had by third persons or duly constituted authorities, against or affecting grantor, its officers, agents or employees, and arising out of or pertaining to any conduct of the grantee, its agents or employees which is within the scope of this indemnity. 
(1975 Code, § 7-1.19) (Ord. 1990-432, effective 5-10-90)  
Sec. 113.14 - Insurance requirements. 
(A)  On or before commencement of franchise operations, the grantee shall obtain policies of liability, workers' compensation and property insurance from companies authorized to transact business in California by the Insurance Commissioner of California. 
(B)  The policy of liability insurance shall: 
(1)  Be issued to grantee and name grantor, its officers, agents and employees as additional insureds; 
(2)  Indemnify for all liability for personal and bodily injury, death and damage to property arising from activities conducted and premises used pursuant to this chapter by providing coverage therefor, including but not limited to coverage for: negligent acts or omissions of grantee and its agents, servants and employees, committed in the conduct of franchise operations, and/or, use of motor vehicles; 
(3)  Provide a combined single limit for comprehensive general liability and comprehensive automobile liability insurance in the amount provided for in the franchise agreement. Such insurance policy shall be subject to the review and approval of grantor's legal counsel; and 
(4)  Be noncancellable without 30 days' prior written notice thereof directed to grantor. 
(C)  The policy of worker's compensation insurance shall: 
(1)  Have been previously approved as to substance and form by the California Insurance Commissioner; 
(2)  Cover all employees of grantee who in the course and scope of their employment are to conduct the franchise operations; 
(3)  Provide for every benefit and payment presently or hereinafter conferred by Cal. Lab. Code Division 4 upon an injured employee, including vocational rehabilitation and death benefits. 
(D)  The policy of property insurance shall provide fire insurance with extended coverage on the franchise property used by grantee in the conduct of franchise operations in an amount adequate to enable grantee to resume franchise operations following the occurrence of any risk covered by this insurance. 
(E)  Grantee shale file with grantor prior to commencement of franchise operations either certified copies of these insurance policies or a certificate of insurance for each of the required policies executed by the company issuing the policy or by a broker authorized to issue such a certificate, certifying that the policy is in force and providing the following information with respect to the policy: 
(1)  The policy number; 
(2)  The date upon which the policy will become effective and the date upon which it will expire; 
(3)  The names of the named insureds and any additional insured required by this chapter or the franchise agreement; 
(4)  The subject of the insurance; 
(5)  The type of coverage provided by the insurance; and 
(6)  Amount or limit of coverage provided by the insurance. 
(F)  Conduct of franchise operations shall not commence until grantee has complied with the aforementioned provisions of this section. 
(G)  In the event grantee fails to maintain any of the above described policies in full force and effect, grantor shall, upon 48 hours' notice to grantee, have the right to procure the required insurance and recover the cost thereof from grantee. Grantor shall also have the right to suspend the franchise during any period that grantee fails to maintain said policies in full force and effect. 
(H)  No more than once during any three-year period, grantor shall have the right to order grantee to increase the amounts of the insurance coverage provided herein. Such order may be made by grantor after complying with the hearing procedure provided for herein. Increases in insurance coverage shall be based upon evidence of prudent business practices of like enterprises involving the same or similar risks. 
(1975 Code, § 7-1.20) (Ord. 1990-432, effective 5-10-90)  
Sec. 113.15 - Records required. 
(A)  Grantee shall at all times maintain: 
(1)  A record of all complaints received and interruptions or degradation of service experienced for the preceding two years, provided that such complaints result in or require a service call. 
(2)  A full and complete set of plans, records and "as-built" maps showing the location of the cable television system installed or in use in the Town, exclusive of subscriber service drops and equipment provided in subscribers' homes. 
(3)  A record of service calls, identifying the number, general nature and disposition of such calls, on a monthly basis. A summary of such service calls shall be submitted to the grantor within 30 days following the end of each month in a form reasonably acceptable to the grantor. 
(B)  The grantor may impose reasonable requests for additional information, records and documents from time to time, provided they reasonably relate to the scope of the Town's rights under this chapter or the grantee's franchise agreement. 
(C)  At all reasonable times, grantee shall permit examination by any duly authorized representative of the grantor, of all franchise property and facilities, together with any appurtenant property and facilities of grantee situated within or without the Town, and all records relating to the franchise, provided they reasonably relate to the scope of grantor's rights under this chapter or the grantee's franchise agreement. 
(1975 Code, § 7-1.21) (Ord. 1990-432, effective 5-10-90)  
Sec. 113.16 - Reports. 
(A)  Annual reports. Within 90 days after a request from grantor, grantee shall submit a written annual report to grantor with respect to the preceding calendar year in a form approved by grantor, including, but not limited to, the following information: 
(1)  A summary of the previous year's (or in the case of the initial reporting year, the initial year(s) activities in development of the cable system, including but not limited to, services begun or discontinued during the reporting year; 
(2)  A current statement of costs of construction by component categories; 
(3)  A list of grantee's officers, members of its board of directors, and other principals of grantee; 
(4)  A list of stockholders or other equity investors holding five percent or more of the voting interest in grantee and its parent, subsidiary and affiliated corporations and other entities, if any; 
(5)  An indication on a map of those areas where service is planned and a schedule describing the planned implementation; 
(6)  Information as to the number of homes passed, subscribers, additional television, outlets, and penetration of basic and pay service in the service area. 
(B)  Copies of federal and state reports. The grantee shall submit to grantor copies of all pleadings, applications and reports submitted by grantee to, as well as copies of all decisions, correspondence and actions by any federal, state or local court, regulatory agency, or other governmental body which are non-routine in nature and which will materially affect its cable television operations within the franchise area. The grantee shall submit such documents to grantor simultaneously with their submission to such court, agency and/or body; or within five days after their receipt from such court, agency and/or body. Information otherwise confidential by law and so designated by grantee, which is submitted to grantor, shall be retained in confidence by grantor and its authorized agents and shall not be made available for public inspection. 
(C)  Public reports. If grantee is publicly held, a copy of each grantee's annual and other periodic reports and those of its parent, shall be submitted to grantor within 45 days of request by grantor. 
(D)  Complaint report and opinion survey. 
(1)  The grantee shall furnish to the grantor the results of any opinion survey conducted by the grantee which identifies satisfaction or dissatisfaction among subscribers within the Town with the grantee's cable service. The results of such survey shall be furnished to the grantor within 30 days following completion of the survey. 
(2)  Upon request of the grantor, but not more than once annually, the grantee shall conduct a subscriber satisfaction survey pertaining to quality of service, which may be transmitted to subscribers in subscriber statements for cable services. The form and content of such survey shall be reasonably acceptable to the grantor. The cost of such survey shall be borne by the grantee. 
(E)  Privacy report. Upon grantor's request, but no more than annually, grantee shall submit to grantor an annual report indicating the degree of compliance with the privacy provisions contained in this chapter and all steps taken to assure that the privacy rights of individuals have been protected. 
(F)  General requirements. 
(1)  All reports required under this chapter, except those confidential by law, shall be available for public inspection in the grantor's offices during normal business hours. 
(2)  All reports and records required under this chapter shall be furnished at the sole expense of grantee, except as otherwise provided in this chapter or the franchise agreement: 
(3)  The wilful refusal, failure, or neglect of grantee to file any of the reports required as and when due under this chapter, may be deemed a material breach of the franchise' agreement if such reports are not provided to grantor within 30 days after written request therefor, and may subject the grantee to all remedies, legal or equitable, which are available to grantor under the franchise or otherwise. 
(4)  Any materially false or misleading statement or representation made knowingly and wilfully by the grantee in any report required under this chapter or under the franchise agreement may be deemed a material breach of the franchise and may subject grantee to all remedies, legal or equitable, which are available to grantor under the franchise or otherwise. 
(1975 Code, §§ 7-1.22—7-1.27) (Ord. 1990-432, effective 5-10-90)  
Sec. 113.17 - Review and evaluation of system performance. 
(A)  Annual review. 
(1)  Each year throughout the term of the franchise, if requested by the grantor, grantor and grantee shall meet publicly to review system performance and quality of service. 
(2)  The various reports required pursuant to this chapter shall be utilized as the basis for review. In addition, any subscriber may submit comments or complaints during the review meetings, either orally or in writing, and these shall be considered. Within 30 days after conclusion of a system performance review meeting, grantor may issue findings with respect to the adequacy of system performance and quality of service. 
(3)  If the cable system is determined not to comply with the requirements of this chapter or the grantee's franchise, grantor may direct grantee to correct the areas of noncompliance within a reasonable period of time. Failure of grantee, after due notice, to correct the areas of noncompliance within the period specified therefor or to commence compliance within such period and diligently achieve compliance thereafter shall be considered a material breach of the franchise, and grantor may exercise any remedy within the scope of this chapter and the franchise agreement considered appropriate. 
(B)  Special review. When there have been complaints made or where there exists other evidence which, in the judgment of the grantor, casts reasonable doubt on the reliability or quality of cable service to the effect that the grantee is not in compliance with the requirements of this chapter or its franchise, the grantor shall have the right to compel the grantee to test, analyze and report on the performance of the system in order to protect the public against substandard cable service. Such test or tests shall be made and the report thereof shall be delivered to the grantor no later than 30 days after the grantor notifies the grantee that it is exercising such right. Such report shall include the following information: the nature of the complaints which precipitated the special tests; what system component was tested; the equipment used and procedures employed in said testing; the results of such tests; and the method by which such complaints were resolved. Any other information pertinent to the special test shall be recorded. 
(C)  Special evaluation sessions. The grantor may hold special evaluation sessions at any time during the term of a franchise, provided such sessions are held no more often than once every three years. The grantee shall be notified of the place, time and date thereof and the topics to be discussed. Such sessions shall be open to the public and advertised in a newspaper of general circulation at least 30 days before each session. 
(1975 Code, §§ 7-1.28, 7-1.29, 7-1.30) (Ord. 1990-432, effective 5-10-90)  
Sec. 113.18 - Remedies for franchise violation. 
(A)  If grantee fails to perform in a timely manner any obligation required by this chapter or a franchise granted under this chapter following notice from the grantor and an opportunity to cure such nonperformance in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, grantor may at its option and in its sole discretion: 
(1)  Cure the violation and recover the actual cost thereof from the security fund established in this chapter if such violation is not cured within five days after written notice to the grantee of grantor's intention to cure and draw upon the security fund; 
(2)  Assess against grantee liquidated damages in an amount set forth in the franchise agreement for any such violation(s) if such violation is not cured within five days after written notice to the grantee of grantors intention to assess liquidated damages. By acceptance of a franchise under this chapter, grantee hereby agrees to pay any assessment to be levied against the security fund provided for in this chapter and collected by grantor immediately upon such assessment. Such assessment shall not constitute a waiver by grantor of any other right or remedy it may have under the franchise or under applicable law, including without limitation, its right to recover from grantee such additional damages, losses, costs and expenses, including actual attorneys' fees, as may have been suffered or incurred by grantor by reason of or arising out of such breach of the franchise; 
(3)  For violations which have materially degraded the quality of service, order and direct grantee to issue rebates or credits to subscribers, in an amount to be determined by grantor to be reasonably related to the nature of the degradation in service and measured by the period of the degradation, to provide monetary relief substantially equal to the reduced quality of service resulting from grantee's failure to perform. 
(B)  Prior to imposing any remedy or other sanction against grantee specified in this chapter, grantor shall give grantee notice and opportunity to be heard on the matter, in accordance with the following procedures: 
(1)  Grantor shall first notify grantee of the violation in writing by personal delivery or registered or certified mail, and demand correction within a reasonable time, which shall not be less than five days in the case of the failure of the grantee to pay any sum or other amount due the grantor under this chapter or the grantee's franchise and 30 days in all other cases. If grantee fails to correct the violation within the time prescribed or if grantee fails to commence correction of the violation within the time prescribed and diligently remedy such violation thereafter, the grantor shall then give written notice of not less than 20 days of a public hearing to be held before the Council. Said notice shall specify the violations alleged to have occurred. 
(2)  At the public hearing, the Council shall hear and consider all relevant evidence, and thereafter render findings and its decision. 
(3)  In the event the Council finds that grantee has corrected the violation or has diligently commenced correction of such violation after notice thereof from grantor and is diligently proceeding to fully remedy such violation, or that no violation has occurred, the proceedings shall terminate and no penalty or other sanction shall be imposed. 
(4)  In the event the Council finds that the alleged violations exist and that grantee has not corrected the same in a satisfactory manner or has not diligently commenced correction of such violation after notice thereof from grantor and is not diligently proceeding to fully remedy such violation, the grantor may impose one or more of the remedies specified herein as it, in its discretion, deems appropriate under the circumstances. 
(1975 Code, §§ 7-1.31, 7-1.33) (Ord. 1990-432, effective 5-10-90)  
Sec. 113.19 - Grantor's power to revoke franchise. 
(A)  The grantor reserves the right to revoke any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter and rescind all rights and privileges associated with it in the following circumstances, each of which shall represent a default by grantee and material breach under the franchise grant: 
(1)  If grantee shall default in the performance of its material obligations under this chapter or under such agreements, contracts or other terms and provisions entered into by and between grantor and the grantee; 
(2)  If grantee shall fail to provide or maintain in full force and effect the insurance coverage or security fund as required herein; 
(3)  If grantee shall violate any order or ruling of any regulatory body having jurisdiction over the grantee relative to the grantee's franchise, unless such order or ruling is being contested by grantee by appropriate proceedings conducted in good faith; 
(4)  If grantee attempts to evade any provision of this chapter or practices any fraud or deceit upon grantor; 
(5)  If grantee persistently fails to remedy defaults for which lesser penalties have previously been imposed; 
(6)  If grantee becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its debts, or is adjudged a bankrupt. 
(B)  The termination and forfeiture of the grantee's franchise shall in no way affect any right of grantor to pursue any remedy under the franchise or any provision of law. 
(1975 Code, § 7-1.32) (Ord. 1990-432, effective 5-10-90)  
Sec. 113.20 - Grantee's inability to perform. 
In the event grantee's performance of any of the terms, conditions or obligations required by this chapter or a franchise granted hereunder is prevented by a cause or event not within grantee's control, such inability to perform shall be deemed excused and no penalties or sanctions shall be imposed as a result thereof; provided, however, that such inability to perform shall not relieve a grantee from the obligations imposed by Section 113.18(A)(3), pertaining to refunds and credits for interruptions in service. For the purpose of this section, causes or events not within the control of grantee shall include without limitation acts of God, strikes, sabotage, riots or civil disturbances, restraints imposed by order of a governmental agency or court, explosions, acts of public enemies, and natural disasters such as floods, earthquakes, landslides, and fires, but shall not include financial inability of the grantee to perform or failure of the grantee to obtain any necessary permits or licenses form other governmental agencies or the right to use the facilities of any public utility where such failure is due solely to the acts or omissions of grantee, or the failure of the grantee to secure supplies, services or equipment necessary for the installation, operation, maintenance or repair of the cable communications system where the grantee has failed to exercise reasonable diligence to secure such supplies, services or equipment. 
(1975 Code, § 7-1.34) (Ord. 1990-432, effective 5-10-90)  
Sec. 113.21 - Abandonment or removal of franchise property. 
(A)  In the event that the use of any franchise property or a portion thereof is discontinued for a continuous period of 12 months, grantee shall be deemed to have abandoned that franchise property. 
(B)  Grantor, upon such terms as grantor may impose, may give grantee permission to abandon, without removing, any system facility or equipment laid, directly constructed, operated or maintained under the franchise. Unless such permission is granted or unless otherwise provided in this chapter, the grantee shall remove all abandoned facilities and equipment upon receipt of written notice from grantor and shall restore the street to its former state at the time such facilities and equipment were installed, as near as may be, so as not to impair its usefulness. In removing its plant, structures and equipment, grantee shall refill, at its own expense, any excavation that shall be made by it and shall leave all public ways and materially interfering with any electrical or telephone cable or other utility wires, poles, or attachments. Grantor shall have the right to inspect and approve the condition of the public ways, public places, cables, wires, attachments and poles prior to and after removal. The liability, indemnity and insurance provisions of this chapter and the security fund as provided in this chapter shall continue in full force and effect during the period of removal and until full compliance by grantee with the terms and conditions of this section. 
(C)  Upon abandonment of any franchise property in place, the grantee, if required by the grantor, shall submit to the grantor an instrument, satisfactory in form to the Town Attorney, transferring to the grantor the ownership of the franchise property abandoned. 
(D)  At the expiration of the term for which the franchise is granted, or upon its revocation or earlier expiration, as provided for herein, in any such case without renewal, extension or transfer, the grantor shall have the right to require grantee to remove, at its own expense, all aboveground portions of the cable television system from all streets and public ways within the Town within a reasonable period of time, which shall not be less than 180 days. 
(E)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in this chapter, the grantee may abandon any underground franchise property in place so long as it does not materially interfere with the use of the street or public rights-of-way in which such property is located or with the use thereof by any public utility. 
(1975 Code, § 7-1.35) (Ord. 1990-432, effective 5-10-90)  
Sec. 113.22 - Restoration by grantor. 
In the event of a failure by grantee to complete any work required herein or by any other law or ordinance, and if such work is not completed within 30 days after receipt of written notice thereof from grantor or, if more than 30 days are reasonably required therefor, if grantee does not commence such work within such 30 day period and diligently complete the work thereafter (except in cases of emergency constituting a threat to public health, safety or welfare), grantor may cause such work to be done and grantee shall reimburse grantor the costs thereof within 30 days after receipt of an itemized list of such costs, or grantor may recover such costs through the security fund provided by grantee. 
(1975 Code, § 7-1.36) (Ord. 1990-432, effective 5-10-90)  
Sec. 113.23 - Extended operation and continuity of services. 
Upon either expiration or revocation of the franchise, the grantor shall have discretion to permit grantee to continue to operate the cable television system for an extended period of time not to exceed 12 months from the date of such expiration or revocation, unless extended by resolution of grantor. Grantee shall, as trustee for its successor-in-interest, continue to operate the system under the terms and conditions of this chapter and the franchise and to provide the regular subscriber service and any and all of the services that may be provided at that time. It shall be the right of all subscribers to continue to receive all available services provided their financial and other obligations to grantee are honored. The grantee shall use reasonable efforts to provide continuous, uninterrupted service to its subscribers, including operation of the system during transitional periods following franchise expiration or termination. 
(1975 Code, § 7-1.37) (Ord. 1990-432, effective 5-10-90)  
Sec. 113.24 - Receivership and foreclosure. 
(A)  A franchise granted hereunder shall, at the option of grantor, cease and terminate 120 days after appointment of a receiver or receivers, or trustee or trustees, to take over and conduct the business of grantee, whether in a receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy or other action or proceeding, unless such receivership or trusteeship shall have been vacated prior to the expiration of said 120 days, or unless such receivers or trustees shall have, within 120 days after their election or appointment, fully complied with all the terms and provisions of this chapter and the franchise granted pursuant hereto, and the receivership or trustees within said 120 days shall have remedied all the faults under the franchise or provided a plan for the remedy of such faults which is satisfactory to the grantor; and such receivers or trustees shall, within said 120 days, execute an agreement duly approved by the court leaving jurisdiction in the premises, whereby such receivers or trustees assume and agree to be bound by each and every term, provision and limitation of the franchise herein granted. 
(B)  In the case of a foreclosure or other judicial sale of the franchise property, or any material part thereof, grantor may serve notice of termination upon grantee and the successful bidder at such sale, in which event the franchise granted in this chapter and all rights and privileges of the grantee hereunder shall cease and terminate 30 days after service of such notice, unless grantor shall have approved the transfer of the franchise, as and in the manner that this chapter provides; and such successful bidder shall have covenanted and agreed with grantor to assume and be bound by all terms and conditions of the franchise. 
(1975 Code, § 7-1.38) (Ord. 1990-432, effective 5-10-90)  
Sec. 113.25 - Rights reserved to grantor. 
(A)  In addition to any rights specifically reserved to the grantor by this chapter, the grantor reserves to itself every right and power which is required to be reserved by a provision of any ordinance or under the franchise, and the grantee by accepting a franchise hereunder agrees to be bound thereby and to comply with any action or requirement of the grantor in its exercise of any such right or power. 
(B)  The grantor shall have the right to waive any provision of the franchise, except those required by federal or state regulation, if the grantor determines that it is in the public interest to do so, and that the enforcement of such provision will impose an undue hardship on the grantee or the subscribers. To be effective such waiver shall be evidenced by a statement in writing signed by a duly authorized representative of the grantor. Waiver of any provision in one instance shall not be deemed a waiver of such provision subsequent to such instance nor be deemed a waiver of any other provision of the franchise unless the statement so recites. 
(1975 Code, § 7-1.39) (Ord. 1990-432, effective 5-10-90)  
Sec. 113.26 - Rights of individuals. 
(A)  The grantee shall not deny service, deny access, or otherwise discriminate against subscribers, channel users, or general citizens on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, age or sex. The grantee shall comply at all times with all other applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations, and all executive and administrative orders, relating to nondiscrimination, including without limitation Cal. Civ. Code § 51 which is incorporated in this section by reference. 
(B)  Grantee shall adhere to the applicable equal employment opportunity requirements of the FCC, state and local regulations, as now written or as amended from time to time. 
(C)  Neither the grantee, nor any person, agency, or entity shall, without the subscriber's consent, tap, or arrange for the tapping, of any cable, line, signal input device, or subscriber outlet or receiver for any purpose except routine maintenance of the system, detection of unauthorized service, polling with audience participating, or audience viewing surveys to support advertising research regarding viewers where individual viewing behavior cannot be identified. 
(D)  In the conduct of providing its services or in pursuit of any collateral commercial enterprise resulting therefrom, grantee shall take reasonable steps to prevent the invasion of a subscriber's or general citizen's right of privacy or other personal rights through the use of the system as such rights are delineated or defined by applicable law. The grantee shall not without lawful court order or other applicable valid legal authority utilize the system's interactive two-way equipment or capability for unauthorized personal surveillance of any subscriber or general citizen. 
(E)  No cable line, wire, amplifier, converter, or other piece of equipment owned by the grantee shall be installed by the grantee in the subscriber's premises without first securing any required consent. If a subscriber requests service, permission to install upon subscriber's property shall be presumed. 
(F)  The grantee shall credit or refund to the subscriber upon request, for interruptions in service, as provided in the grantee's franchise agreement. 
(G)  The grantee, or any of its agents or employees, shall not sell, or otherwise make available to any party: 
(1)  Any list of the names and addresses of subscribers containing the names and addresses of subscribers who request in writing to be removed from such list; and 
(2)  Any list which identifies the viewing habits of individual subscribers, without the prior written consent of such subscribers. This does not prohibit the grantee from providing composite ratings of subscriber viewing to any party. 
(1975 Code, § 7-1.40) (Ord. 1990-432, effective 5-10-90)  
Sec. 113.27 - Separability. 
If any provision of the ordinance codified in this chapter is held by any court or by any federal or state agency of competent jurisdiction, to be invalid as conflicting with any federal or state law, rule or regulation now or hereafter in effect, or is held by such court or agency to be modified in any way in order to conform to the requirements of any such law, rule or regulation, such provision shall be considered a separate, distinct, and independent part of this chapter, and such holding shall not affect the validity and enforceability of all other provisions herein. In the event that such law, rule or regulation is subsequently repealed, rescinded, amended or otherwise changed, so that the provision hereof which had been held invalid or modified is no longer in conflict with such law, rule or regulation, said provision shall thereupon return to full force and effect and shall thereafter be binding on grantor and grantee, provided that grantor shall give grantee 30 days written notice of such change before requiring compliance with said provision or such longer period of time as may be reasonably required for grantee to comply with such provision. 
(1975 Code, § 7-1.41) (Ord. 1990-432, effective 5-10-90)  
CHAPTER 114. - FILMING ACTIVITIES 
 
Sec. 114.01 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Woodside Film Permit Ordinance. 
(Ord. 1992-453, effective 1-19-92)  
Sec. 114.02 - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to provide for rules governing the issuance of permits for filming activities on location within the Town. The intent of this chapter is to ensure that motion picture, television, commercial and non-theatrical filming companies will be encouraged to use locations for filming activities within the Town so long as those activities are consistent with the public health and safety and the protection of property. 
(Ord. 1992-453, effective 1-19-92)  
Sec. 114.03 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
Film permit. Written authorization from the Town Planning Director to conduct the filming activity described in the permit. 
Filming activity. The filming, videotaping, photographing, or other similar process conducted for the making of motion pictures, television programs, commercials and/or nontheatrical film productions. 
News purposes. A filming activity conducted for the purpose of reporting on persons or events which are in the news for television and other news services, and related conduct protected under the state and federal constitutions such as free speech and free press. 
Studio. A fixed place of business where filming activities are regularly conducted upon the premises. 
Town Planning Director. The Town Planning Director of the Town or designee. 
(Ord. 1992-453, effective 1-19-92)  
Sec. 114.04 - Permit required; exemptions. 
(A)  It is unlawful to conduct a filming activity as defined in this chapter without first obtaining a film permit from the Town Planning Director. 
(B)  The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any of the following activities: 
(1)  Film activities conducted for news purposes as defined herein. 
(2)  Filming activities conducted in a studio as defined herein. 
(3)  Filming activities conducted for use in a criminal investigation, or court civil or criminal proceeding. 
(Ord. 1992-453, effective 1-19-92)  
Sec. 114.05 - Application for permit; fees. 
(A)  Deadline for filing. 
(1)  Applications for a filming permit must be filed with the Town Planning Director's Office at least ten business days in advance of the time that the proposed filming activity is to commence. 
(2)  Application deadlines may be waived for good cause by the Town Planning Director if there is sufficient time remaining to process the application, and for the Town to prepare for the requested filming activity. 
(B)  Application form. Permit application shall be on a form furnished by the Town Planning Director. Such form shall request the following information: 
(1)  Name, business address and telephone number and fax number of applicant. 
(2)  Location(s) and approximate daily call times of proposed filming activity. 
(3)  Description of scenes to be filmed including details of any stunts, chase scenes, pyrotechnics, or special effects. 
(4)  Name of person in charge on location. 
(5)  Proof of permission to film on private property within the Town. If such proof is not available at the time the application is submitted, it can be subsequently filed by the applicant prior to the Town's issuance of the film permit. 
(6)  Description of all vehicles which will be parked on Town streets during filming activities and a parking plan. 
(7)  Other information as the Town Planning Director may require to determine whether to grant a film permit under this chapter. 
(C)  Fees and deposits. A permit fee in and deposit in amount established by Town Council Resolution shall be paid by the applicant at the time the application is filed. 
(Ord. 1992-453, effective 1-19-92)  
Sec. 114.06 - Permit approval or denial. 
The application shall be approved/denied within seven business days of receipt of the completed application. The film permit shall be approved by the Town Planning Director unless he/she determines from consideration of the application or other pertinent information, that any of the following conditions exist, and cannot be properly mitigated by conditions to the permit: 
(A)  The filming activity will substantially disrupt the use of a street or right-of-way at a time when it is usually subject to traffic congestion, or interfere with the operation of emergency vehicles in the proposed permit area, or unduly interfere with local business activity. 
(B)  The location of the filming activity will substantially interfere with street maintenance work, or a previously authorized excavation permit. 
(C)  The proposed permit location is on Town owned property and the filming activity will substantially interfere with municipal functions, or other previously authorized activities on Town property. 
(D)  The filming activity creates a substantial risk of injury to persons or property. 
(E)  The applicant failed to complete the application after being requested to do so, or the information contained in the application is found to be false in any material detail. 
(F)  The particular filming activity would violate federal, state or local law including license/permit requirements. 
(Ord. 1992-453, effective 1-19-92)  
Sec. 114.07 - Permit conditions. 
The Town Planning Director may condition the issuance of a filming activity permit by imposing reasonable requirements concerning the time, place and manner of filming activities including but not limited to the following: 
(A)  Requirements for the presence of Town employees, Sheriff's personnel or Fire District employees. 
(B)  Traffic and parking requirements at the applicant's expense. 
(C)  Restrictions on the use of gunfire, explosions, and other noise-creating or hazardous devices. 
(D)  Restrictions on hours of filming activity. 
(E)  Requirements concerning notice to affected property owners of the filming activity. 
(Ord. 1992-453, effective 1-19-92)  
Sec. 114.08 - Change of filming date. 
Upon reasonable notice by the permittee in advance of the filming activity, the Town Planning Director is authorized to change the date for which the film permit has been issued without requiring a new application, or permit fee. 
(Ord. 1992-453, effective 1-19-92)  
Sec. 114.09 - Insurance requirements. 
(A)  The applicant for a film permit must possess or obtain liability insurance to protect against loss from liability imposed by law for damages on account of bodily injury and property damage arising from the filming activity. Such insurance shall name on the policy or by endorsement as insureds the Town, its officers, employees and agents. Insurance coverage must be maintained for the duration of the filming activity. Coverage shall be provided by a Comprehensive General Liability Insurance Policy in the amount required by the Town Planning Director. 
(B)  A copy of the policy or a certificate of insurance along with all necessary endorsements must be filed with the Town not less than three business days prior to the filming activity unless the Town Planning Director for good cause waives the filing deadline. 
(C)  Proof of insurance coverage as specified in divisions (A) and (B) above must be verified by the Town prior to issuance of a film permit by the Town Planning Director. 
(Ord. 1992-453, effective 1-19-92)  
Sec. 114.10 - Indemnification and liability. 
(A)  Prior to the issuance of the film permit, the permit applicant must sign an agreement to reimburse the Town for any costs incurred to repair or replace Town property which is damaged as the result of the filming activity. 
(B)  The Agreement shall also provide that the permittee shall defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the Town, its officers, agents, or employees from all claims and liability of any kind whatsoever resulting from or arising out of the filming activity or issuance of the film permit. 
(Ord. 1992-453, effective 1-19-92)  
Sec. 114.11 - Duties of permittee. 
(A)  Each permittee shall comply with all terms and conditions of the permit. Failure to comply with all permit terms and conditions is grounds for permit revocation by the Town Planning Director. 
(B)  Each permittee shall clean and restore all Town owned property utilized during the filming activity to the same condition as existed prior to the filming. 
(C)  The person in charge of the filming activity shall retain a copy of the film permit on location. 
(Ord. 1992-453, effective 1-19-92)  
Sec. 114.12 - Appeals. 
The permit applicant or any interested person may appeal a permit's granting, permit's denial, permit revocation or refusal to waive a deadline under this chapter by filing an appeal pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 36 of this Code. 
(Ord. 1992-453, effective 1-19-92; Am. Ord. 2003-520, effective 10-23-03)  
Sec. 114.13 - Violations. 
The violation of any provision of this chapter, shall be a misdemeanor, and any violations may also be addressed in a civil action. 
(Ord. 1992-453, effective 1-19-92)  
CHAPTER 115. - STABLES 
 
Sec. 115.01 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Stable Ordinance of the Town of Woodside." 
(Ord. 2007-538, effective 11-22-07)  
Sec. 115.02 - Purpose and intent. 
(A)  The provisions of this chapter are adopted to establish licensing requirements for the keeping of horses and to regulate their keeping and maintenance in order to protect and promote both public and animal health, safety, welfare, comfort, and convenience and to establish conditions and requirements for the operation of stables. 
(B)  It is hereby expressly declared to be the intent of the Council that the standards and regulations set forth in this chapter shall apply to the maintenance and operation of all private and professional stables situated and existing within the Town and all private and professional stables hereafter erected, constructed, or put into operation within the Town. 
(Ord. 2007-538, effective 11-22-07)  
Sec. 115.03 - Prohibited acts. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed as authorizing any act prohibited by the state laws or regulations adopted pursuant thereto. 
(Ord. 2007-538, effective 11-22-07)  
Sec. 115.04 - Enforcement of provisions. 
The enforcement of the provisions of this chapter shall be performed by such persons or governmental bodies as authorized by the Council or by the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2007-538, effective 11-22-07)  
Sec. 115.05 - Appeals. 
Any person may appeal to the Planning Commission regarding the issuance or denial of a stable permit per this chapter. Appeals shall be made pursuant to the provisions enumerated in Sections 153.335 through 153.338 of this Code. In accordance with these provisions, the decision of the Planning Commission may be appealed to the Town Council. 
(Ord. 2007-538, effective 11-22-07)  
Sec. 115.06 - Conformance required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain, or cause to be maintained, any horse or other equine in the Town except in conformance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2007-538, effective 11-22-07)  
Sec. 115.07 - Nonconforming livestock use. 
A nonconforming livestock use or the use of a nonconforming structure for livestock purposes may be continued except as otherwise provided in the Zoning Code. The right to continue a nonconforming livestock use shall run with the land, provided, however, that such right shall lapse if the use shall be abandoned for a period of one year or more. 
(Ord. 2007-538, effective 11-22-07)  
Sec. 115.08 - Interpretation and application of provisions. 
It is the intention and direction of the Council that the interpretation and application of the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements, except where it is expressly stated that maximum requirements shall prevail. The provisions of this chapter are not intended to impair or interfere with any private restriction placed upon property by covenant or deed; however, where the provisions of this chapter impose a greater restriction upon such property, the provisions of this chapter shall control. Where the provisions of this chapter impose regulations or requirements which are different from or in conflict with those of any other law of the Town, the law establishing the more stringent requirements shall prevail. 
(Ord. 2007-538, effective 11-22-07)  
Sec. 115.09 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
Automatic sprinkler system. An approved fire protection system which dispenses water through specially sized pipe and to which sprinkler heads are attached for the extinguishment of fire. 
Boarded horse. A horse that is kept on a property where the horse's owner does not reside. 
Call box. An approved, manually operated fire alarm box. 
Code box relay station. An approved electrical device which receives and transmits a coded fire alarm signal to a distant receiving station. 
Enclosed stable. A stable where the stalls do not immediately exit to the outside directly from each stall. 
Existing professional stable. A professional stable in existence on July 1, 2007. 
Flammable liquid. A volatile liquid which will readily combust when subjected to heat. 
New professional stable. Any professional stable not legally existing on July 1, 2007. 
Private stable. A property where the keeping of horses is considered an accessory use of land as defined in Section 153.005 of this Code. 
Professional stable. Any boarding and/or training establishment where the primary use of the property is to provide services or facilities for the keeping and/or use of horses. 
Rapid rise in temperature fire alarm system. An electrical device which automatically detects fire by a rapid change in temperature. Detecting devices are electrically connected to each other in a circuit, and, upon being activated, such detecting device transmits a signal. 
Shelter. A roofed structure a minimum of ten feet by ten feet, with at least one wall, dry footing, adjacent to turnouts, with water and feed containers. 
Stable. A building, or portion thereof, used for the feeding and housing of one or more horses. 
Stall. An enclosure in a stable provided and designed for the feeding and housing of a horse. 
Stallion. Any uncastrated male horse which has attained the age of 18 months. 
Turnout. A fenced area for the confinement of horses. 
Unenclosed stable. A stable where the stalls are so located that each stall door opens immediately to the outside. 
(Ord. 2007-538, effective 11-22-07)  
Sec. 115.10 - Permit required. 
No horse shall be kept for more than 30 consecutive days without obtaining a stable permit therefor pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. All related fees for such permits shall be fixed by resolution of the Council and payment shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property. 
(Ord. 2007-538, effective 11-22-07; Am. Ord. 2008-541, effective 7-10-08)  
Sec. 115.11 - Private stable permit application; issuance or denial. 
(A)  Applications made to Town Clerk. Applications shall be made to the Town Clerk on a form provided by the Town for such purpose and shall be accompanied by the required annual fee. Applications received during the year shall have the applicable annual fee prorated to the nearest month. Annual billings shall be mailed in the month of July of each year with payment due 30 days after mailing. 
(B)  Fees. All applications shall be made by or on behalf of the owner of the property. Permits shall be issued (subject to inspection as provided in division (C) below) upon collection of fees, and shall be issued for an annual term commencing July 1 of each year. Stable fees are not refundable. 
(C)  Inspections. The Town staff shall make, or shall cause to be made, by members of the Livestock Committee or other authorized persons, an inspection of the premises to verify that the use or proposed use is or will be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter and any conditions imposed by the Planning Commission in approving a conditional use permit for professional stables. Inspections shall occur prior to final for a newly constructed stable. Inspections shall also be made upon receipt of a complaint about the stable from neighbors or other concerned persons. An inspection shall not be required for an application for a private stable permit submitted by a new owner of a property that has had a current and valid private stable permit in the preceding 12 months, provided that the owner acknowledges in writing that his or her stable is in full compliance with the private stable regulations listed in Section 115.12. 
(D)  Denial or revocation. If the Town staff finds that the use or proposed use is not or will not be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, the Town Manager or designee shall deny such a permit (if none has been issued), or if issued, shall take action to revoke such permit as provided for in Section 115.13. 
(E)  Reserved. 
(F)  Conditions. Each stable permit issued shall state the number of horses permitted, the activities and facilities permitted, and any special conditions or requirements to be met. 
(G)  Transferability. Existing stable permits issued pursuant to this chapter may not be transferred or assigned to new owner(s). 
(Ord. 2007-538, effective 11-22-07; Am. Ord. 2008-541, effective 7-10-08; Am. Ord. 2011-549, effective 7-14-11)  
Sec. 115.12 - Private stable regulations. 
The following regulations apply to all private stable permits. 
Minimum size 	One acre. 
Number of horses permitted 	Maximum two per acre: In calculating the number of horses permitted by any section of this Code, a horse shall not be counted if under one year of age. 
Shelters 	Every horse shall have a shelter defined as a roofed structure a minimum of 10 feet by 10 feet, with at least one wall, dry footing, adjacent to turnouts, with water and feed containers. 
Turnouts 	Minimum 600 square feet; with water and shelter available if not stalled. 
Traffic/circulation 	Shall be served by a driveway meeting the minimum Town standards. 
Topography 	Areas on which stables, pastures, corrals and other equestrian structures are located shall have less than 20% slope. 
Fire protection 	Garden hose of a minimum ¾-inch diameter and hose bib no more than 50 feet from the stable or shelter, capable of reaching all areas of the stable or shelter, with adequate water flow and pressure; fire extinguishers; halter and lead rope at the door of each stall. 
Waste management 	The applicant shall submit a waste management plan that demonstrates that the property will be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition for review by the Livestock Committee and approval by the Planning Director. Waste management may be through removal, composting or spreading of waste. 
Insect control 	An insect control plan may be required. 
Dust control 	A dust control plan may be required. 
Drainage 	Adequate drainage and maintenance of drainage. 
Residence 	The primary residence of the permittee shall be on-site. The permittee may or may not be the owner of the property. 
Events 	Special events, including training, where horse trailers or similar vehicles will be parked in the right-of-way shall be regulated by special permit issued by the Planning Director, and shall be subject to an approved parking and staging plan. 
Parking 	On-site parking shall be provided at equestrian facilities for workers, users and guests. 
Lighting 	No exterior lighting, other than needed for safe passage around buildings, unless specifically authorized by the Planning Director. 
Fences 	All turnouts shall be enclosed by an adequate fence that complies with the provisions of Section 153.051 of this Code. 
Stallions 	Fencing shall be six feet in height. Signs shall be posted on stall doors, turnout gates, and fences adjacent to trails indicating a stallion is kept therein. The owner shall disclose on the stable application the number of stallions kept on the property and/or shall so amend an existing stable permit prior to bringing a stallion onto the property. Turnouts shall be at least 50 feet from neighboring property lines and dedicated trail easements. 
 
(Ord. 2007-538, effective 11-22-07; Am. Ord. 2008-541, effective 7-10-08)  
Sec. 115.13 - Suspension and revocation of permit. 
Any stable permit granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to suspension or revocation by the Council for failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter. A notice shall be served by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, or by personal service on the person holding such permit specifying therein that he/she is failing to comply with the provisions of this chapter or with any term or condition specified in the permit for the maintenance of horses. Such notice shall require him/her to report or appear before the Council, at a date and hour specified, to show cause at such time and place why the permit should not be suspended or revoked. At such time and place the person holding such permit shall have the right to appear in person or by counsel and to introduce such relevant evidence as he/she may desire, and the Council shall hear and consider any evidence it deems relevant to the issue of the alleged failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter or the terms and conditions specified in the permit for the maintenance of horses. After the conclusion of the hearing, the Council, if it makes a finding that the permit holder has violated the terms of this chapter or the terms and conditions specified in the permit for the maintenance of horses, may revoke or suspend the permit or set new or amended conditions for its continuance. 
(Ord. 2007-538, effective 11-22-07)  
Sec. 115.14 - Exceptions. 
Exceptions to the private stable standards listed in Section 115.12 may be granted by the Planning Director after review and recommendation by the Livestock Committee, subject to the following findings and limitations. 
(A)  For all exceptions, the Livestock Committee and the Planning Director must make all of the following findings: 
(1)  The exception will not impair the health, safety or welfare of the livestock maintained on the site. 
(2)  The exception will not result in any adverse health, safety, noise, traffic or visual impacts on surrounding properties and roadways. 
(3)  The proposed use complies with all other standards of Section 115.12 above regarding private stables. 
(B)  For any exception involving a request to exceed two horses per acre, the Livestock Committee and the Planning Director must make all of the following additional findings: 
(1)  That the site is adequate in size, shape, and topography to accommodate the proposed use; 
(2)  That the site for the proposed use can be served by roads of adequate width and design to accommodate the quantity and type of traffic generated by such use, including parking demands; 
(3)  That the number of horses allowed shall not exceed four horses per acre on a property. 
(C)  Applications for stable permit exceptions shall be accompanied by a fee, as set forth in the Town's fee and deposit resolution, to recover the costs of staff and Livestock Committee review (in addition to the annual stable permit fee), along with stamped envelopes addressed to all owners of properties located within 100 feet of the subject property. Notice of the Livestock Committee meeting to consider the exception shall be mailed to all such property owners not later than ten days prior to the Committee meeting date. 
(D)  The Planning Director may require periodic review or renewal of the stable permit for the excepted property as a condition of approval of the exception, and may revoke such exception at any time upon finding the existence of an immediate health or safety hazard, or after recommendation of the Livestock Committee that the required findings can no longer be made. 
(E)  Any decision made by the Planning Director approving or denying a stable permit exception may be appealed to the Planning Commission pursuant to the provisions of the Town Zoning Code. 
(Ord. 2007-538, effective 11-22-07)  
Sec. 115.15 - Existing professional stables. 
Existing professional stables shall be subject to and meet the following fire protection requirements. 
(A)  Access roads. Access roads to stables or other buildings shall be kept in good repair, and overhanging tree limbs or other obstructions shall be removed when they restrict or impair the maneuverability of fire apparatus. 
(B)  Portable fire extinguishers. Portable fire extinguishers shall be installed in each stable at such locations as approved by the Fire Marshal. The Fire Marshal shall determine the number, type, and size of extinguishers to be installed. 
(C)  Brush, grass, and similar combustible material. Brush, grass, and similar combustible materials shall be removed to mineral soil for a distance of 20 feet around the exterior of the stable when, in the opinion of the Fire Marshal, such materials would aid the spread of fire if not so removed. 
(D)  Exits. Enclosed stables shall have a minimum of two approved exits. 
(1)  When 11 or more stalls are used in an enclosed stable, one additional exit shall be required for each five stalls, or portion thereof. Additional exits shall be installed at such locations as approved by the Fire Marshal. 
(2)  Exit doors shall be kept in good operating condition and repair. 
(3)  Exit doors for enclosed stables shall not be less than six feet in width nor less than eight feet in height. Each exit door shall have a latch which can be operated from either side of the exit door. 
(4)  Exit ways shall be maintained and kept free of storage or other obstructions. 
(5)  A metal lock shall not be used for securing an exit door or a stable door. 
(E)  Electrical wiring. Electric wiring in a stable shall meet the minimum requirements of the Woodside Electrical Code. Substandard wiring shall be removed, and all new wiring shall be placed in metallic conduit. 
(F)  Flammable liquids. Flammable liquids shall not be stored or used in any stable, except where special permission has been granted, in writing, by the Fire Marshal. 
(G)  Submersible water heaters, hot plates, and open flames. Submersible water heaters, hot plates, or open flames shall not be used in any stable, except where special permission has been granted, in writing, by the Fire Marshal. 
(H)  Storage of combustible materials. Hay, straw, wood shavings, and similar combustible materials shall be baled when stored in a stable. Broken bales shall be limited to those immediately in use. 
(I)  Storage of vehicles. No vehicle shall be stored in any stable, except where special permission has been granted, in writing, by the Fire Marshal. 
(J)  Removal of trash, rubbish, and other combustible materials. Stables shall be kept in a neat and orderly manner with daily removal of trash, rubbish, and other combustible materials. 
(K)  Emergency lead lines and halters. Each stall shall be provided with an emergency lead line and halter. They shall be located near the stall exit door, in plain view; and immediately available for emergency use. This requirement shall be waived if the horse is haltered when located in a stall. 
(L)  Stallions. Any stall primarily used for the confinement of a stallion shall be identified by a conspicuous sign stating "DANGER, STALLION". It shall be located near the stall exit door. 
(M)  Smoking. Smoking shall be prohibited in storage rooms, exit ways, haylofts, and stalls. A conspicuous sign shall be posted near the main stable entry stating "NO SMOKING by order of the Woodside Fire District". 
(N)  Adult attendants or rapid rise in temperature fire alarm systems. When a stable has ten or more horses, a competent adult attendant shall remain on the immediate property 24 hours a day. A rapid rise in temperature fire alarm system may be installed in lieu of the attendant providing the system is installed in accordance with the requirements of the National Board of Fire Underwriters with a direct Electrical Code connection to the Woodside Fire Department. 
(O)  Fire walls or fire curtains. The Fire Marshal may order the installation of either a fire wall or a fire curtain when, in his/her opinion, such fire wall or fire curtain would aid in the confinement of fire or in the evacuation of horses. 
(P)  Floor construction. When a hayloft is used for the storage of baled hay, straw, wood shavings, or other combustible materials, the floor construction of the loft shall be capable of carrying a live load of 30 pounds per square foot and for each square foot of height thereafter. 
(Q)  New additions and extensions. Any new addition or extension to an existing stable, if permitted, shall meet the stable construction requirements of the Town. 
(Ord. 2007-538, effective 11-22-07)  
Sec. 115.16 - New professional stables. 
(A)  Application of existing professional stable provisions. New professional stables shall conform to all the requirements set forth in Section 115.15 for existing professional stables, except where such requirements are specifically deleted or superseded by the provisions of this section. 
(B)  Construction plans. Plans for the construction of new professional stables shall be reviewed by the Fire Marshal prior to issuance of any building permits. The recommendations of the Fire Marshal shall be submitted, in writing, to the Building Official. 
(C)  Wood shingles. The use of wood shingles on the roof of a new professional stable shall be prohibited. 
(D)  Exit doors. The major exit doors of enclosed new professional stables shall swing in an outward direction, or slide. 
(Ord. 2007-538, effective 11-22-07)  
Sec. 115.17 - Conditional use permits for professional stables. 
(A)  Professional stables shall be permitted only on sites where a conditional use permit has been granted by the Planning Commission pursuant to the zoning laws of the Town. In acting on any conditional use permit for a professional stable, the Planning Commission may impose such conditions as are necessary to secure the objectives of this chapter, including, but not limited to, the alteration, demolition, or reconstruction of existing structures within the time limits established by the Planning Commission, giving consideration to the purposes of the chapter. 
(B)  In addition to the general requirements of this chapter and any conditions imposed in approving the conditional use permit, each professional stable shall conform to the following: 
(1)  Minimum site size. Five acres. 
(2)  Number of horses permitted. The maximum number shall be set by the use permit and shall depend on the specific site characteristics and conditions of the permit. The characteristics to be considered shall include, but not be limited to: access to roads and equestrian trails; road conditions; streams and waterways; watersheds; vegetation; surrounding properties; slope; and visual impacts. 
(3)  Stalls and corrals. New construction or remodeled stalls shall be a minimum 12 by 12 feet in size, and existing stalls shall be a minimum ten by ten feet in size. All stables shall have room for daily turnouts. Turnouts shall have water for horses. Each horse shall have shelter available. 
(4)  Boarding. Up to 100 percent of the permitted horses may be boarded horses. 
(5)  Training. Up to 100 percent of the permitted horses may be involved in training. 
(6)  Traffic/circulation. Sites shall be adjacent to an arterial road. 
(7)  Topography. The area for turnouts shall have an average ground slope of less than 20 percent. 
(8)  Setbacks. For any new professional stable, at the time of construction, the stable shall be located not less than 50 feet from the nearest property line, recognizing that the Planning Commission may require a greater setback in issuing a conditional use permit for the use based on existing site conditions and surrounding site conditions. Turnout and riding rings fences shall be a minimum distance of 50 feet from any neighboring property line, other than a street parcel line where the minimum distance shall be 25 feet. Other setback requirements shall be as defined in the Town's Zoning Code. 
(9)  Fire protection. As set forth in Sections 115.15 and 115.16 and this section. 
(10)  Waste management. The applicant shall submit a waste management plan that demonstrates that the property will be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition for review by the Livestock Committee and approval by the Planning Director. Waste management may be through removal, composting or spreading of waste. 
(11)  Insect and dust control. An insect and dust control plan shall be required. 
(12)  Drainage. A drainage plan shall be required as a condition of the use permit demonstrating adequate site drainage and the maintenance of the drainage system. 
(13)  Structures. Plans for the new construction of all structures for which a building permit is required shall be reviewed and approved by the Architectural and Site Review Board. All new professional stables shall be built in conformance with the Building Code of the Town. Where existing buildings and structures constructed in compliance with regulations in force at the time of construction constitute a threat to the health, safety, or general welfare, specific corrections may be required within stated time periods as a condition of the permit. 
(14)  Residence. There shall be a full time residence owner or manager on-site. 
(15)  Events. Special events involving horses not usually stabled or trained on-site shall be regulated by special permit issued by the Town Manager. 
(16)  Parking. Parking adequate for the use and the site shall be set by the Planning Commission as a condition of the use permit. 
(17)  Lighting. No exterior lighting, other than needed for safe passage around buildings, unless specifically authorized by the Planning Commission in its review of the use permit. 
(18)  Fences. All turnouts shall be enclosed by an adequate fence that complies with the provisions of Section 153.051 of this Code. 
(19)  Stallions. Fencing shall be six feet in height. Signs shall be posted on stall doors, Turnout gates, and fences adjacent to trails indicating a stallion is kept therein. The owner shall disclose on the stable permit that a stallion is on the premises. Turnouts shall be at least 50 feet from neighboring property lines and dedicated trail easements. 
(20)  Equestrian lessons. Equestrian instruction shall be permitted. 
(21)  Renting and hiring horses prohibited. No horse shall be rented or let for hire, except for equestrian instruction. 
(C)  The Livestock Committee shall review all applications for use permits for professional stables and shall make a report and recommendation to the Planning Commission prior to the Planning Commission issuance of a use permit. 
(Ord. 2007-538, effective 11-22-07)  
Sec. 115.99 - Penalty. 
(A)  Public nuisance abatement. Any building or structure set up, erected, constructed, altered, enlarged, converted, moved, or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter or any permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and any use of any land, building, or premises established, conducted, operated, or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter or any permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be, and the same is hereby declared to be, unlawful and a public nuisance. The Town Attorney, upon an order of the Council, shall commence an action or proceedings for the abatement, removal, and enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law and shall take such other steps and shall apply to such courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate and remove such building or structure and restrain and enjoin any person from setting up, erecting, building, maintaining, or using any such building or structure or using property contrary to the provisions of this chapter. The remedies provided for in this chapter shall be cumulative and not exclusive. All costs and attorneys' fees relating to the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter shall be borne by, and recoverable from, the persons in violation thereof. 
(B)  Violations, misdemeanors and infractions. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a professional or private stable within the Town in violation of the provisions of this chapter. Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the general penalty provisions of Section 10.99 of this Code. 
(Ord. 2007-538, effective 11-22-07)  
TITLE XIII - GENERAL OFFENSES 
   
CHAPTER 130. - OFFENSES AGAINST TOWN REGULATIONS  
ARTICLE I. - OFFENSES INVOLVING ALCOHOL 
 
Sec. 130.01 - Consuming alcoholic beverages in public places. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage on any highway, avenue, street, alley, sidewalk, public parking lot, parking lot open to public use, public equestrian trail, and pedestrian walkway open to public use; provided, however, the provisions of this section shall not apply to the consumption by persons in the areas designated in this section of any duly prescribed and dispensed medication having alcoholic content; and provided, further, this section shall not be applicable in those areas and during such times as the Council has granted permission for the temporary use or occupancy of the public streets and areas appurtenant thereto. The provisions of this section shall not be deemed to make punishable any act which is prohibited by any law of the state. 
(1975 Code, § 5-3.04) (Ord. 1976-267, effective 12-9-76) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Secs. 130.02—130.14 - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - WEAPONS OFFENSES 
 
Sec. 130.15 - Firearm defined. 
For the purpose of this chapter firearm shall mean any cannon, gun, pistol, revolver, automatic pistol, rifle, shotgun, "BB" gun, air gun, pellet gun, or other weapon of a similar nature designed to discharge a projectile propelled by the expansion of a gas. 
(1975 Code, § 5-7.01) (Ord. 1956-16, effective - -56)  
Sec. 130.16 - Discharging firearms; exceptions. 
(A)  No person shall discharge or fire any firearm within the Town, except as otherwise provided in division (B) below of this section. 
(1975 Code, § 5-7.02) 
(B)  The provisions of division (A) above of this section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Sheriffs, constables, marshals, policemen, or other peace officers, or any person summoned by any such officers to assist in making arrests or preserving the peace, or to persons who are members of the armed services of the United States or the National Guard while such persons are acting in the lawful discharge of their duties; 
(2)  Persons using firearms in the lawful defense of selves, third persons, or property of the user; 
(3)  Persons discharging or firing such firearms, or causing them to be discharged or fired, at a regularly established firing, shooting, or target range with the consent of the owner and/or person in charge of any such firing, shooting, or target range. "Regularly established firing, shooting, or target range," as used in this division, shall include properly constructed indoor and/or outdoor home ranges on private property when such ranges are supervised by adults; and 
(4)  Persons lawfully hunting pursuant to the provisions of the Cal. Fish & Game Code. 
(1975 Code, § 5-7.03) (Ord. 1956-16, effective - -56) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 130.17 - Possession by minors; exceptions. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to have in his/her possession in a public place any firearm, except as otherwise provided in division (B) below of this section. 
(1975 Code, § 5-7.04) 
(B)  The provisions of division (A) above of this section shall not apply to the following persons under the age of 18 years: 
(1)  When such persons are in the immediate charge of a parent, guardian, or adult person having the responsibility for the conduct of such person under the age of 18 years; 
(2)  When the firearm is unloaded and either in a dismantled or "take-down" condition or completely wrapped or in a carrying case made for the purpose of carrying such firearm. A gun shall be deemed to be unloaded only when no ammunition or propellant is in any part of the gun or magazine or clip thereof; and 
(3)  When such persons are lawfully hunting pursuant to the provisions of the Cal. Fish & Game Code and in possession of a hunting license issued as prescribed by said Cal. Fish & Game Code. 
(1975 Code, § 5-7.05) (Ord. 1956-16, effective - -56) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
TITLE XV - LAND USAGE 
   
CHAPTER 150 - BUILDING REGULATIONS  
ARTICLE I. - ADOPTION OF STANDARD CODES 
 
Sec. 150.01 - Building Code and Residential Code; amendments. 
(A)  Adoption of 2016 California Residential Code and the 2016 California Building Code. The Code of rules, regulations and standards, published by the International Code Conference under the title, 2016 Edition of the California Building Standards Code, Part 2.5 as well as the 2016 edition of the California Building Standards Code, Part 2, Volumes 1 and 2, and including the following appendices: Appendix C Agricultural Buildings (Group-U), Appendix I Patio Covers; and Appendix J Grading, hereinafter collectively called "California Building Code," and the "California Residential Code," regulating the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, demolition, conversion, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area and maintenance of all buildings and structures in the Town of Woodside, is hereby adopted, and by reference incorporated herein as if fully set forth, except as hereinafter otherwise provided, as the Residential Code and the Building Code of the Town of Woodside. The mandatory requirements of the appendix to the Code shall be enforceable to the same extent as if contained in the body of the Code. Any amendments and supplements of this Code shall be enforceable to the same extent as if contained in the body of the California Code. 
(B)  Powers and duties of the Building Official. Section 104 Chapter 1 Administration of the 2016 California Code is hereby amended with the addition of the following language: 
Right to disconnect utility service. The Building Official or his or her authorized representative shall have the authority to disconnect or order discontinuance of any utility service or energy supply to buildings, structures, or equipment therein regulated by this Code and the construction codes in cases of emergency or where necessary for safety to life or property. Such utility service shall be discontinued until the emergency is abated or it is determined that the threat to life or property has been corrected. 
(C)  Fees . Fees shall be assessed according to the current Town of Woodside fee schedule adopted by Town Council resolution. 
(D)  Fire Hazard Severity Zones. Fire Hazard Severity Zones designated on a map titled "Very High Fire Hazard Severity Zones in LRA - Woodside," dated May 2, 2008, and retained on file at Woodside Town Hall, 2955 Woodside Road, Woodside, CA 94062, are Local Agency Very High Fire Hazard Severity Zones for the purpose of applying Chapter 7A, Materials and Construction Methods for Exterior Wildfire Exposure, of the California Code, as determined in division (J). 
(E)  Materials and construction methods for exterior wildfire exposure. 
(1)  Chapter 7A of the California Code, Section 701A.3, Application; is modified to read as follows: 
(a)  New buildings as determined in division (J) for which a complete building permit application is submitted after September 1, 2012, shall comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Any addition, alteration, or repair to any building, unless determined a new building in division (J), or otherwise exempted by this Code shall comply with the requirements specified for the following: 
(i)  Section 705A, Roofing and division (F). 
(ii)  Section 706A, Venting, when required due to roof or exterior wall covering replacements. 
(iii)  Section 707A, Exterior Covering, when the replacement of the wall exceeds 80 percent of the exterior wall surface to an existing building or structure within any one (1) year period from the date of permit final. The exterior venting in the affected area of work only shall be replaced with exterior venting complying with section 706A. 
(iv)  Section 708A, Exterior Windows and Doors. 
(v)  Section 709A, Decking. 
(2)  Chapter 7A of the California Code, Section 701A.3, Application, Exceptions; is amended as follows: 
(a)  Exception 2 is removed. 
(b)  Exception 3 is modified to read: Buildings classified as a Group-U Agricultural building, including barns as defined in Section 202 of the California Code (see also Appendix C-Group-U Agricultural buildings), when located at least 50 feet from an applicable building. Any future changes to a barn (converting to living quarters or any other non-agricultural defined use) that change occupancy type would require applicable fire-resistant construction materials and methods that are in affect at time of proposed changes. 
(c)  Exception 4 is removed. 
(F)  Roofing requirements. Section 1505 of the California Code is hereby amended with the addition of the following language: 
The roof covering or roof assembly for all structures shall be Class A fire retardant. The roof covering on any structure regulated by this Code shall be as specified in Table No. 1505.1 and as classified in Section 1505. The roof-covering assembly includes the roof deck, underlayment, insulation and covering which is assigned a roof-covering classification. Detached patio covers, spa covers, gazebos, sheds with 120 square feet or less of roof area and awning covers are exempt. Roof covering repairs of less than 300 square feet in a 12-month period are exempt from the provisions of this paragraph. These standards shall apply when there is conflict with less stringent standards of the California Code. Existing and new exterior roof venting that is in the area affected by the work shall comply with the requirements of exterior venting in 706A of the current California Code. 
(G)  Automatic fire-extinguisher systems. Section 903.2 of the California Code and Section R313.3 of the California Residential Code is hereby amended with the addition of the following language: 
(1)  The following requirements shall apply to all new buildings or structures which require a building permit from the Town of Woodside for which a complete building permit application is submitted after May 1, 2000: 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by this section, or as provided under section 903.2 of the California Code, or as provided under Section R313 in the California Residential Code (whichever is most stringent) automatic fire sprinkler systems shall be installed and maintained in every new building or structure of any type, use, occupancy or size which requires a building permit issued by the Town of Woodside. 
(b)  The term AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER SYSTEM as used in this section means an integrated system of underground and overhead piping, including a water supply such as a gravity tank, fire pump, reservoir, pressure tank, or connection by underground piping to a fire main, which system complies in all respects with the requirements for such systems contained in standards issued by the National Fire Protection Association based upon occupancy classification. 
(c)  As referenced in National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) standards, Section 13D, Chapter 2, Section 2-1 - General Provisions: Every automatic sprinkler system shall have at least one automatic water supply. Where stored water is used as the sole source of supply, the minimum quantity of water shall equal the water demand rate (as specified in Chapter 4 of Section 13D of the NFPA standards) times ten minutes. Exception: Dwelling units that are one story in height and less than 2,000 square feet in floor area shall have a water supply of at least seven minutes for the two sprinkler demand that is typically required (as specified in Chapter 4 of Section 13D of the NFPA standards). 
(d)  As referenced in National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) standards, Section 13D, Chapter 2, Section 2-2 - Water Supply Sources: The following water supply sources shall be considered to be acceptable by this standard: 
1.  A connection to a reliable waterworks system with or without an automatically operated pump. 
2.  An elevated tank. 
3.  A pressure tank designed to ASME standards for a pressure vessel with a reliable pressure source. 
4.  A stored water source with an automatically operated pump (which could also be used to supply the residence's domestic water supply). 
(2)  The following structures are exempt from the requirements of this section: 
(a)  Agricultural buildings, as defined in Section 202 of the 2016 California Code (including but not limited to greenhouses), which are located at least 60 feet from any residential structure and barns unless otherwise specified in this Code. 
(b)  Not used. 
(c)  MANUFACTURED HOUSING , as defined by California Health and Safety Code § 18007. 
(d)  Structures not exceeding 1,000 square feet in area, except for a dwelling unit (which is not exempt), as defined in the 2016 California Code Section 202, and as defined in the 2016 California Residential Code Section 202, and as provided under the 2016 California Residential Code Section R313. 
(e)  Mausoleums of Type I construction, as defined by the 2016 California Code, which do not contain offices, chapels or other places where the public assembles on a regular basis. 
(f)  Open-air parking garages of Type I construction as defined by the 2016 California Code, which do not contain offices, stores or other places of public occupancy for purposes other than parking of vehicles. 
(g)  Roofed structures with no walls or doors. 
(3)  The requirements of this section are intended to present minimum standards for new construction. Nothing in this section shall prevent any fire authority having jurisdiction from adopting and enforcing any regulations which impose more stringent requirements. Further, any requirement of the current California Code, the Uniform Fire Code or the State Building Standards Code, which is more restrictive, specifies higher standards or mandates specific locations within a structure for automatic sprinkler systems, shall be applicable. 
(4)  Notwithstanding the other provisions of this section, no existing residential building or structure shall be required to conform to the requirements of this section, unless the addition, alterations or repairs to the existing building or structure within any 12-month period exceed the mandatory compliance threshold percentage of alteration limits as set forth in division (J) and Table A-1 of this section, as calculated by the Town Building Official or unless the provisions of division (G)(2)(g) applied and the applicant is now seeking a permit to install any doors or walls. 
(5)  Residential structures with attached garages for which a complete building permit application is submitted after May 1, 2000 shall have automatic fire sprinkler heads installed in the garage in addition to those required in the 13D standards of the National Fire Protection Association. The number and location of such fire sprinkler heads shall be such that full coverage of the garage will be obtained. 
(6)  When a stored water source with an automatically operated pump system is installed, the Woodside Fire Protection District will conduct an annual inspection of the system to ensure reliability. Any deficiencies found to exist by the District as a result of such inspections shall be corrected by the property owner within 30 days of receipt of written notice from the District requiring such deficiencies to be corrected. 
(H)  Intentionally left blank. 
(I)  Intentionally left blank. 
(J)  Determination of new building classification to ascertain compliance with divisions (D), (E) and (G) for the alteration of an existing residential building. 
(1)  Purpose. The purposes of this division are as follows: 
(a)  To determine when a new building, proposed alteration, addition, or reconstruction of an existing residential building or structure will be required to be classified as a new building for the purpose of compliance with division (E) and the adopted California Code Chapter 7A and Chapter 15 standards, as set forth in Table A-1 of this section. 
(b)  To determine when a new building, proposed alteration, addition, or reconstruction of an existing residential building or structure will require the installation of an automatic fire sprinkler system in accordance with division (G)(4), as set forth in Table A-1 of this section. 
(c)  To determine when a new building proposed alteration, addition, or reconstruction of an existing residential building or structure will require compliance with the adopted California Fire Code Standards, as adopted and regulated by the Woodside Fire Protection District, as set forth in Table A-1 of this section. 
(d)  To establish a procedure for the determination of the percentage of an altered residential building or structure, as set forth in Table A-2 of this section, for use in conjunction with Table A-1 of this section. 
(2)  Definitions. For the purposes of this division, the definitions contained in Section 153.005 shall apply as well as the definition for DWELLING UNIT , as defined in the 2016 California Code Section 202. 
TABLE A-1 
Item 	Description of Work 	Automatic Fire Sprinkler Compliance 
DU=Dwelling unit 
ALQ=Accessory Living Quarters 	New Building 
Classification for 
WMC Compliance 
Purposes Only 	New Building 
Classification for 
CBC Chapter 7A 
Compliance Purposes Only 	WFPD Fire Code 
Compliance 
1 	New Building 
A 	Construction of a new building. 	All DU and other buildings > 1,000 sq. ft. Barns w/o ALQ are exempt. 	yes 	yes 	yes 
B 	Alteration (reconstruction) of an existing building in a different location. 	All DU and other buildings > 1,000 sq. ft. Barns w/o ALQ are exempt. 	yes 	yes 	yes 
2 	Reconstructed Building 
A 	Alteration (reconstruction) or repair of fire-damaged building. 	All DU and other buildings > 1,000 sf. 	= 50% alteration 	= 50% alteration 	= 50% alteration 
= 50% alteration 
B 	Alteration (reconstruction) of building in same location, identical size and volume. 	All DU and other buildings > 1,000 sf. 	yes 	yes 	yes 
3 	Alterations (Changes and Additions) 
A 	New addition and change of existing building. See Table A-2 to determine the percentage of alteration. 	= 50% addition and/or 
= 75% alteration 	= 50% addition and/or 
= 50% alteration 	= 50% addition and/or 
= 50% alteration 	= 50% addition and/or 
= 50% alteration 
B 	Alteration only—Variable scope of demolition (no change in existing building location, floor area, building height, or interior volume). See Table A-2 to determine the percentage of alteration. 	= 75% alteration 	= 50% alteration 	= 50% alteration 	= 50% alteration 
C 	New 2nd story element addition, including associated new foundations. 	= 50% addition 	= 50% addition 	= 50% addition 	= 50% addition 
D 	New floor area added within footprint of existing structure, with minimal elective changes to unaffected areas of existing building. 
Example: crawlspace area converted to living space. 	= 75% addition 	No 	No 	No 
E 	New addition only, no changes of existing building. 	= 50% addition 	= 50% addition 	= 50% addition 	= 50% addition 
4 	Foundation Alteration and Seismic Upgrade 
A 	Alteration or replacement of existing foundation only. 	No 	No 	No 	No 
B 	Voluntary seismic upgrade only, compliance with CBC 3404.5 (exception). 	No 	No 	No 	No 
 
TABLE A-2 
METHOD OF CALCULATION 
TO DETERMINE THE PERCENTAGE OF ALTERATION OF A BUILDING 
For the purposes of Section 150.01(J) of the Woodside Municipal Code, the following formulas are established in order to compute the percentage of alteration of an existing residential building or structure. The component elements (roof plane, exterior wall plane, floor plane, foundation) that comprise the alteration or addition of an existing building or structure shall be used to compute the total percentage of alteration for the purpose of applying the Table A-1 compliance matrix. 
An alteration is created and defined when any of the following cases occur. Where more than one of the following cases will occur simultaneously, the computed percentage of each case shall be added and used to determine the total percentage of alteration to the existing building or structure as follows: R% + W% + F% + FDN% = total percentage of alteration of building. 
Case #1. 	Alteration of roof plane:  Where the existing roof framing is altered, the altered horizontal roof plane area shall be used in the following 2-step process to determine the percentage of altered roof plane: 
	1st step: 	  altered roof area   
overall building roof area 	× 100 	= RA% (this value represents the unadjusted percentage of altered roofplane) 
	2nd step: 	RA% × 0.10 (weighted factor)  = R% (percentage of roof plane alteration)
Case #2. 	Alteration of exterior wall plane:  Where the existing exterior wall framing is altered, or if the wall plate height is increased, the altered wall plane area and/or the raised wall plane area shall be used in the following two-step process to determine the percentage of altered exterior wall plane: 
	1st step: 	 altered exterior wall area  
overall building exterior wall area 	× 100 	= WA% (this value represents the unadjusted percentage of altered exterior wall plane) 
	2nd step: 	WA% × 1.00 (weighted factor) = W% (percentage of exterior wall plane alteration) 
Case #3. 	Alteration of floor plane:  Where the existing floor framing is altered, the altered floor plane area shall be used in the following two-step process to determine the percentage of altered floor plane: 
	1st step: 	  altered floor area   
overall building floor area 	× 100 	= FA% (this value represents the unadjusted percentage of altered building floor plane) 
	2nd step: 	FA% × 0.25 (weighted factor) = F% (percentage of building floor plane alteration) 
Case #4. 	Alteration of foundation:  Where the existing perimeter foundation is altered, or the existing slab is re-constructed, the altered linear length of foundation footing (length) or foundation slab (area) shall be used in the following two-step process to determine the percentage of altered foundation, based on the type of existing foundation style (strip footing or slab foundation): 
	1st step 
(strip footing): 	 altered length of foundation  
overall building existing foundation length 	× 100 	= FDNALT% (this value represents the unadjusted percentage of altered building footing length) 
	2nd step 
(strip footing): 	FDNALT% × 0.10 = FDN% (percentage of building foundation footing length alteration) 
	1st step 
(slab foundation): 	 altered foundation slab area  
overall building existing foundation slab area 	× 100 	= FDNALT% (this value represents the unadjusted percentage of altered building foundation slab plane) 
	2nd step 
(slab foundation): 	FDNALT% × 0.10 (weighted factor) = FDN% (percentage of building foundation slab plane alteration) 
 
(Ord. 1999-499, effective 11-25-99; Am. Ord. 2000-502, effective 3-9-00; Am. Ord. 2005-525, effective 5-12-05; Am. Ord. 2006-531, effective 8-10-06; Am. Ord. 2007-539, effective 1-10-08; Am. Ord. 2009-544, effective 4-9-09; Am. Ord. 2010-545, effective 3-25-10; Am. Ord. 2010-546, effective 1-13-11; Am. Ord. 2012-552, effective 7-26-12; Am. Ord. 2013-562, effective 1-9-14; Am. Ord. 2016-580, effective 1-12-17)  
Sec. 150.02 - Electrical Code. 
(A)  The Code of rules and regulations known and designated as the 2016 California Electrical Code , based on the 2014 National Electrical Code, including the Appendix chapters, printed therein, and all supplements subsequently issued thereto, as published by the National Fire Protection Association, regulating all electrical work in or on any building or property, or similar installation in the Town of Woodside, is hereby adopted, and by reference incorporated herein as if fully set forth, except as hereinafter otherwise provided, as the Electrical Code of the Town of Woodside. Any amendments and supplements to this Code shall be enforceable to the same extent as if fully contained in the body of the National Electrical Code. 
(B)  Exemption from permit requirements. Permits are not required for the following: 
(1)  Any electrical work done by an employee of a public utility in connection with rendering of electric service to any building or structure by said public utility. 
(2)  The ordinary care and maintenance of an established installation of electric equipment by the owner, operator, or user thereof, except that ordinary care and maintenance shall not be construed as including additions to such installation or other work such as the repair or replacement of any electric wiring, appliances, or apparatus which is a fixed part of such installation. The replacement of lamps and fuses, plugging-in apparatus, repair of plugging-in apparatus and similar work shall be construed as ordinary care and maintenance. 
(3)  The repair of appliances, apparatus, and materials which are not a fixed part of an established installation of electric equipment or which have been detached from such an installation for the purpose of repair. 
(Ord. 1999-499, effective 11-25-99; Am. Ord. 2007-539, effective 1-10-08; Am. Ord. 2010-546, effective 1-13-11; Am. Ord. 2013-562, effective 1-9-14; Am. Ord. 2016-580, effective 1-12-17)  
Sec. 150.03 - Plumbing Code. 
(A)  The Code of rules and regulations known and designated as the 2016 California Plumbing Code , based on the 2015 Uniform Plumbing Code, and the appendix chapters, prepared and published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, providing for the protection of the public health and safety, requiring a permit and inspection for the installation or alteration of plumbing drainage systems; creating an Administrative Authority and describing its duties; defining certain terms; establishing minimum regulations for the installation, alteration or repair of plumbing and drainage systems and the inspection thereof; providing penalties for its violation and repealing conflicting ordinances, is hereby adopted for the Town of Woodside, and by this reference incorporated herein as if fully set forth, except as hereinafter otherwise provided, as the Plumbing Code of the Town of Woodside. 
(B)  Section 104.5 and Table 104.5 entitled "Permit Fees" is deleted. 
(Ord. 1999-499, effective 11-25-99; Am. Ord. 2007-539, effective 1-10-08; Am. Ord. 2010-546, effective 1-13-11; Am. Ord. 2013-562, effective 1-9-14; Am. Ord. 2016-580, effective 1-12-17)  
Sec. 150.04 - Mechanical Code. 
(A)  The Code of rules and regulations known and designated as the 2016 California Mechanical Code , based on the 2015 Uniform Mechanical Code including Appendix Chapters, prepared and published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, including the standards printed therein, hereinafter called "California Mechanical Code," regulating the installation, maintenance, alteration, or repair of heating, ventilating, comfort, cooling and refrigeration systems; and providing for the issuance of permits and the collections of fees therefor, defining terms, providing penalties for its violation, is hereby adopted and by reference incorporated herein as if fully set forth, except as hereinafter otherwise provided, as the Mechanical Code of the Town of Woodside. Any amendments and supplements to this Code shall be enforceable to the same extent as if contained in the body of the California Mechanical Code. 
(B)  Section 104.5 and Table 104.5 entitled "Permit Fees" is deleted. 
(Ord. 1999-499, effective 11-25-99; Am. Ord. 2007-539, effective 1-10-08; Am. Ord. 2010-546, effective 1-13-11; Am. Ord. 2013-562, effective 1-9-14; Am. Ord. 2016-580, effective 1-12-17)  
Sec. 150.05 - Reserved.  
Sec. 150.06 - Reserved.  
Sec. 150.07 - Energy Code. 
The code of rules and regulations known and designated as the 2016 California Energy Code , with all previously approved errata and supplements is hereby adopted, and by reference incorporated herein as if fully set forth, except as hereinafter otherwise provided, as the Energy Code of the Town of Woodside. 
(Ord. 2007-539, effective 1-10-08; Am. Ord. 2010-546, effective 1-13-11; Am. Ord. 2013-562, effective 1-9-14; Am. Ord. 2016-580, effective 1-12-17)  
Sec. 150.08 - Reserved.  
Sec. 150.09 - Historical Building Code. 
The code of rules and regulations known as and designated as the 2016 California Historical Building Code published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted, and by reference incorporated herein as if fully set forth, except as hereinafter otherwise provided, as the Historical Code of the Town of Woodside. 
(Ord. 2007-539, effective 1-10-08; Am. Ord. 2010-546, effective 1-13-11; Am. Ord. 2013-562, effective 1-9-14; Am. Ord. 2016-580, effective 1-12-17)  
Sec. 150.10 - Seismic strengthening. 
The code of rules and regulations known as and designated as 2016 California Existing Building Code , "Appendix Chapter Al Seismic Strengthening Provisions for Unreinforced Masonry Bearing Wall Buildings" and "Appendix Chapter A3 Prescriptive Provisions for Seismic Strengthening of Cripple Walls and Sill Plate Anchorage of Light, Wood-Frame Residential Buildings" excluding section A304.2, Foundations, based on the 2015 International Existing Code as published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted, and by reference incorporated herein as if fully set forth, except as hereinafter otherwise provided, as the Existing Code of the Town of Woodside. 
(Ord. 2007-539, effective 1-10-08; Am. Ord. 2010-546, effective 1-13-11; Am. Ord. 2013-562, effective 1-9-14; Am. Ord. 2016-570, effective 2-25-16; Am. Ord. 2016-580, effective 1-12-17)  
Sec. 150.11 - Referenced Standards Code. 
The code of rules and regulations known as and designated as 2016 California Referenced Standards Code , is hereby adopted, and by reference incorporated herein as if fully set forth, except as hereinafter otherwise provided, as the Referenced Standards Code of the Town of Woodside. 
(Ord. 2007-539, effective 1-10-08; Am. Ord. 2010-546, effective 1-13-11; Am. Ord. 2013-562, effective 1-9-14; Am. Ord. 2016-580, effective 1-12-17)  
Sec. 150.12 - Reserved.  
Sec. 150.13 - Green Buildings Standards Code. 
The Code of rules and regulations known as and designated as 2016 California Green Building Standards Code as published in the referenced California Code of Regulations Title 24, Part 11, is hereby adopted and by reference incorporated herein as if fully set forth, except as hereinafter otherwise provided, as the Green Building Standards Code of the Town of Woodside. 
(Ord. 2013-562, passed 1-9-14; Am. Ord. 2016-580, effective 1-12-17)  
Sec. 150.14 - Existing Building Code. 
The Code of rules and regulations known as and designated as 2016 California Existing Building Code as published in the referenced California Code of Regulations Title 24, Part 10, is hereby adopted and by reference incorporated herein as if fully set forth, except as hereinafter otherwise provided, as the Existing Building Standards Code of the Town of Woodside. 
(Ord. 2016-580, effective 1-12-17)  
Secs. 150.15—150.19 - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION PERMITS 
 
Sec. 150.20 - Certification of compliance required. 
(A)  Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this chapter, no building permit or other permit authorizing the construction, reconstruction, repair, alteration, or remodeling of any building or structure on any parcel of land shall be issued until the Building Official certifies, on the face of such permit, that the following provisions of this Code have been complied with: 
(1)  Sections 54.01 through 54.07 entitled "Water Standards." 
(2)  Sections 95.01 through 95.05 entitled "Encroachments." 
(3)  Chapter 151 entitled "Site Development." 
(4)  Chapter 152 entitled "Subdivisions." 
(5)  Chapter 153 entitled "Zoning." 
(B)  In the event any violation of said provisions, or of the conditions of any permit issued pursuant to said provisions, is found to exist, the building permit or other permit authorizing the construction, reconstruction, repair, alteration, or remodeling of any building or structure on any parcel of land shall not be issued until such time as the violation has been rectified to the satisfaction of the Town Manager. A monthly report of the permits issued shall be made to the Council by the Building Official. 
(Ord. 1992-462, effective 11-10-92)  
Sec. 150.21 - Permits required. 
No person, firm, or corporation shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert, keep, or demolish any building or structure or make any installation, alteration, or improvement to the electrical, plumbing, or mechanical system in a building, or cause the same to be done, without first obtaining the prescribed permits for each such building or structure from the Building Official. 
(Ord. 1992-462, effective 11-10-92)  
Sec. 150.22 - Issuance of permits. 
(A)  The Building Official shall issue mechanical, electrical, and plumbing permits in accordance with the following procedure. The application and any required plan and data filed by an applicant for a mechanical, electrical, or plumbing permit shall be checked by the Building Official. If the Building Official is satisfied that the work described and the application conform to the requirements of the construction codes and the supplements and appendices thereto, and other pertinent laws and ordinances, and that the appropriate fees have been paid, he/she shall issue a permit therefor to the applicant. The Building Official may issue a working, maintenance, or interim permit to a qualified applicant where he/she is satisfied that the full scope of the proposed work is unknown at the time of application and further that adequate information and statements have been filed indicating compliance with the requirements of this Code. All such interim permits issued shall be supplemented by a regular permit as the scope of the work in progress becomes known. 
(B)  The issuance or granting of a permit shall not be deemed or construed to be a permit for, or approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or the ordinances and codes adopted by reference by the provision of this chapter. No permit purporting to give the authority to violate or cancel any of the provisions of this chapter or said ordinances and codes shall be valid. 
(Ord. 1992-462, effective 11-10-92)  
Secs. 150.23—150.29 - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - STREAMLINED PERMITTING PROCESS FOR SMALL RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR SYSTEMS 
 
Sec. 150.30 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this subchapter is to adopt an expedited, streamlined solar permitting process that complies with the Solar Rights Act and AB 2188 (Chapter 521, Statutes 2014) to achieve timely and cost-effective installations of small residential rooftop solar energy systems. This subchapter encourages the use of solar systems by removing unreasonable barriers, minimizing costs to property owners and the Town of Woodside, and expanding the ability of property owners to install solar energy systems. This subchapter allows the Town of Woodside to achieve these goals while protecting the public health and safety. 
(Ord. 2015-568, effective 10-8-15)  
Sec. 150.31 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
ASSOCIATION. A nonprofit corporation or unincorporated association created for the purpose of managing a common interest development. 
COMMON INTEREST DEVELOPMENT. Any of the following: 
(1)  A community apartment project; 
(2)  A condominium project; 
(3)  A planned development; or 
(4)  A stock cooperative. 
ELECTRONIC SUBMITTAL. The utilization of one or more of the following: 
(1)  Email; or 
(2)  The internet. 
REASONABLE RESTRICTIONS ON A SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM. Those restrictions that do not significantly increase the cost of the system or significantly decrease its efficiency or specified performance, or that allow for an alternative system of comparable cost, efficiency, and energy conservation benefits. 
RESTRICTIONS THAT DO NOT SIGNIFICANTLY INCREASE THE COST OF THE SYSTEM OR DECREASE ITS EFFICIENCY OR SPECIFIED PERFORMANCE. 
(1)  For water heater systems or solar swimming pool heating systems: an amount not exceeding ten percent of the cost of the system, and in no case more than $1,000.00, or decreasing the efficiency of the solar energy system by an amount exceeding ten percent, as originally specified and proposed. 
(2)  For photovoltaic systems: an amount not to exceed $1,000.00 over the system cost as originally specified and proposed, or a decrease in system efficiency of an amount exceeding ten percent as originally specified and proposed. 
SMALL RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM. All of the following: 
(1)  A solar energy system that is no larger than ten kilowatts alternating current nameplate rating or 30 kilowatts thermal. 
(2)  A solar energy system that conforms to all applicable state fire, structural, electrical, and other building codes as adopted or amended by the Town of Woodside, and all state and Town of Woodside municipal codes. 
(3)  A solar energy system that is installed on a single-family or duplex family dwelling. 
(4)  A solar panel or module array that does not exceed the maximum legal building height as defined by the Town of Woodside. 
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM. Either of the following: 
(1)  Any solar collector or other solar energy device whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for space heating, space cooling, electric generation, or water heating. 
(2)  Any structural design feature of a building, whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for electricity generation, space heating or cooling, or for water heating. 
SPECIFIC, ADVERSE IMPACT. A significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, and written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete. 
(Ord. 2015-568, effective 10-8-15)  
Sec. 150.32 - Applicability. 
This subchapter applies to the permitting of all small residential rooftop solar energy systems in the Town of Woodside. Small residential rooftop solar energy systems legally established or permitted prior to the effective date of this subchapter are not subject to the requirements of this subchapter unless physical modifications or alterations are undertaken that materially change the size, type, or components of a small rooftop energy system in such a way as to require new permitting. Routine operation and maintenance shall not require a permit. 
(Ord. 2015-568, effective 10-8-15)  
Sec. 150.33 - Solar energy system requirements. 
(A)  All solar energy systems shall meet applicable health and safety standards and requirements imposed by the state and the Town and the Woodside Fire Protection District. 
(B)  Solar energy systems for heating water in single-family residences and for heating water in commercial or swimming pool applications shall be certified by an accredited listing agency as defined by the California Plumbing Code and California Mechanical Code. 
(C)  Solar energy systems for producing electricity shall meet all applicable safety and performance standards established by the California Electrical Code, the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories and, where applicable, rules of the Public Utilities Commission regarding safety and reliability. 
(Ord. 2015-568, effective 10-8-15)  
Sec. 150.34 - Submittal requirements. 
(A)  All documents required for the submission of an expedited solar energy system application shall be made available on the Town website. 
(B)  Electronic submittal of the required permit application and associated documents for small, residential rooftop solar energy system permits shall be made by email or the internet. As an alternative an applicant may submit a permit application and associated documents at the Building Division front counter during regular business hours. 
(C)  An applicant's electronic signature will be accepted on all forms, applications, and other documents in lieu of a wet signature. 
(D)  The Town shall adopt a standard plan and checklist of all requirements with which small residential rooftop solar energy systems must comply to be eligible for expedited review. 
(E)  The small residential rooftop solar system permit process, standard plans, and the checklist shall substantially conform to recommendations for expedited permitting, including the checklist and standard plans contained in the most current version of the California Solar Permitting Guidebook adopted by the Governor's Office of Planning and Research. 
(F)  All fees prescribed for the permitting of small residential rooftop solar energy system must comply with Cal. Gov't Code § 65850.55, Cal. Gov't Code § 66015, Cal. Gov't Code § 66016, and Cal. Health and Safety Code § 17951. 
(Ord. 2015-568, effective 10-8-15)  
Sec. 150.35 - Plan review, permit, and inspection requirements. 
(A)  The Building Division shall process, review, and approve the application for the installation or use of a solar system in the same manner as an application for review of an architectural modification to the property. 
(B)  If an application is deemed incomplete, a written correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information or documentation required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance shall be sent to the applicant for resubmission. 
(C)  If an application for the installation of a solar system is not denied in writing within 45 days of receipt of a complete application the application shall be deemed approved, unless the delay is the result of a reasonable request for additional information. 
(D)  The Town Planning Division may require an applicant to apply for a use permit if the Planning Division finds, based on substantial evidence, that the solar energy system could have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health and safety. Such decisions may be appealed to Town Planning Commission. 
(E)  Review of the permit application shall be limited to the Building Division's review of whether the application meets local, state, and federal health and safety requirements. If a use permit is required, the building official may deny an application for the use permit if the building official makes written findings based upon substantive evidence in the record that the proposed installation would have a specific, adverse impact upon public health or safety and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid, as defined, the adverse impact. Such findings shall include the basis for the rejection of the potential feasible alternative for preventing the adverse impact. Such decisions may be appealed to the Town Planning Commission. Any condition imposed on an application shall be designed to mitigate the specific, adverse impact upon health and safety at the lowest possible cost. 
(F)  A "feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact" includes, but is not limited to, any cost-effective method, condition, or mitigation imposed by the Town on another similarly situated application in a prior successful application for a permit. The Town shall use its best efforts to ensure that the selected method, condition, or mitigation meets the conditions of Cal. Civil Code § 714(d)(1)(A) and (B) defining restrictions that do not significantly increase the cost of the system or decrease its efficiency or specified performance. 
(G)  The Town shall not provide conditional approval of an application for a small residential rooftop solar energy system on the approval of an association, as defined in Cal. Civil Code § 4080. 
(H)  Only one inspection shall be required and performed by the Building Division for small residential rooftop solar energy systems eligible for expedited review. During the required inspection, if is found that the installation does not conform to the approved plans and/or comply with the current California Code requirements then additional, follow-up inspection(s) shall be required. 
(I)  If a small residential rooftop solar energy system fails inspection, a subsequent inspection shall be required but need not conform to the requirements of this subchapter. 
(J)  If a small residential rooftop solar energy system fails inspection two times, a re-inspection fee will be charged in accordance with the applicable fee indicated on the Town's Schedule of Fees and Charges. 
(K)  A separate fire inspection is required and will be performed by the Woodside Fire Protection District. 
(L)  The inspection shall be done within three business days and may include consolidated inspections. 
(Ord. 2015-568, effective 10-8-15)  
Secs. 150.36—150.39 - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - WATER EFFICIENCY LANDSCAPE 
 
Sec. 150.40 - Model water efficiency landscape ordinance; modification and amendments. 
Adoption of the 2015 State Model Efficiency Landscape Ordinance. The Code of rules, regulations and standards, set forth by the State of California under Sections 490—495, Chapter 2.7, Division 2, Title 23, California Code of Regulations, and including Appendices A through E, regulating the landscape design, installation, maintenance and management in a water efficient manner in the Town of Woodside, is hereby adopted, and by reference incorporated herein as if fully set forth, except as hereinafter otherwise provided, as the Model Water Efficiency Landscape Ordinance of the Town of Woodside. The mandatory requirements of the appendix to the MWELO shall be enforceable to the same extent as if contained in the body of the MWELO. Any amendments and supplements of this Code shall be enforceable to the same extent as if contained in the body of the MWELO. The following modification shall apply: 
(1)  Section 492.6(a)(2)(D) is modified as follows: "Covers are required for outdoor pools and outdoor spas, when not in use, for all new outdoor pools and outdoor spas constructed after the effective date of this ordinance." 
(Ord. 2016-572, effective 3-24-16)  
Secs. 150.41—150.49 - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - STREAMLINED PERMITTING PROCESS FOR ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATIONS 
 
Sec. 150.50 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this subchapter is to adopt an expedited, streamlined permitting process for electric vehicle charging stations that complies with AB 1236 (Chapter 598, Statutes 2015, Cal. Gov't Code § 65850.7) to achieve timely and cost-effective installations of electric vehicle charging stations. The subchapter encourages the use of electric vehicle charging stations by removing unreasonable barriers, minimizing costs to property owners and the Town of Woodside, and expanding the ability of property owners to install electric vehicle charging stations. The subchapter allows the Town of Woodside to achieve these goals while protecting the public health and safety. 
(Ord. 2017-588, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 150.51 - Definitions. 
ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATION(S) or CHARGING STATION(S) means any level of electric vehicle supply equipment station that is designed and built in compliance with California Code of Regulations, Title 24 Part 3 California Electrical Code Article 625, as it reads on the effective date of this subchapter or as it may be amended, and delivers electricity from a source outside an electric vehicle into a plug-in electric vehicle. 
SPECIFIC, ADVERSE IMPACT means a significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, and written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete. 
(Ord. 2017-588, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 150.52 - Applicability. 
This subchapter applies to the permitting of all electric vehicle charging stations in the Town of Woodside. Electric vehicle charging stations legally established or permitted prior to the effective date of this subchapter are not subject to the requirements of this subchapter unless physical modifications or alterations are undertaken that materially change the size, type, or components of a small rooftop energy system in such a way as to require new permitting. Routine operation and maintenance shall not require a permit. 
(Ord. 2017-588, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 150.53 - Electric vehicle charging stations requirements. 
(A)  All electric vehicle charging stations shall meet applicable health and safety standards and requirements imposed by the state and the Town. 
(B)  Electric vehicle charging stations shall meet all applicable safety and performance standards established by the California Electrical Code, the Society of Automotive Engineers, the National Electrical Manufacturers Association, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories and where applicable, rules of the Public Utilities Commission regarding safety and reliability. 
(Ord. 2017-588, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 150.54 - Submittal requirements. 
(A)  All documents required for the submission of an electric vehicle charging station system application shall be made available on the Town of Woodside website. 
(B)  Electronic submittal of the required permit application and associated documents for electric vehicle charging station system permits may be made by email. As an alternative an applicant may submit a permit application and associated documents at the Building Division front counter during regular business hours. 
(C)  An applicant's electronic signature shall be accepted on all forms, applications, and other documents in lieu of a wet signature. 
(D)  The Building Division shall adopt a checklist of all requirements with which the electric vehicle charging stations shall comply to be eligible for expedited review. The electric vehicle charging station permit process, standard(s) and checklist(s) shall substantially conform to recommendations for permitting, including the checklist and standards contained in the "Plug-In Electric Vehicle Infrastructure Permitting Checklist" of the "Zero-Emission Vehicles in California: Community Readiness Guidebook" published by the Office of Planning and Research. 
(E)  All fees prescribed for the permitting of electric vehicle charging stations shall comply with Cal. Gov't Code § 65850.55, Cal. Gov't Code § 66015, Cal. Gov't Code § 66016, and State Health and Safety Code § 17951 as set forth in the fee schedule adopted by resolution by the Town Council. 
(F)  The determination of value or valuation under any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by the Building Official. The value to be used in computing the electric vehicle charging station permit and plan review shall be the total value of all construction work for which the permit is issued as well as any other equipment. 
(Ord. 2017-588, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 150.55 - Plan review, permit, and inspection requirements. 
(A)  The Building Official shall implement an administrative review process to expedite approval of electric vehicle charging stations. Where the application meets the requirements of the approved checklist and standards and there are no specific, adverse impacts upon public health or safety, the Building Division shall complete the building permit approval process, which is nondiscretionary. Review of the application for electric vehicle charging stations shall be limited to the Building Official's review of whether the application meets local, state, and federal health and safety requirements. 
(B)  The Building Official may require an applicant to apply for an "electric vehicle charging station use permit" if the Building Official finds, based on the initial application submittal, that the electric vehicle charging stations could have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health and safety. The Building Official's decision may be appealed to the Planning Commission. 
(C)  If an electric vehicle charging station use permit is required, the Building Official may only deny an application for the electric vehicle charging station use permit if the official makes written findings based upon substantial evidence in the record that the proposed installation would have a specific, adverse impact upon public health or safety and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the adverse impact. Such findings shall include the basis for the rejection of the potential feasible alternative for preventing the adverse impact. The Building Official's decision may be appealed to the Planning Commission. 
(D)  If the Building Official issues an electric vehicle charging station use permit, the permit may include conditions designed to mitigate the specific, adverse impact upon health and safety at the lowest possible cost. 
(E)  A feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact includes, but is not limited to, any cost-effective method, condition, or mitigation imposed by the Town on another similarly situated application in a prior successful application for a permit. 
(F)  If an application is deemed incomplete, a written correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information or documentation required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance shall be sent to the applicant for resubmission. A separate fire inspection may be performed by the Woodside Fire Protection District, if required. 
(Ord. 2017-588, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 150.99 - Penalty. 
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the general penalty provisions as set forth in Section 10.99 of this Code. 
(Ord. 1992-462, effective 11-10-92; Am. Ord. 2007-539, effective 1-10-08) 
Cross reference— Code compliance; judicial and administrative remedies, see §§ 10.40 through 10.53.  
CHAPTER 151. - SITE DEVELOPMENT  
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 151.01 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Site Development Law of the Town of Woodside" and will be referred to in this chapter as "this chapter." 
(1975 Code, § 7-4.01) (Ord. 1984-317, effective 4-12-84; Am. Ord. 2016-575, effective 6-9-16)  
Sec. 151.02 - Authority and applicability. 
(A)  This chapter is adopted pursuant to Section II of Article XI of the Constitution of the State and the general laws of the state. 
(1975 Code, § 7-4.02) 
(B)  The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all site development within the Town as set forth in Section 151.20. 
(1975 Code, § 7-4.03) (Ord. 1984-317, effective 4-12-84; Am. Ord. 2016-575, effective 6-9-16)  
Sec. 151.03 - Purpose. 
This chapter is adopted to promote the public safety and general public welfare, to implement the general plan and zoning and subdivision provisions, and specifically to: 
(A)  Standards and procedures. Protect public and private lands from erosion , earth movement, flooding, and degradation of water quality and ensure the maximum preservation of the natural and scenic character of the Town by establishing minimum standards and requirements relating to land grading , excavations and fills , erosion control and sedimentation control, quality of materials, and installations of basements , driveways , swimming pools, sportcourts, and creek crossings and by establishing procedures by which such standards and requirements may be enforced; and 
(B)  Harmonize development. Ensure that the site development work on each site harmoniously relates to adjacent lands and minimizes physical problems which could result in safety hazards or increased maintenance costs. 
(1975 Code, § 7-4.04) (Ord. 1984-317, effective 4-12-84; Am. Ord. 2016-575, effective 6-9-16)  
Sec. 151.04 - Interpretation. 
(A)  Regulatory rule. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements, except where they are expressly stated to be maximum requirements. It is not intended to impair or interfere with any private restriction placed upon property by covenant or deed; provided, however, where this chapter imposes higher standards or a greater restriction upon the development of land than is imposed or required by such private restrictions, the provisions of this chapter shall control. 
(B)  Regulatory control. Whenever any provision of this chapter and any other provision of law, whether set forth in this chapter or in any other law, ordinance, or resolution of any kind, imposes overlapping or contradictory regulations over the development of land, or contains restrictions covering any of the same subject matter, that provision which is more restrictive or imposes higher standards or requirements shall govern. 
(1975 Code, § 7-4.05) (Ord. 1984-317, effective 4-12-84; Am. Ord. 2016-575, effective 6-9-16)  
Sec. 151.05 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
AVERAGE GROUND SLOPE. The average ground slope of the entire lot as expressed by the formula: 
S =  0.00229IL 
  A 
where 
S = Average ground slope in percent 
I = Contour interval in feet 
L = Combined length of the contour lines in feet; and 
A = The gross area in acres of the parcel or lot. 
Measurements along contours shall be made at contour intervals not to exceed ten feet, and a horizontal map scale of one inch equals 200 feet or larger. 
BACKFILL. The replacement of removed earth materials from excavations with excavated or approved new material, such as sand, gravel, rock, or earth. 
BASEMENT. An improved or unimproved space which is fully or partially below the existing grade or finished grade , whichever is lower, so that the vertical distance from the adjoining ground to the top of the interior structural ceiling is no more than two feet above grade. This shall include below grade patios, vehicular tunnels including the driveway approach, and egress/light wells, but does not include crawl space . 
BASEMENT, DAYLIGHTED. An improved or unimproved space which is partially below the existing grade or finished grade , whichever is lower, so that the vertical distance from the adjoining ground to the top of the interior structural ceiling is more than two feet above grade. Daylighted basements do not include crawl space . Daylighted basements count towards total floor area pursuant to Section 153.206. 
BEDROCK. The undisturbed rock exposed or beneath the soil. 
BENCH. A relatively level step excavated into earth materials. 
BUILDING PERMIT. A permit issued by the Town for the construction, erection, or alteration of a structure or building. 
CERTIFICATION. A statement that required inspections and tests have been performed and that such tests comply with the applicable requirements of this chapter. 
CLEARING. The removal of vegetation but shall not include normal vegetation pruning. 
COMPACTION. The consolidation of fill material by mechanical means. 
CONTOUR GRADING. Grading which minimizes abrupt changes in the contour of graded areas in order to obtain a natural appearance. 
CRAWL SPACE. Areas under an above grade structure or adjacent to a basement with an interior finished ceiling height of no more than four feet. 
CUT. Excavation and removal of soil (or other substrate material) from a site . 
DRIVEWAY. A way or route for use by vehicular traffic leading from a parking area or from a house, garage, or other structure to the road . 
EROSION. The wearing away of the ground surface as a result of the movement of wind or water. 
EXCAVATION. Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock, or any other similar material is cut into, dug, quarried, removed, displaced, relocated, or bulldozed or the conditions resulting there from. 
FILL. A deposit of earth, sand, gravel, or rock materials. 
FOUNDATION PIERS. Vertical foundation members drilled or driven into soil or bedrock . 
GRADE. The elevation of the ground surface. 
GRADE, EXISTING. The elevation of the ground surface prior to excavation or filling. 
GRADE, FINISHED. The elevation of the ground surface after the completion of all grading . 
GRADING. An excavation or fill , or the stockpiling or any combination thereof, or the conditions resulting from any excavation or fill . All grading quantities shall be measured in their compacted state. 
GRADING, BASEMENT AND DAYLIGHTED BASEMENT. Basement size is determined by the maximum allowable basement grading. Grading quantities for basements and daylighted basements are calculated to the exterior of the basement structural walls. Basement and daylighted basement grading does not include the area required for any over-excavation required to construct the basement or daylighted basement . Basement and daylighted basement grading is calculated using the formula in Section 151.22(C)(1). Basement and daylighted basement grading is not included in site grading . 
GRADING, SITE. The process of adjusting the slope and elevation, excluding any grading listed in §§ 151.20(A)(11) and 151.20(B). 
IMPERVIOUS AREA. Material that is not permeable by water or other fluids. Material that functions as a barrier to water infiltration into the soil (e.g., most concrete, asphalt, tile, and plastic lining). 
IMPORTED MATERIAL. Earth material acquired from an off-site location for use in on-site grading . 
KEYWAY. A Benched area cut into subsurface materials intended to support fill . 
NATURAL STATE. Natural state is the condition of land with no grading , terrain alteration, keeping of livestock (see Section 115.12, Private Stable Regulations, for further details on keeping of horses), or removal of natural vegetation. Natural state areas include all natural features such as stream zones, rock outcrops, ridgelines, drainage swales, and areas of significant natural vegetation. No grading or other disturbance is permitted (except as may be required for public safety or the development of Town designated trails). 
NATURAL STATE RESTORATION AREAS. Natural state restoration areas are previously disturbed areas where grading and restoration are allowed as part of the site development permit , to restore a site or portion thereof, to its natural, pre-development era condition, or to restore a site following land movement or other disturbance and/or climate related phenomena. 
OWNER. The individual, firm, partnership, association, trustee, or corporation who or which: 
(1)  Is the fee owner of record of the property for which a site development permit is to be considered or issued; or 
(2)  In the case of fractionally owned fee interests, is the person or agent authorized by all the fee owners to commence and maintain proceedings to obtain a site development permit . 
PERMITTEE. The owner or any person authorized by the owner to apply for a site development permit . 
PERSON. A natural person or his/her heirs, executors, administrators, or assigns; or a firm, partnership, or a public or private corporation or its successors or assigns; or the agent of any of such. 
PLANNING COMMISSION. The Planning Commission of the Town of Woodside. 
PLANNING DIRECTOR. The Director of the Planning Department of the Town of Woodside, California, or the designee of the Director. 
ROAD. Any public or private thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to abutting properties. 
SITE. An area capable of supporting a permitted principal use and meeting the required conditions prescribed in the zoning district in which the lot is situated. 
SITE DEVELOPMENT. Any alteration of terrain or removal of vegetation for the purpose of preparing land for any land use. 
SITE DEVELOPMENT PERMIT. A permit required for all activities listed in Section 151.20. 
STOCKPILING. A temporary storage of earth, rock, sand, gravel, or other similar materials. 
STRUCTURE, ABOVE GRADE. A structure fully enclosed by walls and a roof that has a plate height of at least six feet. 
TOWN ENGINEER. The Engineer of the Town of Woodside. 
TOWN GEOLOGIST. The Geologist of the Town of Woodside. 
TRENCHING. Subsurface excavations to create ditches or trenches for drainage or utility purposes. Trenching shall not be included as site grading for the purposes of this chapter. 
TUNNEL. A below grade, enclosed structure that connects to either an outdoor space(s) or a building(s), or any combination thereof. 
TUNNEL, VEHICULAR. A below grade, enclosed structure that provides access to above or below grade vehicular parking. 
VAULT. A subsurface area, to a maximum excavated depth of four feet, with a functional/removable lid that is not located wholly or partially under a structure and contains utility mechanical, electrical, communication, plumbing, or similar equipment. 
(1975 Code, § 7-4.06) (Ord. 1984-317, effective 4-12-84; Am. Ord. 2016-575, effective 6-9-16; Am. Ord. 2018-596 , § 2(Exh. A, I), effective 10-26-18)  
Sec. 151.06 - Responsibilities of permittees. 
Failure of the Town officials to observe or recognize hazardous or scarring conditions which may adversely affect the economic value of other property in the vicinity, or to recommend the denial of a site development permit , or the failure of the Planning Commission to deny such permit shall not relieve the permittee of responsibility for the conditions or damages resulting therefrom and shall not result in the Town, or its officers or agents, being responsible for the conditions or damages resulting therefrom. 
(1975 Code, § 7-4.17) (Ord. 1984-317, effective 4-12-84; Am. Ord. 2016-575, effective 6-9-16)  
Sec. 151.07 - Retention of plans. 
Plans, permits, and geology/geotechnical reports shall be permanently retained by the Town in accordance with the Town's retention schedule, unless the Town Clerk deems otherwise. 
(1975 Code, § 7-4.30) (Ord. 1984-317, effective 4-12-84; Am. Ord. 2016-575, effective 6-9-16)  
Secs. 151.08—151.18 - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PERMITS 
 
Sec. 151.19 - Purpose of a site development permit. 
The purpose of the site development permit is to promote the public safety and general public welfare, to implement the General Plan and zoning ordinance, subdivision provisions, and specifically to protect public and private lands from erosion , earth movement, flooding, and degradation of water quality and ensure the maximum preservation of the natural and scenic character of the Town. This protection is ensured by establishing minimum standards and requirements related to the natural and scenic character of the Town by establishing minimum standards and requirements related to land grading , excavations and fills , erosion control and sedimentation control, quality of materials, and installations of basements , driveways , swimming pools, tennis courts and creek crossings, and by establishing procedures by which such standards and requirements may be enforced. 
(Ord. 2016-575, effective 6-9-16)  
Sec. 151.20 - Permits required. 
No person shall commence or perform any grading or site development work in excess of the limits set forth in division (A) of this section without first obtaining a site development permit . A separate site development permit shall be required for each site on which site development work is proposed. 
(A)  A site development permit shall be required in all cases where development comes under any one or more of the following provisions, unless such work is exempted therefrom by division (B) of this section: 
(1)  Excavations, Fills, and Stockpiling. Excavations , fills , stockpiling , or any combination thereof exceeding 100 cubic yards (includes both cut and fill quantities); 
(2)  Fills. fills exceeding three feet in vertical depth at their deepest point, measured from the natural ground surface; 
(3)  Excavations. Excavations exceeding four feet in vertical depth at their deepest point; 
(4)  Area of work. Excavations , fills , stockpiling , vegetation removal, or any combination thereof exceeding an area of 10,000 square feet or 25 percent of the area of the site , whichever is less; 
(5)  Driveway construction. New driveway construction, not including driveway repair/resurfacing or maintenance; 
(6)  Swimming pool construction. New swimming pool or pools construction which cumulatively exceeds 1,500 cubic yards; 
(7)  Septic tanks, septic leachfields, and underground tanks. New septic tanks, septic leachfields, and/or underground tank installations which cumulatively exceed 1,500 cubic yards; 
(8)  Water quality impacts. Where erosion , sedimentation, or surface runoff will affect water quality as determined by the Town or the Regional Water Quality Control Board; 
(9)  Drainage impacts. Where, as determined by the Town Engineer , existing drainage patterns will be altered; 
(10)  Geologic studies and percolation testing. Trenching or test pit excavations for geologic studies or percolation testing; and 
(11)  Basements. Excavations for basements exceeding 25 percent of the maximum allowable basement grading pursuant to Section 151.22(C). 
(B)  A site development permit shall not be required in the following cases (the exceptions set forth in this section shall not apply in areas of soil instability, flooding, stream corridors, or earthquake fault zones as determined by the Town Engineer ): 
(1)  For excavations below the finished grade for building foundations and footings, foundation piers , or utility trenches and vaults ; 
(2)  For backfill of natural on-site material; 
(3)  For trenching in recorded public utility easements and public rights-of-way performed by public utility companies for the purpose of installing or maintaining underground utilities; 
(4)  For tilling of soil for agricultural or fire protection purposes; 
(5)  For the repair or resurfacing of a driveway where the gradient or drainage is not materially changed; 
(6)  For municipal corporations performing a governmental function; 
(7)  For emergency work as authorized by the Town; 
(8)  For swimming pool or pools which cumulatively total up to 1,500 cubic yards; 
(9)  For septic tanks, septic leach fields and underground tanks which cumulatively total up to 1,500 cubic yards; or 
(10)  For basement grading below an above grade structure and up to 25 percent of the maximum allowable basement grading pursuant to Section 151.22(C). 
(1975 Code, § 7-4.07) (Ord. 1984-317, effective 4-12-84; Am. Ord. 2016-575, effective 6-9-16; Am. Ord. 2017-584, effective 4-13-17) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 151.21 - Permit applications. 
Each application for a site development permit shall be made by the property owner or an authorized agent to the Town on forms furnished for such purpose. When work covered by this chapter is proposed as part of a project which requires a building permit , the site development permit and the building permit applications may be combined, and one site plan, may be submitted. All applications shall be accompanied by the required fees and deposits and shall contain the submittal requirements on file with the Town and online, and such further applicable information as the Town Engineer or Planning Director may require in order to carry out the purposes of this chapter. 
(1975 Code, § 7-4.09) (Ord. 1984-317, effective 4-12-84; Am. Ord. 2016-575, effective 6-9-16)  
Sec. 151.22 - Action on applications. 
A site development permit shall be issued only if such permit is accompanied by or combined with a valid building permit application or use Permit for the site issued by the Town; or the proposed grading is coordinated with any overall development plan which has been previously approved by the Town for the area in which the site is situated; or a principal use exists on the site ; or for necessary geotechnical, percolation, or hydrological testing. Grading described in divisions (A), (B) and (C) below requires a site development permit . For such grading , the Town Engineer and Planning Director shall review the application for the proposed site development permit . If, after receiving recommendations from the Planning Director , the Town Engineer finds the application for the proposed grading plan is in conformance with the provisions of this chapter, he/she may issue a permit with such reasonable conditions as he/she may deem necessary to meet the objectives of this chapter. 
(A)  Site grading work less than 1,500 cubic yards. Where the aggregate volume of grading on any site is between 100 and 1,500 cubic yards pursuant to §§ 151.20(A)(1) through 151.20(A)(10), such grading is not considered substantial in terms of the policies contained in the general plan. For such quantity of grading, the Town Engineer and Planning Director shall review the application for the proposed site development permit . If, after receiving recommendations from the Planning Director , the Town Engineer finds the application for the proposed grading plan is in conformance with the provisions of this chapter, he/she may issue a permit with such reasonable conditions as he/she may deem necessary to secure substantially the objectives of this chapter, or alternatively, he/she may refer the application to the Planning Commission in the manner provided for in division (B) of this section. 
(B)  Grading work in excess of 1,500 cubic yards, and cuts and fills exceeding eight feet, require a grading exception. Grading in excess of Section 151.22(A)(1), site grading , is considered substantial in terms of policies contained in the General Plan, and shall require a grading exception. Where the aggregate volume of grading on any site pursuant to §§ 151.20(A)(1) through 151.20(A)(10) is in excess of 1,500 cubic yards, or the proposed cuts and fills exceed eight feet in height at any point, the following procedure shall be followed: 
(1)  Referral to Town staff. The application shall be referred for review to the Town Engineer and the Planning Director and the Town Geologist if deemed necessary by the Town Engineer or Planning Director . 
(2)  Review by Planning Commission. Following such review, the Town Engineer and Planning Director shall prepare and forward reports with recommendations to the Planning Commission and make the exception findings in Section 151.22(B)(6). 
(3)  Planning Commission hearing. The Planning Commission shall hold a hearing on the application for the proposed site development permit and, before holding such hearing, shall send notices to all property owners within 300 feet of the subject site . The Planning Commission shall make all of the findings listed in Section 151.22(B)(6). 
(4)  Project conditions. Upon the completion of the prescribed hearing and after the consideration of the recommendations of the Town Engineer and Planning Director , the Planning Commission shall approve, approve with such conditions as it may deem necessary to substantially secure the objectives of this chapter, if found to be consistent with the General Plan, or disapprove the application for the site development . 
(5)  Timeliness. Failure of the Planning Commission to make a determination on the application for a site development permit within 60 days after the receipt of all necessary information for such action will constitute an approval of the application, unless such time is extended with the consent of the applicant. 
(6)  Findings. A grading exception may be granted by the Planning Commission . In order for the Planning Commission to grant a grading exception, all of the following findings are required to be made: 
(a)  Constraints. There are no significant physical constraints relating to grading , including lot configuration, topography, geology, sewage disposal, ground water, Scenic road impact, storm drainage, vehicular access, vegetation removal, significant trees, creek impacts, and cultural resource impacts; 
(b)  Design. All site grading shall be properly contoured, result in natural appearing land forms specific to the site, and minimize abrupt grade changes; and 
(c)  Natural state restoration. Natural state restoration shall be accomplished to the maximum extent practicable. 
(7)  Entitlement expiration. Any approval by the Town Engineer , Planning Director or Planning Commission , given pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter 151 shall lapse and shall become null and void two years following the date on which the approval became effective, unless, prior to the expiration of two years, a site development permit has been issued. Approvals may be extended for an additional period of one year provided that, prior to the expiration of the initial two year approval period, an application for the renewal of the approval is filed with the Planning Director . The Planning Director may grant an extension for a period not exceeding one year where no change in conditions or requirements has occurred, but an application involving a change deemed to be significant by the Planning Director shall be treated as a new application, subject to all the provisions of this chapter. 
(8)  Application inactivity. Any Planning application which has been incomplete for six or more months shall be considered inactive. The Planning Director shall notify applicants of such status by letter and provide 60 days to bring the application to complete status. If the application has not achieved complete status to the satisfaction of the Planning Director within this 60 day period, the applicant shall be refunded fees as specified by the Town's fee schedule and the application shall be closed. 
(C)  Basement and daylighted basement grading. Grading quantities for basements and daylighted basements shall be calculated as the exterior of the basement structural walls. The maximum permitted grading for a basement shall be as follows in Table 1 below (no grading exceptions are permitted to Table 1). 
Table 1 - Maximum Grading for Basements and Daylighted Basements* 
Zoning 
District 	Maximum Cubic Yards 
of Grading 
R-1, SR, RR, and all SCP 	The maximum residence size allowed for the property without an exception multiplied by 12 and divided by 27. 
CC 	The maximum building coverage allowed for the property multiplied by 12 and divided by 27. 
All OS 	The total floor area allowed for the property or 6,000 square feet, whichever is less, multiplied by 12 and divided by 27. 
 
* The maximum cubic yards of grading for basements is calculated as the square footage (the footprint) times 12 (a depth), divided by 27 (to convert cubic feet to cubic yards). This is a volume calculation, therefore basements with greater depths have smaller footprints. 
(1)  Calculation of basement and daylighted basement grading. Basement and daylighted basement grading shall be calculated to the exterior structural walls located below existing grade or finished grade , whichever is lower. When calculations of an existing basement(s) and daylighted basement(s) grading is needed to determine the remaining allowable basement(s) and daylighted basement(s) , or when grading for a site and construction plans are not available, the existing basement and daylighted basement grading shall be calculated as the interior finished dimensions, plus an assumed factor of 12 inches for all structural walls. 
(2)  Means and methods for basement and daylighted basement grading. Over-excavation for basement and daylighted basement grading shall be minimized to the greatest extent practicable. The means and methods for over-excavation for basement and daylighted basement grading exceeding eight feet shall require the review and approval of the Town Engineer and Planning Director . 
(1975 Code, § 7-4.10) (Ord. 1984-317, effective 4-12-84; Am. Ord. 2014-564, effective 12-1-14; Am. Ord. 2016-575, effective 6-9-16; Am. Ord. 2018-596 , § 2(Exh. A, I), effective 10-26-18)  
Sec. 151.23 - Review criteria. 
The following factors shall be considered by the Town in its review of any application for a site development permit , as indicated in Section 151.20: 
(A)  The degree of saturation of the fill and unsupported cuts by water, both natural and domestic; 
(B)  The runoff of surface waters which have a potential to produce erosion , siltation, and other adverse impacts on stream corridors or flood plains; 
(C)  The subsurface conditions, such as the rock strata and faults; 
(D)  The nature and type of the soil or rock; 
(E)  The effect upon the potential for future subdivision design; 
(F)  The visual relationships with other development in the vicinity of the site ; 
(G)  The relationship of the proposed site development to the character of the surrounding community; 
(H)  The capability of proposed slopes to be landscaped; 
(I)  Unnecessary scarring of the natural landscape through the proposed grading or removal of vegetation; 
(J)  Proper contouring of grading to result in natural appearing land forms specific to the site and minimize abrupt grade changes; 
(K)  The impact of basement construction on groundwater and drainage patterns, significant trees, and geotechnical stability; and 
(L)  Any other measures contained within any environmental report which will eliminate or mitigate environmental damage. 
(1975 Code, § 7-4.11) (Ord. 1984-317, effective 4-12-84; Am. Ord. 2016-575, effective 6-9-16)  
Sec. 151.24 - Permit fees and deposits. 
(A)  Permit fees and deposits. Before reviewing any site development permit , the Town shall collect a permit fee in the amount established by the Council. In addition to the collection of a site development permit fee, the Town shall collect a deposit for services in the amount established by the Council to cover the estimated costs of checking and inspections necessitated by the grading operation. Any unused portion of the deposit shall be returned when the work authorized by the permit has been completed. In the event the actual costs of checking and inspections exceeds the amount of the deposit, the permittee shall pay such excess prior to continuing with the unfinished work. 
(1975 Code, § 7-4.12) 
(B)  Deposit refunds. Where no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with the terms of this chapter, the Town Manager , upon a written request from the original permit holder filed with the Town Manager , shall refund the unused portion of the deposit for services. The application fee shall not be refundable, and the permit will be cancelled. 
(1975 Code, § 7-4.14) (Ord. 1984-317, effective 4-12-84; Am. Ord. 2016-575, effective 6-9-16)  
Sec. 151.25 - Work to commence and be completed within certain time. 
Timeliness, extensions and stop work orders. Work under a site development permit shall commence within 180 days after issuance, and all work shall be completed within one year after the start of the work. In the event of unusual difficulties, the Town Engineer may grant an extension of not more than 180 days, so long as the application for an extension is made prior to the expiration date of the permit. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, the Town Engineer shall have the power to stop or suspend any work if deemed necessary due to weather conditions or other conditions as provided for in this chapter. 
(1975 Code, § 7-4.13) (Ord. 1984-317, effective 4-12-84; Am. Ord. 2016-575, effective 6-9-16)  
Sec. 151.26 - Denial of permit. 
Hazardous conditions. The Town Engineer shall deny a site development permit if, in his/her opinion, it will endanger any property or public way. Factors to be considered in determining the probability of hazardous conditions shall include, but not be limited to, possible saturation by water, land instability, runoff of surface waters, erosion , silting of drainage ways, and subsurface conditions, such as the lithology, structure, nature, and type of soil or rock. Failure of the Town Engineer to observe or recognize hazardous conditions or to deny the site development permit shall not relieve the permittee of responsibility for the condition or damages resulting therefrom and shall not result in the Town, or its officers or agents, being responsible for the conditions or damages resulting therefrom. 
(1975 Code, § 7-4.15) (Ord. 1984-317, effective 4-12-84; Am. Ord. 2016-575, effective 6-9-16)  
Secs. 151.27—151.39 - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - DESIGN STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 151.40 - Grading. 
(A)  General. 
(1)  All finished grading shall be blended with the existing grade to form a smooth transition where possible. 
(2)  Cuts and fills pursuant to §§ 151.20(A)(1) through 151.20(A)(10) shall be balanced on site , unless an exception is granted by the Town Engineer and Planning Director . Basement grading is exempt from this requirement. 
(B)  Excavations. 
(1)  Steepness. No surface grading shall be made with a cut face steeper than two horizontal to one vertical unless allowed by the Town Engineer and Town Geologist in accordance with the approved grading specifications. 
(2)  Setback from property lines. The tops and toes of all cuts and fills shall be at least ten feet from any property line and five feet from a proposed building. 
(3)  Contour grading. Contour grading of all tops and toes shall be required for a minimum of ten feet horizontal distance. 
(4)  Stricter standards. The Town Engineer may require an excavation to be made with a cut face flatter in slope than two horizontal to one vertical if he/she finds the material in which the excavation is to be made is subject to significant erosion or if other conditions make such flatter cut slope necessary for stability or safety to adjoining property. 
(1975 Code, § 7-4.08(a), (b)) (Ord. 1984-317, effective 4-12-84) 
(C)  Fills. 
(1)  Steepness. No fill shall be made which creates any exposed surface steeper in slope than two horizontal to one vertical. 
(2)  Stricter standards. The Town Engineer may require that the fill be constructed with an exposed surface flatter than two horizontal to one vertical if he/she finds that, under the particular conditions, such flatter surface is necessary for stability, safety, and planting. 
(3)  Fill material. All fills shall be made of clean earth, sand, gravel, or rock. 
(4)  Surface preparation. The ground surface shall be prepared to receive the fill by removing vegetation, topsoil, and other unsuitable materials and shall be scarified to provide a bond with new fill . Where slopes are steeper than five to one, and the height is greater than five feet, benching or keying into sound bedrock or other component material as determined by the Soils Engineer may be required. 
(5)  Compaction of fills. All fills intended to support buildings or structures or where otherwise required to be compacted for stability of material shall be compacted, inspected, and tested in accordance with the approved geotechnical report. Where no geotechnical report exists, the following provisions shall apply: 
(a)  Surface preparation. The natural ground surface shall be prepared by the removal of topsoil and vegetation and, if necessary, shall be graded to a series of terraces. 
(b)  Moisture control. The moisture content of the fill material shall be controlled at the time of spreading and compaction to obtain the required maximum density. 
(c)  Compaction density. The fill material shall be compacted to a relative compaction density of not less than 90 percent, determined by the current ASTM standard. 
(1975 Code, § 7-4.08(c)—(e)) (Ord. 1984-317, effective 4-12-84; Am. Ord. 2016-575, effective 6-9-16) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 151.41 - Basements. 
(A)  Development standards. Basements shall meet the following development standards: 
(1)  No more than 50 percent of the maximum allowable basement grading , pursuant to Section 151.22(C), shall take place beyond the footprint of an above grade structure ; 
(2)  Any basement not located under an above grade structure or impervious area shall have at least two and one-half feet of soil between the finished grade and the top of the basement structure; 
(3)  Below grade patios and egress/light wells, in aggregate, shall comprise no more than 15 percent of the maximum allowable basement grading ; 
(4)  Below grade tunnels , in aggregate, shall comprise no more than 15 percent of the maximum allowable basement grading ; 
(5)  All basements shall meet the required setbacks, except basements beneath nonconforming structures, which may encroach into the required setbacks so long as that portion of the newly constructed basement located in the setback does not exceed the footprint of the nonconforming structure. Egress/light wells which encroach into setbacks shall be sized to the minimum required by the California Residential Code (CRC) and/or California Code (CBC), whichever is applicable; 
(6)  All grading for basements , egress/light wells, and below grade tunnels shall adhere to Section 151.40(B)(2); 
(7)  The maximum interior finished height of a basement shall be 20 feet; and 
(8)  All tunnels shall be a maximum of eight feet wide in interior finished width, and nine feet high in interior finished height. Vehicular tunnels ( tunnels leading to above or below grade vehicular parking) shall be excluded from this requirement. 
(B)  All portions of basements located below grade shall not count towards total floor area pursuant to Section 153.055. 
(Ord. 2016-575, effective 6-9-16)  
Sec. 151.42 - Sport courts and swimming pools. 
Maximum cuts and fills. Cuts and fills for such accessory uses as sport courts and decking or terraces around swimming pools shall not exceed a height of six feet measured vertically from the toe to the top of the slope. 
(1975 Code, § 7-4.08(f)) (Ord. 1984-317, effective 4-12-84; Am. Ord. 2016-575, effective 6-9-16) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 151.43 - Drainage. 
Adequate provisions shall be made to dispose of surface waters and to prevent such surface waters from damaging the face of an excavation or any portion of a fill in accordance with the 1978 Town Storm Drain Master Plan and any subsequent revisions, and the following: 
(A)  Subsurface drainage. Cut and fill slopes shall be provided with subsurface drainage as necessary for stability. 
(B)  Disposal. All drainage facilities shall be designed to carry waters to the nearest practicable drainage way approved by the Town Engineer as a safe place to discharge such waters. The erosion of ground in the area of discharge shall be prevented by the installation of downdrains, retention basins, or other devices. 
(C)  Building pads. Building pads and all finished grading shall comply with the drainage slope gradient required by the Building Code. If it is not practical to slope the finish grade away from the building, alternative methods may be approved by the Town Engineer . Surface drainage shall be toward approved drainage facilities to the satisfaction of the Town Engineer . Building pads, if necessary, shall be protected by berms, walls, fills , or trenches which drain to a protected outlet. 
(D)  Drainfields. The site drainage system shall be designed and constructed so that surface drainage shall not cross septic tank drainfields. Interceptor trenches or curtain drains may be used if approved by the County Environmental Health Officer and Town Engineer . 
(E)  Driveways. To prevent erosion and ponding on the roadside and road surface, all driveways shall have a minimum cross slope of three percent or as approved by the Town Engineer . Shoulders shall be protected from erosion . All gravel or rock surfaced driveways shall be protected through the construction of water bars or drainage depressions, the design and location of which shall be to the satisfaction of the Town Engineer . Culverts or bridges approved by the Town Engineer shall be installed on all waterways, streams, or ditches when road crossings are required. 
(1975 Code, § 7-4.08(g)) (Ord. 1984-317, effective 4-12-84; Am. Ord. 2016-575, effective 6-9-16) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 151.44 - Driveways. 
All driveways shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the following: 
(A)  Number of entrances. All residential lots shall have only one driveway with only one opening which shall be from only one public or private serving road . Second driveway exceptions may be granted by the Planning Commission if the following findings can be made: 
(1)  The proposed additional ingress and egress point meets Town standards for the line of sight, case of public identification, and any other traffic safety consideration; and 
(2)  The proposed additional ingress and egress point does not detract from the scenic and rural quality of the Town. 
(3)  The proposed additional ingress and egress point cannot be accommodated off of the primary driveway . 
(4)  The proposed additional ingress and egress is not the only vehicular access to a proposed accessory dwelling unit. 
(B)  Driveways for accessory dwelling units. Any lots that have two or more existing permitted driveways shall use the principal access driveway , as defined in Chapter 153, as the primary access to any proposed accessory dwelling units. Any additional existing driveways other than the principal access driveway shall not be used as the primary access for any proposed accessory dwelling units. 
(C)  Alignment. The horizontal alignment of the driveway shall be adequate for safe and convenient travel, and the minimum center line radius shall be 40 feet. If a special case involving a restricted site , steep grades, or the like occurs, the Town Engineer may consider curve widening in place of the 40-foot radius. The curve widening shall be in the range of 12 feet to 25 feet in width, and the curve widening shall permit the use of the driveway by emergency vehicles. The Town Engineer shall specify the required turning radii. 
(D)  Gradients. Driveways shall have a minimum grade of one percent and a maximum grade of 20 percent. All grade changes shall be connected with vertical curves long enough to prevent the contact of any passenger vehicle's undercarriage or bumper with the driveway surface. The center line grade of the driveway at the edge of the fronting road surface shall be a maximum of five percent (up or down) for 25 feet to provide a transition from the fronting road to the driveway . A vertical curve shall be used, and the minimum length shall be 50 feet, and the maximum tangent grade adjoining the existing road shall be five percent. A similar transition shall also be required where the driveway joins the parking area at the garage, or at the garage. 
(E)  Design and construction standards. 
(1)  Width and road connection. Driveways shall have a minimum paved width, asphalt or rocked, of 12 feet and a maximum paved width, asphalt or rocked, of 20 feet, except as provided in division (C) above. Driveways shall connect to a public or private road meeting the driveway standards of this chapter. 
(2)  Length and turnout requirements. Driveways longer than 200 feet and less than 350 feet shall contain a turnout if required by the Town Engineer for reasons of public safety. Driveways 350 feet or longer shall contain one or more turnouts. No two adjacent turnouts shall be more than 350 feet apart. The total width of the driveway at the turnout shall not be less than 18 feet. The length of the turnout shall not be less than 25 feet. In addition, tapers shall be provided at each end. 
(3)  Crown/cross-slope. The crown or cross-slope of driveways shall be three percent. 
(4)  Construction specifications. Driveway subgrades shall be compacted to a minimum of 95 percent. Driveways shall have a minimum compacted thickness of compacted rock base of five inches. Where the center line grade of any section of driveway exceeds five percent, the driveway shall be surfaced with a plant-mixed material of 1½ inches or be constructed of another combination of base and surface providing equal strength and durability; unless an exception is granted by the Town Engineer and Fire District. Any driveway exceeding 15 percent center line grade shall have a minimum four-inch concrete slab with a brushed concrete surface. Surfacing materials for driveways and parking lots shall conform to Caltrans Standard Specifications, January 1978. 
(5)  Backarounds. A backaround at the end of a driveway shall be constructed, at a minimum, in accordance with the Town Backaround Standard. 
(6)  Load capacity. All bridges, culverts, and driveway structures shall be designed to sustain an H-20 truck loading in accordance with AASHO standards. 
(1975 Code, § 7-4.08(h)) (Ord. 1984-317, effective 4-12-84; Am. Ord. 2016-575, effective 6-9-16; Am. Ord. 2017-585, effective 4-27-17) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 151.45 - Winterization and erosion control. 
(A)  Timing, means, and methods. All grading operations pursuant to Sections 151.20(A)(1) through 151.20(A)(10) shall be conducted between April 15 and October 15. All grading work shall be winterized by providing weather protection for the exposed graded surfaces no later than October 15th. All exposed surfaces shall be protected (for example, planted, fertilized, and covered with a straw mulch or burlap netting) in a manner satisfactory to the Town Engineer and Planning Director . Temporary structures, such as retention basins, sand bag baffles, plastic covering, and temporary culverts, shall be provided if required by the Town Engineer . Work may be stopped by the Town Engineer if, in his/her opinion, it appears that storm damage may result if grading is allowed to continue. The permittee may be required to install temporary planting to control erosion , install temporary structures, or take such other measures as may be required to protect adjoining property or the public safety. The Town Engineer may specify the time of starting grading and the time of completion or may require that the operation be conducted in specified stages so as to ensure the completion of protective measures or devices prior to the advent of seasonal rains. 
(B)  Securing cut and fill surfaces. The faces of cut and fill slopes and other areas where vegetation has been removed shall be prepared and maintained to prevent soil erosion . All cut and fill surfaces shall be planted with ground covers or grasses which are compatible with the natural ground covers and grasses found in the Town and which will thrive with little maintenance. Earthen slopes shall be contour graded to encourage plant growth. Cut and fill surfaces along public and private roads may be required to be landscaped to blend into the natural surroundings. Plants used shall not obstruct vehicular sight distances. Adequate sight distance shall be determined by the Town Engineer . All plant materials shall be satisfactory to the Planning Director . 
(C)  Slope protection. Slope protection shall be installed as soon as practicable and prior to calling for final grading approval. 
(D)  Further means and methods. Check dams, cribbing, riprap, or other methods shall be employed to control erosion and provide safety if required by the Town Engineer . 
(E)  Winter grading exception. An applicant for a site development permit may apply to the Town Engineer for an exception to allow grading to commence after October 15 and before December 1 of any year. The Town Engineer shall not grant an exception unless he/she finds: 
(1)  That no detriment is likely to occur to neighboring properties; 
(2)  That no detriment is likely to occur to public or private roads ; 
(3)  That the applicant can complete the grading within 30 days of the granting of exception; 
(4)  That the site will be winterized as required by this chapter, with an erosion plan to the satisfaction of the Town Engineer . 
(F)  Public project grading. Grading for a public project of the Town may be commenced after October 15 and before December 1 of any year where the Town Engineer makes a report to the Town Council with the findings required in division (E) above. 
(1975 Code, § 7-4.08(i)) (Ord. 1984-317, effective 4-12-84; Am. Ord. 1987-347, effective 8-13-87; Am. Ord. 1988-360, effective 4-15-88; Am. Ord. 1989-419, effective 1-11-90; Am. Ord. 2016-575, effective 6-9-16) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Secs. 151.46—151.54 - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - OPERATING REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 151.55 - Compliance with regulations required. 
(A)  Applicability. All site development work and operations shall comply with the requirements set forth in this section in addition to other requirements of this chapter. 
(B)  Hours of operation. All site development and building construction operations shall be carried on only between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 5:30 p.m., Monday through Friday, and 8:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m. Saturdays, unless the Town Engineer finds that work at other times or days would not imperil or inconvenience the public, or create a nuisance, in which case he/she may by written permission, allow the work to proceed during such other hours as may be necessary. Site development and building construction operations shall not occur on New Year's Day, Martin Luther King Day, Presidents' Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Veterans Day, Thanksgiving Day, or Christmas Day. 
(C)  Dust and dirt control. All graded surfaces shall be treated to prevent nuisances from dust or spillage on roads or adjacent properties. Equipment, materials, and roadways on the site shall be used in a manner or treated as to prevent excessive dust conditions. 
(D)  Noise control. At all times, broadcast, recorded or amplified music shall not be audible beyond the property lines of any construction site . 
(1975 Code, § 7-4.16) (Ord. 1984-317, effective 4-12-84; Am. Ord. 2016-575, effective 6-9-16; Am. Ord. 2016-577, effective 8- 25-16) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 151.56 - Inspections. 
(A)  Inspections by the Town Engineer. The Town Engineer , when requested, upon two working days' notice (48 hours) delivered to the Town Hall, shall make the inspections required by this division and shall either approve that portion of the work completed or shall notify the permit holder wherein the work fails to comply with this chapter. In addition to such inspections, the Town Engineer may initiate his/her own inspections. 
(1)  Noncompliance and stop work orders. Where it is found by inspection that the soil or other conditions are not as stated or shown in the application for the site development permit , the Town Engineer may stop the work until approval is obtained for a revised site development permit conforming to the existing conditions. 
(2)  Compliance. Plans and permits for grading work, bearing the approval of the Town Engineer , shall be maintained at the site during the progress of the grading work and until the work has been approved. 
(3)  Inspections. The following inspections shall be made: 
(a)  Initial inspections. When the permittee or his/her agent is ready to begin work on an excavation or fill , and construction stakes, where required, have been set, and before any grading is started; 
(b)  Rough grading inspections. When all rough grading has been completed; 
(c)  Winterization inspections. If required by the Town Engineer ; and 
(d)  Final inspections. When all work, including the installation of all drainage, paving, and other structures and any required planting, has been completed. All revised plans and soils certifications shall have been submitted and approved in advance of the final inspection. 
(B)  Notification. The Town Engineer shall notify the applicant of the results of all inspections. 
(1975 Code, § 7-4.18) (Ord. 1984-317, effective 4-12-84; Am. Ord. 2016-575, effective 6-9-16)  
Sec. 151.57 - Special precautions. 
If, at any stage of the work on an excavation , fill , or driveway construction, the Town Engineer determines by inspection that the nature of the earth materials is such that further work as authorized by an existing permit is likely to endanger any property or public way, the Town Engineer may require as a condition to allowing the work to proceed that such reasonable safety precautions be taken as the Town Engineer considers advisable to avoid such likelihood of danger. "Special precautions," for the purposes of this section, may include, but shall not be limited to, specifying a flatter graded slope, the construction of additional drainage facilities, berms, terracing, compaction , or cribbing, or the installation of plant materials for erosion control. 
(1975 Code, § 7-4.19) (Ord. 1984-317, effective 4-12-84; Am. Ord. 2016-575, effective 6-9-16)  
Sec. 151.58 - Geotechnical reports. 
(A)  Geologic reports required for geologically hazardous sites. For any grading , a complete geotechnical report shall be required for those sites identified as "geologically hazardous" on the Town's geologic hazards maps, or as identified by the Town Geologist , Planning Director , and Town Engineer , unless a detailed geotechnical report has been previously approved by the Town. The report shall meet the guidelines of the General Plan seismic safety, natural hazards, and safety element and provisions of the Zoning Code relating to geologically hazardous areas. The report preparer should consult any other reports relative to the site which are on file with the Town. 
(B)  Contents of geological report. The report shall incorporate all relevant existing data and provide any additional information necessary for grading . The report preparer is encouraged to submit a written outline of the geotechnical report to the Town for review by the Town Geologist and Town Engineer . The report shall include all geotechnical aspects of the site and the surrounding area, including geology, soils, surface storm waters, ground waters, and other applicable facts. The report shall describe the site , the work proposed for the site , the geotechnical requirements of the work, detailed geotechnical specifications of the work, and the required geotechnical field review of the work. 
(C)  Report submission. The report shall be submitted to the Town and will be reviewed by the Town Geologist and Town Engineer . The Town Geologist and Town Engineer may require additional field work, research, calculations, or specifications. The revised report shall be reviewed by the Town Geologist and the Town Engineer . The final report for such site shall include the initial report, all reviews, and the revised report. 
(D)  Report certification. The geotechnical report preparer shall review the final construction plans and submit a written certification that such plans reflect the geotechnical recommendations and specifications and that the proposed work is geotechnically feasible. The permit will not be issued until the report is final and the certification is submitted. 
(E)  Waiving or altering geotechnical report requirements. The Town Engineer may waive the geotechnical report requirement where the work is minor, involves no swimming pool or building for human occupancy, and geologic hazards do not exist. A geotechnical report shall be required for all swimming pools and buildings for human occupancy. The Town Engineer and Town Geologist may modify the requirements for a geotechnical report for buildings for human occupancy or swimming pools when, in their opinion, no apparent geological hazard exists. 
(F)  Final report and field reviews. The final geotechnical report shall specify the necessary field reviews of the work. The applicant shall retain a licensed professional to perform the field reviews. The geotechnical professional shall review all clearing , grading , keyways , approval of materials, compaction , slope angles, pier depths, and the like. The geotechnical field reviews shall be complete for each phase before the Town final review will be conducted. A final written report on the field reviews shall be required describing the work, changes, and adherence to the approved specifications. The final report on the field reviews will be reviewed and approved prior to the final field review by the Town. 
(1975 Code, § 7-4.20) (Ord. 1984-317, effective 4-12-84; Am. Ord. 2016-575, effective 6-9-16; Am. Ord. 2017-584, effective 4-13-17)  
Sec. 151.59 - Responsibilities of applicants' consultants. 
When engineered grading is required, it shall be the responsibility of the licensed professional who prepares the approved grading plan to incorporate in the grading plan all recommendations from the geotechnical reports. Inspections and the approval of the grading shall be by each licensed professional acting within his/her area of technical specialty. Such responsibility shall include, but need not be limited to, inspections and approval as to the establishment of the layout, grading , and drainage of the development area. The licensed professional shall also be responsible for the preparation of revised plans and the submission of as-graded grading plans upon the completion of the work. 
(1975 Code, § 7-4.21) (Ord. 1984-317, effective 4-12-84; Am. Ord. 2016-575, effective 6-9-16)  
Sec. 151.60 - Deviations from standards and approved plans. 
(A)  The Town Engineer shall have the authority to permit minor changes, modifications, and other deviations from the design standards set forth in this chapter upon finding that any such change, modification, or deviation will not detrimentally alter the resultant stability and drainage in relation to the use to be made of the graded area. 
(B)  There shall be no major change, modification, or deviation from the approved plans unless such changes are approved by the Town Engineer and Planning Director . 
(1975 Code, § 7-4.22) (Ord. 1984-317, effective 4-12-84; Am. Ord. 2016-575, effective 6-9-16)  
Sec. 151.61 - Transfer of responsibility for approval. 
If any of the licensed professionals are changed during the course of the work, the work shall be stopped until the replacement has agreed in writing to accept the responsibilities within the area of his/her technical competence for approval upon the completion of the work. 
(1975 Code, § 7-4.24) (Ord. 1984-317, effective 4-12-84; Am. Ord. 2016-575, effective 6-9-16; Am. Ord. 2017-584, effective 4-13-17)  
Secs. 151.62—151.69 - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 151.70 - Notification of noncompliance. 
If, in the course of fulfilling their responsibilities under this chapter, the Civil Engineer, Architect, Landscape Architect, Soils Engineer, Engineering Geologist , or testing agency finds that the work is not being undertaken in conformance with this chapter or the approved grading plans, the discrepancies shall be reported immediately in writing to the person in charge of the grading work and to the Town Engineer . Recommendations for corrective measures, if necessary, shall be submitted. 
(1975 Code, § 7-4.23) (Ord. 1984-317, effective 4-12-84; Am. Ord. 2016-575, effective 6-9-16)  
Sec. 151.71 - Hazards. 
Whenever the Town determines that any existing excavation or embankment or fill on private property has become a hazard to life and limb, or endangers property, or adversely affects the safety, use, or stability of a public way or drainage channel, the owner of the property upon which the excavation or fill is located, or other person or agent in control of such property, upon the receipt of notice in writing from the Town, within the period specified, shall repair or eliminate such excavation or embankment so as to eliminate the hazard and be in conformance with the requirements this chapter. 
(1975 Code, § 7-4.26) (Ord. 1984-317, effective 4-12-84; Am. Ord. 2016-575, effective 6-9-16)  
Sec. 151.72 - Certificates of completion. 
If, upon the final inspection of any excavation, fill, or driveway , it is found that the work authorized by the site development permit has been satisfactorily completed in accordance with the requirements of this chapter and any other requirements imposed, a certificate of completion covering such work, and stating that the work is approved, shall be issued to the owner by the Town Engineer upon request. 
(1975 Code, § 7-4.25) (Ord. 1984-317, effective 4-12-84)  
Sec. 151.73 - Exceptions authorized by Planning Commission. 
The Planning Commission may authorize exceptions to any of the requirements and regulations set forth in this chapter, except for standards listed in Section 151.22(C), basement and daylighted basement grading . An application for any exception shall be made by stating fully the grounds of the application and the facts relied upon. Such application shall be filed with the site development permit application. In order for the Planning Commission to grant an exception, the Planning Commission shall make all of the following findings (unless more specific findings are set forth in preceding sections): 
(A)  That the land is of such shape or size, or is affected by such physical conditions, or is subject to such title limitations of record that it is impossible or unpractical for the applicant to comply with all of the regulations of this chapter. 
(B)  That the exception is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right of the applicant; 
(C)  That the granting of the exception will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property in the vicinity of the subject property; 
(D)  That the granting of the exception shall not constitute a grant of special privilege to the applicant; and 
(E)  That the granting of the exception shall be consistent with the General Plan and zoning provisions. 
(1975 Code, § 7-4.27) (Ord. 1984-317, effective 4-12-84; Am. Ord. 2016-575, effective 6-9-16)  
Sec. 151.74 - Procedures for suspension or revocation of permit. 
(A)  Authority. 
(1)  In the event any person holding a site development permit pursuant to this chapter violates the terms of the permit or conducts, carries on, or permits to be conducted or carried on site development in such a manner as materially or adversely to affect the health, welfare, or safety of persons residing or working in the neighborhood of the property of the permittee , or conducts or carries on or permits to be conducted or carried on site development so that it is materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property or improvement in the neighborhood, the Town Engineer may order a temporary suspension, effective immediately upon notification. 
(2)  In order to remove a temporary suspension, the permittee shall perform the necessary corrective and/or restorative work as approved by the Town Engineer . The restorative or corrective work shall commence within three days and be completed and directed by the Town Engineer . If the Town Engineer and permittee cannot agree upon the corrective and/or restorative work and the time within which such work is to be completed, the Town Engineer shall report such disagreement to the Planning Commission at its next available meeting. The Planning Commission shall consider the Town Engineer's report and determine the appropriate action at its next available meeting. 
(B)  Procedure for revoking site development permits. No site development permit which has been approved by the Planning Commission shall be revoked until a public hearing is held by the Planning Commission . Written notice of such hearing shall be served by the Planning Director upon the permittee , either personally or by certified mail. Such notice shall be given to the permittee at least five days prior to the date set for the hearing and shall state: 
(1)  The grounds for the complaint or reasons for the revocation; and 
(2)  The time when, and the place where, such hearing is to be held. 
(C)  Decisions. At any such public hearing, the permittee shall be given an opportunity to be heard and may call witnesses and present evidence on his/her behalf. Upon the conclusion of such hearing, the Planning Commission shall determine whether or not the permit shall be suspended, revoked, or modified. 
(D)  Appeals. The permittee may appeal the decision of the Planning Commission as provided in Section 151.75. 
(1975 Code, § 7-4.28) (Ord. 1984-317, effective 4-12-84; Am. Ord. 2016-575, effective 6-9-16)  
Sec. 151.75 - Appeals. 
(A)  Any decision of the Town Engineer or Planning Director relevant to this chapter may be appealed by the applicant or any interested person to the Planning Commission . 
(B)  Any determination of the Planning Commission relevant to this chapter may be appealed by the applicant or any interested person to the Council. 
(C)  Appeals shall be filed in writing with the Town Clerk within ten days after the date of the appealed decision. 
(D)  Appeals shall be conducted as set forth in §§ 153.335 et seq. , of this Code. 
(1975 Code, § 7-4.29) (Ord. 1984-317, effective 4-12-84; Am. Ord. 2003-520, effective 10-23- 03; Am. Ord. 2016-575, effective 6-9-16)  
Sec. 151.76 - Bonds. 
(A)  At his/her discretion, the Town Manager , upon receiving a recommendation from the Town Engineer and Planning Director , may require bonds and/or other guarantees to ensure the completion of the required work and compliance with the regulations imposed under the terms of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter, including, but not limited to, geotechnical investigations, percolation testing, driveway improvements, landscaping and maintenance. In the case of landscaping and landscaping maintenance, security shall be provided to guarantee the maintenance of all plant materials for a period of two years. 
(B)  All bonds shall be prepared in a form satisfactory to the Town Attorney , such improvement security to be to the benefit of the Town. Such bond, or other security, shall be in an amount deemed by the Town Manager , after receiving a recommendation from the Town Engineer , to be sufficient to cover the costs of improvements. The term of the bond, or other security, shall commence on the date the application is granted and shall remain in full force and effect until the completion of the work to the satisfaction of the Town Engineer . 
(C)  When work is completed, any unused portion of the security shall be refunded to the permittee upon the certification of satisfactory completion by the Town Engineer . 
(1975 Code, § 7-4.31) (Ord. 1984-317, effective 4-12-84; Am. Ord. 2016-575, effective 6-9-16)  
Sec. 151.77 - Violations. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. Any person violating any of such provisions or failing to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter shall be subject to the penalty provisions in Chapter 10, Sections 10.40 through 10.99. 
(1975 Code, § 7-4.32) (Ord. 1984-317, effective 4-12-84; Am. Ord. 2016-575, effective 6-9-16) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99; Site Development Code violations, see § 10.66.  
CHAPTER 152: - SUBDIVISIONS  
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 152.001 - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "Subdivision Law of the Town of Woodside." 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.910) (Ord. 1982-305, effective 4-8-82)  
Sec. 152.002 - Authority. 
This chapter is adopted pursuant to Section 11 of Article XI of the Constitution of the State and the Subdivision Map Act , and all terms used in this chapter which are defined in the Subdivision Map Act shall have the same meaning as ascribed thereto in the Act and as the Act may hereafter be amended, except that, where appropriate from the context, the term "subdivision" shall be construed to include divisions of land other than those defined as subdivisions by the Subdivision Map Act . The provisions of this chapter shall be supplemental to the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act . 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.101) (Ord. 1982-305, effective 4-8-82)  
Sec. 152.003 - Applicability. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the subdivision or other division of land for any purpose whatsoever within the Town. For the purposes of this chapter, a division of land shall mean the division of any parcel or portion thereof into two or more lots, plots, sites, or parcels. Divisions of land shall include lot line adjustments, land divisions, subdivisions, resubdivisions, and other divisions of land and, when appropriate to the context, shall relate to the process of dividing land or to the land or territory divided. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.102) (Ord. 1982-305, effective 4-8-82)  
Sec. 152.004 - Purpose. 
This chapter is adopted to regulate the division of land and to require the provision of certain prescribed improvements which are needed in consequence of the division of land in order to achieve the following purposes: 
(A)  To promote the public health, safety, convenience, and general welfare; 
(B)  To ensure the development of land in a manner consistent with general community objectives and policies as set forth in the general plan; 
(C)  To protect property in the Town against deterioration and obsolescence; 
(D)  To preserve and protect the natural beauty and the established character of the community and through good design, provide a harmonious relationship between the completed subdivision and the natural environment; 
(E)  To provide lots of sufficient size and appropriate design for the purposes for which they are to be used; 
(F)  To protect the community against excessive stormwater runoff, soil erosion, earth movement, and other geologic hazards by preserving the natural ground slopes and natural ground cover; 
(G)  To make possible the ease of law enforcement and fire protection through orderly design and development and the provision of adequate facilities and improvements; 
(H)  To ensure at the time of subdivision the provision of adequate water supply, storm drainage, sewage disposal, and other utilities and services needed as a consequence of the division of land; 
(I)  To ensure that governmental costs are minimized by requiring the installation of improvements of adequate size and quality; 
(J)  To provide roads of adequate capacity with appropriate improvements to provide access to abutting property, to carry the anticipated traffic, and to ensure that roads are designed so as to minimize safety hazards to motorists, pedestrians, equestrians, and bicyclists; 
(K)  To assure that road rights-of-way are designed to preserve the natural terrain, vegetation, and open space qualities of the community; 
(L)  To minimize through traffic on residential roads; 
(M)  To provide pedestrian paths, bicycle paths, and equestrian and hiking trails for the safety and convenience of the residents, for travel throughout the community, and for the enjoyment of the natural amenities of the community; 
(N)  To make possible the coordination of subdivision development by the provision of public facilities, such as parks, recreation areas, schools, and other types of community facilities; and 
(O)  To assist in implementing the general plan. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.103) (Ord. 1982-305, effective 4-8-82)  
Sec. 152.005 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
BLOCK. The land surrounded by roads or which is designated as a block on any recorded subdivision map. 
CEQA. The California Environmental Quality Act. 
COMMON DRIVEWAY. A private way for vehicular and other access to two parcels. 
CONCEPT MAP. A map prepared by the subdivider and reviewed by the Subdivision Review Committee preceding the preparation of a tentative map for the purpose of providing a staff review of the proposed subdivision plan. 
DAY. A calendar day, unless otherwise specified. 
DESIGN. Shall mean and include: 
(1)  Street alignments, grades, and widths; 
(2)  Drainage and sanitary facilities and utilities, including the alignments and grades thereof; 
(3)  The location and size of all required easements and rights-of-way; 
(4)  Fire roads and firebreaks; 
(5)  Lot size and configuration; 
(6)  Traffic access; 
(7)  Grading; 
(8)  Land to be dedicated for park or recreational purposes; and 
(9)  Such other specific requirements in the plan and configuration of the entire subdivision as may be necessary or convenient to ensure conformity to or the implementation of the general plan or any specific plan of the Town. 
DEVELOPMENT PLAN. A plan to scale indicating the outline of the building site and drainfield area and the location and grade of the driveway. Such information may be shown on the tentative map. 
DRIVEWAY. A private way for vehicular and other access to a single building site. 
EASEMENT, PUBLIC. An easement dedicated to and accepted by the Town which shall be continuing and irrevocable, unless formally abandoned by the Town. 
ENGINEERING GEOLOGIST. A person registered by the state as a certified engineering geologist. 
ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT. A comprehensive document, prepared by the Town, which inventories the physical conditions which exist within the area affected by the proposed project, including land, air, water, minerals, flora, fauna, ambient noise, objects of historic or aesthetic significance, public facilities, and applicable public policies and laws. 
FINAL MAP. A map based upon an approved or conditionally approved tentative map complying with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and the provisions of this chapter. 
GEOTECHNICAL REPORT. A report prepared by a geologist and/or soils engineer, certified and/or registered in the state, containing the information specified in Section 152.077 of this chapter. 
IMPROVEMENT. Such road work and utilities installed, or agreed to be installed, by the subdivider to be used for public or private roads, highways, trails, pathways, and easements as are necessary in the land division or subdivision or for local traffic and drainage requirements as a condition precedent to the approval and acceptance of a parcel map or final map. 
IMPROVEMENT. Such other specific improvements or types of improvements the installation of which, by the subdivider, by public agencies, by private utilities, by any other entity approved by the local agency, or by a combination, is necessary or convenient to ensure conformity to or the implementation of the general plan. 
LAND DIVISION. Any division of land into four lots or less for the purpose of sale, lease, financing, or life estate. 
LOT. A piece of land, other than a road, established or to be established by the land division or subdivision procedures of this chapter and shown on a recorded parcel map or final map. 
OWNER. The individual, firm, partnership, association, trustee, or corporation who or which: 
(1)  Is the fee owner of record of the property to be subdivided; 
(2)  Is the purchaser under an executed contract of sale of the property to be subdivided; or 
(3)  In the case of fractionally-owned fee interests, is the person or agent authorized by all the fee owners to commence and maintain proceedings to subdivide such property under the laws of the state and the provisions of this chapter. 
PANHANDLE LOT. A lot with access to a road by means of an access way having not less than 30 feet of frontage and a minimum width of 30 feet. The length of the panhandle shall be measured from the frontage line to the nearest point of intersection with the nearest property line parallel or most nearly parallel to the frontage line. 
PARCEL. All contiguous land held in one ownership. 
PARCEL MAP. A final map for the division of a parcel(s) of land into four or fewer lots, including lot line adjustments. 
ROAD. Shall mean and include all of the following categories: 
(1)  ARTERIAL. A road connecting local roads and designed for the safe movement of through traffic with intersections at grade but with limited direct access. 
(2)  COLLECTOR. A road usually with no limitations placed on access to abutting properties. A collector may function as a feeder and/or connector between arterial roads. 
(3)  CUL-DE-SAC. A road designed primarily for access to abutting properties and not for general traffic use, having one outlet for vehicles and not designed for extension at a later date. 
(4)  DEAD-END ROAD. Any road having one outlet for vehicular traffic but which may be designed to permit its extension at a later date. 
(5)  MINOR RURAL ROAD. A road designed to carry a minimum amount of traffic and utilizing a narrow right-of-way and pavement width for the purpose of retaining to the greatest extent possible the natural terrain and vegetation and to protect the privacy of the abutting properties. MINOR RURAL ROAD may also include cul-de-sacs and dead-end roads. 
(6)  EXPRESSWAY. A road of general Town or County importance which is a limited access road carrying major traffic through several areas. 
(7)  FREEWAY. A divided arterial highway for through traffic, with direct access to abutting property prohibited, and with fully controlled access at connecting streets. 
SUBDIVIDER. An individual, firm, corporation, partnership, or association who or which proposes to divide(s), or causes to be divided real property into a land division or subdivision for himself, itself, or for others, except that employees and consultants of such persons or entities, acting in such capacity, shall not be subdividers. 
SUBDIVISION. The division into five or more lots, by any subdivider, of any unit(s) of improved or unimproved land, or any portion, shown on the latest equalized County assessment roll as a unit or as contiguous units, for the purpose of sale, lease, financing, or creation of a life estate, whether immediate or future, except for leases of agricultural land for agricultural purposes. Property shall be considered as a contiguous unit, even if it is separated by roads, easements, or rights-of-way. Any conveyance of land to a governmental agency, public entity, or public utility shall not be considered a division of land for the purposes of computing the number of parcels. As used in this section, "agricultural purposes" shall mean the cultivation of food or fiber or the grazing or pasturing of livestock. 
SUBDIVISION MAP ACT. The Subdivision Map Act of the state. 
TENTATIVE MAP. A map describing the existing conditions of the land to be subdivided and the design of the proposed division of land and related improvements for land divisions and subdivisions. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.201) (Ord. 1982-305, effective 4-8-82)  
Sec. 152.006 - General plan; precise plans in conformance with state law. 
(A)  General plan. 
(1)  The adopted general plan shall be used as a guide to the use and development of land within the Town. The design of land divisions and subdivisions shall follow the general plan policy with respect to the type and intensity of land use, lot size and arrangement, and type and extent of roads, utilities, and other public facilities. Consideration shall be given to preserving the privacy and safety of residential areas. The number of intersections on thoroughfares shall be kept to the minimum consistent with the basic needs for ingress and egress, and intersections shall be designed to provide the optimum safety for pedestrians, bicyclists, equestrians, and motorists. Topography and vegetation shall be respected, existing trees shall be preserved where possible, and roads and building locations shall be designed to prevent excessive grading and scarring of the landscape. 
(2)  All subdivision improvements including roads shall be located in the least environmentally sensitive areas in order to be deemed to be in conformity with the general plan. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.104) (Ord. 1982-305, effective 4-8-82; Am. Ord. 1988-367, effective 6-9-88) 
(B)  Precise plans. All divisions of land shall conform with applicable precise plans adopted in conformance with the State Planning Law for the purpose of effectuating the general plan. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.105) (Ord. 1982-305, effective 4-8-82)  
Sec. 152.007 - Conformance with zoning and site development provisions. 
All divisions of land shall conform with the zoning and site development provisions of this Code ; provided, however, where this chapter imposes higher standards than said zoning or site development provisions, the requirements of this chapter shall prevail. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.106) (Ord. 1982-305, effective 4-8-82)  
Sec. 152.008 - Interpretation. 
(A)  In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements, except where they are expressly stated to be maximum requirements. It is not intended to impair or interfere with any private restriction placed upon property by covenant or deed; provided, however, where this chapter imposes greater restrictions upon the subdivision of land than are imposed or required by private restrictions, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail. 
(B)  Whenever requirements are set forth in general terms in this chapter, the details of such requirements may be set forth in policies adopted from time to time by the Planning Commission and/or the Council. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.110) (Ord. 1982-305, effective 4-8-82)  
Sec. 152.009 - Exceptions. 
(A)  Recommendations and findings. The Planning Commission may recommend that the Council authorize exceptions or conditional exceptions to any of the requirements and regulations set forth in this chapter. An application for any exception shall be made by a verified petition of the subdivider stating fully the grounds for the requested exception, together with the supporting statements and documentation. Such petition shall be filed with the tentative map for land divisions and subdivisions. In making its recommendations, the Planning Commission shall consider the following: 
(1)  Because of special circumstances applicable to the property, including size, shape, topography, location, or surroundings, the strict application of this chapter will deprive the applicant of privileges enjoyed by other properties in the vicinity and under the identical zone classification; 
(2)  The exception request will not constitute a grant of special privilege, is consistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and under identical zone classification, and is consistent with the objectives of this chapter; 
(3)  The strict application of this chapter would result in practical difficulty or unnecessary physical hardship which is not of the applicant's own making; 
(4)  The granting of the exception request will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property in the vicinity in which the property is situated; and 
(5)  The granting of the exception will be consistent with the general purposes and objectives of this chapter and of the general plan. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.701) 
(B)  Imposition of conditions. In recommending such exceptions, the Planning Commission may impose such conditions as will secure substantially the objectives of this chapter. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.702) 
(C)  Council action. Upon the receipt of the recommendation from the Planning Commission, the Council, after a public hearing, may approve the map with the exceptions and conditions recommended by the Planning Commission, deny the exceptions, or impose such additional conditions as it deems proper. If the Council approves exceptions to the provisions of this chapter, the Council shall make the findings pursuant to division (A) of this section. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.703) 
(D)  Conditions required. In all cases in which such exceptions are authorized, the Council shall require such evidence or guarantees as it deems necessary to ensure that the conditions required in connection with such exceptions shall be fulfilled to the satisfaction of the Town. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.704) (Ord. 1982-305, effective 4-8-82)  
Sec. 152.010 - Transfers illegal; exceptions. 
No person, firm, or corporation shall contract for the transfer or sale of, sell or offer to sell, lease or offer to lease, or transfer any parcel of land contrary to the provisions of this chapter or the Subdivision Map Act . Any deed of conveyance, sale, contract to sell, or lease made contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be voidable at the sole option of the grantee, buyer, lessor, or person contracting to purchase, or his/her heirs, personal representatives, or trustees in insolvency or bankruptcy, within one year after the date of the execution of the deed of conveyance, sale, or contract to sell, but the deed of conveyance, sale, or contract to sell shall be binding upon any assignee or transferee of the grantee, buyer, or person contracting to purchase other than those above enumerated, and upon the grantor, vendor, or person contracting to sell, or his/her assignee, heir, or devisee. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.905) (Ord. 1982-305, effective 4-8-82) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 152.999.  
Secs. 152.11—152.19 - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - GENERAL SUBDIVISION PROCEDURES 
 
Sec. 152.020 - Compliance required. 
Every person desiring to divide a parcel of land within the Town into two or more lots or parcels or combine lots or adjust property lines shall follow the procedures set forth in this chapter. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.300) (Ord. 1982-305, effective 4-8-82)  
Sec. 152.021 - Lot line adjustments. 
(A)  The procedures set forth in this section applicable to lot line adjustments shall apply to lot line adjustments between four or fewer existing adjoining parcels, where the land taken from one parcel is added to an adjoining parcel, and where a greater number of parcels than originally existed is not created. 
(B)  Applications, maps, and required information. The owners or transferees, or their authorized representative, shall file an application with the Planning Director on a form prescribed by the Planning Commission for such purpose. The application shall be accompanied by: 
(1)  Seven copies of a scale map prepared by a registered civil engineer or licensed surveyor containing the following information: 
(a)  The names and addresses of the record owners of the land; 
(b)  The north point, scale, and date of preparation; 
(c)  The boundaries of the land, the existing and proposed lot lines, and the approximate dimensions of proposed lots and areas to the nearest one-tenth of an acre; 
(d)  The existing contours expressed in intervals in the range of one foot to ten feet to produce one contour line at least every 50 feet. The contour interval shall be uniform for the entire map. The source of the topographical information shall be stated; 
(e)  The names and locations of abutting roads and nearest cross streets; 
(f)  The locations of existing buildings, driveways, septic tank drainfields, watercourses, easements, and relevant setbacks; and 
(g)  A key map clearly defining the location of the property with respect to surrounding roads; 
(2)  A report from a title company, dated within the last six months, giving the names of record owners and all easements and reservations of record affecting the land; and 
(3)  The prescribed fee, completed application form, and deposit. 
(C)  Planning Commission review. The Planning Commission shall examine the application for lot line adjustment, and approve the lot line adjustment only if it makes a finding that the lot line adjustment will conform to the General Plan, the Zoning Code and the Building Codes. The Planning Commission may condition its approval in order for the lot line adjustment to conform to the General Plan, the Zoning Code and the Building Codes, or to facilitate the relocation of existing utilities, infrastructure or easements. No tentative map, parcel map or final map shall be required as a condition of approval. 
(D)  Notification. Notice of the approval or disapproval shall be given to the applicants or their authorized representatives in writing. A record of the Planning Commission action shall be certified on the map, and copies shall be furnished to the applicants, the Town Engineer, Town Planner, and Fire Chief, and one copy of the map and the reports thereon shall remain in the permanent files of the Town. 
(E)  Deeds or parcel maps. Within one year after the approval of the preliminary map, the applicant shall cause a deed or parcel map to be prepared, as set forth in the Subdivision Map Act , and filed with the Town Engineer. The deed or parcel map shall be recorded by the Town Clerk with the County Recorder. 
(F)  Extensions of time. An extension of time, not to exceed one year, for recording the deed or parcel map may be granted by the Planning Director. Applications shall be submitted in writing to the Planning Director at least 30 days prior to the expiration. 
(G)  Denial of building permits. No building permit will be issued for any lot created pursuant to the procedure set forth in this section until the required deed or parcel map has been recorded. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.301) (Ord. 1982-305, effective 4-8-82; Am. Ord. 1987-345, effective 7-9-87; Am. Ord. 2004-524, effective 5-13-04) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 152.999.  
Sec. 152.022 - Land divisions and subdivisions. 
The procedures set forth in this section shall be applicable to any division of land which results in the creation of any additional building site. All land divisions and subdivisions shall meet the prescribed standards of this chapter, and any improvements and dedications needed to meet such standards shall be provided by the subdivider as a condition precedent to the approval of the land division or subdivision. 
(A)  Applications, concept maps, and required information. 
(1)  Prior to filing an application for a land division or subdivision, the subdivider or his/her representative shall consult with the Planning Director and obtain a check list of the requirements necessary for an adequate review of the proposed land division or subdivision. Following the consultation, the subdivider shall file a formal application with the Planning Director on a form prescribed for such purpose. The application shall be accompanied by: 
(a)  Twelve copies of a concept map prepared by a land planner, registered architect, landscape architect, civil engineer, or licensed land surveyor showing the information set forth in Section 152.050 of this chapter; 
(b)  A title report from a title company, dated within the last six months, giving the name of the record owners and all easements and reservations of record affecting the land; 
(c)  An outline of the geotechnical report pursuant to Section 152.077 of this chapter; and 
(d)  The required fee, completed application form, and deposit. 
(2)  The environmental documents required by CEQA shall not be prepared until the tentative map is submitted and the application is determined to be complete pursuant to Section 152.051 of this chapter. 
(3)  The subdivider shall be notified in writing of the completeness of the application within 30 days after the receipt of the application and concept map. Such notification of completeness shall not constitute the notification of completeness pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code § 65943. 
(B)  Conferences on concept maps. 
(1)  The Planning Director shall transmit copies of the concept map and accompanying data to the members of the Subdivision Review Committee and to the chairmen of the Town Trails Committee, Town Conservation Committee, Architectural and Site Review Board, and other appropriate committees and shall schedule a meeting of the Subdivision Review Committee and the subdivider within 21 days after the application is determined by the Town to be adequate for the review process. 
(2)  The Subdivision Review Committee, taking into consideration the provisions of this chapter, shall make such general recommendations to the subdivider as seem appropriate and shall recommend consultations with such other public and private agencies which may be interested in the proposed subdivision. 
(3)  A written report of the evaluation of the Subdivision Review Committee and recommendations shall be transmitted to the subdivider within 21 days following the conference on the concept map. Based upon such evaluation and the recommendations of the Town committees and the Architectural and Site Review Board, the subdivider shall prepare a tentative map pursuant to Section 152.051 of this chapter. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.302) (Ord. 1982-305, effective 4-8-82)  
Sec. 152.023 - Tentative maps; preparation and filing data. 
(A)  Subsequent to the receipt of the report from the Subdivision Review Committee on the concept map, a person desiring to proceed with the subdivision of property shall cause a tentative map to be prepared in accordance with the provisions of Section 152.051 of this chapter. Fourteen copies of the map, accompanied by the required statements, materials, fee, and deposit, shall be submitted to the Planning Director. 
(B)  The Planning Director shall refer the tentative map and accompanying data, pursuant to Section 152.054 of this chapter, to the Subdivision Review Committee to review with regard to completeness and adequacy of information as required by this chapter. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.303) (Ord. 1982-305, effective 4-8-82)  
Sec. 152.024 - Initial studies and environmental assessment. 
(A)  For subdivisions and land divisions, an initial study as required by CEQA shall be prepared by the Town. The initial study shall be completed within 30 days after the Town determines that the tentative map is adequate for review. 
(B)  If required by the Planning Director, an environmental assessment containing an inventory of the parcel's physical resources, public facilities, and applicable public policies and laws shall be prepared by the Town. 
(C)  If an EIR or a negative declaration is required pursuant to CEQA, the Town shall deem an application for a project not complete and received for filing under the state permit statute until such time as the environmental documentation required by CEQA has been completed. 
(D)  If the land division or subdivision requires a variance to the zoning provisions, the applicant shall complete an application for such variance, pay the required fees and deposits, and submit the required information pursuant to the Zoning Code. The application for the variance shall accompany the land division or subdivision application. If exceptions to this chapter are requested, such requests should be clearly described and justified on the appropriate application form for a land division or subdivision pursuant to Section 152.009 of this chapter. 
(E)  Applications for all subdivisions shall include a natural land features study consisting of: 
(1)  Slope features, including a certification of topographic data; 
(2)  Biological inventory; 
(3)  Geotechnical features; 
(4)  Noise exposure; 
(5)  Off-site visual impacts; 
(6)  Drainage; 
(7)  Grading; 
(8)  Off-site cumulative impacts assessment; 
(9)  Septic system feasibility analysis. 
(F)  The natural land features study shall be presented in a form that allows the Town to identify the most and least environmentally sensitive areas. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.304) (Ord. 1982-305, effective 4-8-82; Am. Ord. 1988-367, effective 6-8-88)  
Sec. 152.025 - Conferences on tentative maps. 
(A)  If the application and tentative map are found to be in accordance with this chapter, the Planning Director, within five working days, shall transmit copies of the application to the members of the Subdivision Review Committee, the chairman of the Town Trails Committee, Architectural and Site Review Board, Town Conservation Committee, Town Open Space Committee, and other appropriate committees, and to the public agencies and utility companies designated by the Planning Director and Town Engineer. A meeting of the Subdivision Review Committee and the subdivider shall be scheduled within 21 days after the application and tentative map have been transmitted, and the subdivider shall be so notified. All public officials, committee members, public agencies, and utility companies to whom the tentative map was transmitted shall be requested to submit to the Planning Director a written report of their findings and recommendations on the tentative map, prior to the scheduled meeting of the Subdivision Review Committee. 
(B)  At the meeting, the Subdivision Review Committee shall hear the reports and recommendations submitted and the comments and opinions of the subdivider and his/her representatives. After giving due consideration to such reports, recommendations, and comments, the Subdivision Review Committee shall prepare its findings and recommendations and transmit its written report through the Planning Director to the Planning Commission and subdivider not more than 21 days following the meeting. The report shall describe wherein the proposed land division or subdivision does or does not conform with the requirements of this chapter and shall contain an evaluation of the need for any variance and/or exception to the requirements of this Code and chapter and a preliminary list of conditions and concerns. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.305) (Ord. 1982-305, effective 4-8-82; Am. Ord. 2005-528, effective 11-24-05)  
Sec. 152.026 - Hearings; notices. 
If the tentative map is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, CEQA, and the Subdivision Map Act , the Planning Director shall find the tentative map to be complete, accept it for filing, and set the matter for a public hearing at a regular meeting of the Planning Commission within 50 days after certification. At least ten days prior to the Planning Commission meeting at which the public hearing is to be held, the Planning Director shall cause notices of the time and place of such hearing to be given in accordance with the provisions of Section 66451.3 of the Subdivision Map Act . Such notice shall be given either by publication once in a newspaper of general circulation printed and published in the County and circulated in the Town or by posting the notice in at least three public places in the Town. The notice shall include a general description and location of the proposed land division or subdivision. The notice shall be sent to all property owners within the following distances from the perimeter property lines: 
(A)  Three hundred feet when the application is for a lot line adjustment; 
(B)  Four hundred feet when the land division or subdivision is located in a zoning district requiring a minimum parcel area of one acre or less; or 
(C)  Six hundred feet when the land division or subdivision is located in a zoning district requiring a minimum parcel area of three acres or more. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.306) (Ord. 1982-305, effective 4-8-82)  
Sec. 152.027 - Planning Commission action. 
(A)  If an Environmental Impact Report (EIR) has been prepared, the Planning Commission shall first hold a public hearing on the EIR to determine if it is adequate and complete. After the final EIR has been certified as adequate and complete, the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the tentative map, review the report and recommendations of the Subdivision Review Committee, hear the comments and opinions of the subdivider and his/her engineer and other interested persons, and act on the tentative map within 50 days after the EIR has been certified as complete, unless such time limit is extended by agreement with the subdivider. At the discretion of the Planning Director, public hearings on the EIR and the project may be scheduled for the same meeting. 
(B)  The Planning Commission shall determine whether the tentative map is in compliance with the policies and requirements of the general plan, zoning provisions, site development provisions, Subdivision Map Act , and this chapter in accordance with the findings set forth in this section and, upon such basis, shall approve, disapprove, or conditionally approve the tentative map. 
(C)  In the case of conditional approval, the Planning Commission shall require such changes as are necessary to secure compliance with the applicable Town laws, unless specific exceptions to their provisions are recommended to the Council for approval pursuant to Section 152.009 of this chapter. 
(D)  Specifically, the Planning Commission shall consider the following before approving, conditionally approving, or disapproving the proposed tentative map for any land division or subdivision: 
(1)  The environmental review documents; 
(2)  The report, findings, and recommendations of the Subdivision Review Committee; 
(3)  The report and recommendations of relevant Town advisory committees; 
(4)  Consistency with the general plan and the zoning and site development provisions; 
(5)  Applications or requirements for variances or exceptions, if any; 
(6)  Staff reports; 
(7)  Public testimony; and 
(8)  The testimony of the subdivider and/or his/her authorized representatives. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.307) (Ord. 1982-305, effective 4-8-82)  
Sec. 152.028 - Certain findings to prevent approval of tentative map. 
The Planning Commission shall not approve a tentative map if the Planning Commission makes any of the following specific findings: 
(A)  The proposed map is not consistent with the general plan and applicable specific plans; 
(B)  The design or improvement of the proposed land division or subdivision is not consistent with the general plan and applicable specific plans; 
(C)  The site is not physically suitable for the type of development proposed; 
(D)  The site is not physically suitable for the proposed density of development; 
(E)  The design of the land division or subdivision or the proposed improvements are likely to cause substantial environmental damage or substantially and avoidably injure fish or wildlife or their habitat; 
(F)  The design of the land division or subdivision or the type of improvements is likely to cause serious public health or safety problems; 
(G)  The design of the land division or subdivision or the type of improvements will conflict with easements, acquired by the public at large, for access through or the use of property within the proposed land division or subdivision. In this connection, the Planning Commission may approve a tentative map if the Planning Commission finds that alternate easements, for access or for use, will be provided and that they will be substantially equivalent to easements previously acquired by the public. This division shall apply only to easements of record or to easements established by judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction, and no authority is hereby granted to a legislative body to determine that the public at large has acquired easements for access through or the use of property within the proposed land division or subdivision; or 
(H)  The discharge of waste from the proposed land division or subdivision into an existing sewer system would result in a violation of existing requirements prescribed by the State Regional Water Quality Control Board pursuant to Division 7 (commencing with Section 13000) of the Cal. Water Code. In the event the Planning Commission finds that the proposed waste discharge would result in or add to violations of the requirements of said Board, the Planning Commission may disapprove the tentative map for the land division or subdivision. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.308) (Ord. 1982-305, effective 4-8-82)  
Sec. 152.029 - Referral to Council. 
In the case of the approval or conditional approval of a tentative map for a subdivision by the Planning Commission, the approved map and the record of the Planning Commission action shall be transmitted to the Town Clerk to be set for the next available public hearing of the Council in accordance with the provisions of Section 152.009 of this chapter. Referral to the Council shall not be necessary for a tentative map for a land division, except in the case of an exception request or dedications of rights-of-way, easements, or road maintenance agreements. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.309) (Ord. 1982-305, effective 4-8-82)  
Sec. 152.030 - Notification. 
Notice of the approval, disapproval, or conditional approval of any tentative map by the Planning Commission shall be transmitted to the subdivider in writing within ten days following action. A record of the action of the Planning Commission, and that of the Council, if action is required, shall be certified on the tentative map, and copies shall be furnished to the subdivider, Town Engineer, Fire Chief, and appropriate Town committees. One certified copy of the tentative map and the associated reports shall remain in the permanent files of the Town. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.310) (Ord. 1982-305, effective 4-8-82)  
Sec. 152.031 - Revision to approved tentative maps. 
(A)  Any revision to an approved tentative map shall comply with the requirements in effect at the time such revision is considered by the Planning Commission. The revised tentative map shall show all of the information and requirements set forth in this chapter insofar as any change which may have been made. The approval or conditional approval of the Planning Commission of any revised tentative map shall supersede previous decisions only to the extent of the changes under consideration. 
(B)  If the subdivider initiates a substantially revised tentative map as determined by the Planning Director, the subdivider shall pay the fees and deposits established by the Town for map revisions. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.311) (Ord. 1982-305, effective 4-8-82)  
Sec. 152.032 - Changes in essential information. 
When any change is made by the subdivider in statements appearing on or submitted with a tentative map, such change shall be submitted to the Planning Commission in writing and approved by it prior to the recordation of the parcel map or final map. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.312) (Ord. 1982-305, effective 4-8-82)  
Sec. 152.033 - Withdrawal of maps. 
Any subdivider or record owner of property upon which a concept or tentative map has been filed may withdraw such map at any time prior to action by the Planning Commission. Notice of the intent to withdraw shall be made to the Planning Director in writing. Upon the receipt of the notice, the Planning Director shall notify each official, public or private agency, or utility company from whom or which a report was requested. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.313) (Ord. 1982-305, effective 4-8-82)  
Sec. 152.034 - Preparation and filing of parcel maps, and final maps. 
(A)  Within 24 months after the approval or conditional approval of a tentative map, the subdivider may cause the land division or subdivision, or any part thereof, to be surveyed and a parcel map or final map to be prepared and recorded in accordance with the requirements set forth in Sections 152.090 through 152.094 and 152.096(A) of this chapter. The parcel map or final map shall be recorded by the Town Clerk. 
(B)  One or more extensions of time, not to exceed a total of 12 months, for recording the parcel map or final map may be granted by the Planning Commission. Applications for extensions shall be submitted in writing to the Planning Commission at least 30 days prior to the expiration of the tentative map. The subdivider shall pay the prescribed fee for processing requests for time extensions. 
(C)  In the event a land division or subdivision or building, water, or sewer moratorium is established by the Council, that portion of the 12-month period remaining at the time the moratorium was imposed shall be available to the subdivider. However, if the remaining time is less than 120 days, the map shall be valid for 120 days following the termination of the moratorium. 
(D)  Failure to present a parcel map or final map to the Town Clerk for recording within the time limits allowed shall terminate all proceedings. Before a parcel map or final map may thereafter be recorded, a new tentative map shall be submitted and approved. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.314) (Ord. 1982-305, effective 4-8-82)  
Sec. 152.035 - Approval, acceptance, and recording of parcel maps and final maps. 
(A)  The procedures set forth in Sections 152.090 through 152.094 of this chapter shall govern the form of the parcel map or final map, the information and certificates to be shown thereon, the survey requirements, the procedures to be followed in securing approval by the Town Engineer and Planning Commission, the acceptance of the map, the dedications, and the recording of the map. 
(B)  The provisions of Section 152.080 of this chapter shall govern the installation of the improvements required and the acceptance of an improvement agreement with the Town. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.315) (Ord. 1982-305, effective 4-8-82)  
Sec. 152.036 - Denial of building permits. 
No building permit will be issued for any lot created under the procedures set forth in this chapter until the parcel map or final map has been recorded and the required improvements have been completed in accordance with adopted Town policy. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.316) (Ord. 1982-305, effective 4-8-82) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 152.999.  
Sec. 152.037 - Reversions to acreage. 
(A)  Initiation of proceedings. Proceedings to revert subdivided property to acreage may be initiated by a petition of all of the owners of record of the subject lots, or they may be initiated by the Council upon the recommendation of the Planning Commission, on its own motion, or upon instructions from a court of law. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.317) 
(B)  Form of petitions. A petition for a reversion to acreage shall contain the following: 
(1)  Adequate evidence of title to the real property within the land division or subdivision; 
(2)  Evidence of the consent of all of the owners with a record title interest in the subject property or a court order; 
(3)  Evidence that none of the improvements required to be made has been made within two years after the date the parcel map or final map was filed for record or within the time allowed by agreement for the completion of the improvements, whichever is later; 
(4)  Evidence that no lots shown on the parcel map or final map have been sold within five years after the date such parcel map or final map was filed for record; and 
(5)  A parcel map or final map which delineates dedications which will not be vacated and dedications which are a condition to reversion. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.318) 
(C)  Fees. The Council may establish a fee for processing reversions to acreage in an amount which will reimburse the Town for all costs incurred in processing. Such fee shall be paid by the owners at the time of filing the petition for the reversion to acreage. If the proceedings for the reversion to acreage are initiated by the Council, the fee shall be paid by the persons requesting the Council to proceed pursuant to Article I of Chapter 6 of the Subdivision Map Act . 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.319) 
(D)  Hearings. Separate public hearings shall be held by the Planning Commission and Council on the proposed reversion to acreage. Notice shall be given in the time and manner provided in Section 152.026 of this subchapter. The Council may approve a reversion to acreage subject to the provisions of Section 66499.16 of the Subdivision Map Act . A reversion to acreage and a tentative map may be considered at the same public hearing. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.320) 
(E)  Release of securities and delivery of parcel map or final map. After the hearing before the Council and the approval of the reversion to acreage, the parcel map or final map shall be delivered to the County Recorder. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.321) 
(F)  Effect of filing reversion maps with the County Recorder. Reversions to acreage shall be effective upon the parcel map or final map being filed for record by the County Recorder. Upon filing, all dedications and offers of dedication not shown on the parcel map or final map for reversion shall be of no further force and effect. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.322) (Ord. 1982-305, effective 4-8-82)  
Secs. 152.38—152.49 - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - REQUIREMENTS FOR CONCEPT AND TENTATIVE MAPS 
 
Sec. 152.050 - Concept maps. 
A concept map shall be a conceptual sketch plan. In addition to the following requirements of divisions (A) through (N) of this section, a concept map shall contain any other items deemed necessary by the Planning Director to describe the essential features of the property and the proposed uses and development: 
(A)  Major natural features, for example, streams, trees, earthquake faults, solar considerations, and the like; 
(B)  The topographic contours and sources of contour information; 
(C)  A rough lot layout, including the approximate lot size; 
(D)  The vehicular access, including approximate proposed road and driveway grades; 
(E)  The existing and proposed equestrian and hiking trails and pedestrian and bicycle paths; 
(F)  The location of all existing and proposed utilities and easements; 
(G)  The location of existing structures and buildings, including structures of historical significance; 
(H)  The location of existing and proposed building sites and driveways; 
(I)  The existing and proposed conservation easements and public areas; 
(J)  The name and address of the map preparer, owners, and subdivider; 
(K)  The scale, north point, and date of preparation; 
(L)  A key map clearly defining the location of the property with respect to surrounding roads; 
(M)  An outline of the proposed geotechnical report; and 
(N)  A report on the adequacy of the utilities to the proposed land division or subdivision: 
(O)  Natural land features study pursuant to Section 152.024 of this chapter for land divisions and subdivisions located within Town and state scenic corridors; and 
(P)  Location of proposed septic drain fields, and septic drainfield expansion areas. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.401) (Ord. 1982-305, effective 4-8-82; Am. Ord. 1988-367, effective 6-9-88)  
Sec. 152.051 - Tentative maps. 
A tentative map submitted for the purpose of dividing land into separate lots or parcels, in accordance with this section, shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor and shall contain or be accompanied by the information set forth in divisions (A) through (U) of this section. The tentative map shall be in full compliance with the requirements of this chapter and shall clearly show all details of the proposed land division or subdivision. The tentative map shall show the entire proposed development on one sheet, and to a scale of one inch equals 50 feet, unless the Town Engineer or Planning Director has indicated that a larger or smaller scale will facilitate review by the Town. 
(A)  The subdivision name and number; 
(B)  The date of preparation and space for future revision dates and the north point, scale, and key map; 
(C)  The name, address, and telephone number of the individual who prepared the map and the registration or license number of the engineer or surveyor (signed and sealed); 
(D)  The names, addresses, and telephone numbers of the record owner and subdivider; 
(E)  The subdivision boundaries and acreage to the nearest one-tenth of an acre. Town boundaries shall be indicated if they abut the proposed land division or subdivision; 
(F)  The locations, names, and right-of-way and pavement widths of adjacent roads and easements and the location and size of the existing drainage facilities; 
(G)  All major natural features, such as streams, rock outcrops, vegetation, earthquake faults, and the like; 
(H)  The names and numbers of adjacent land divisions or subdivisions, showing the lot and block or assessor's parcel numbers of the adjoining lots and the names of the owners and parcel numbers of all adjacent lands; 
(I)  The location and an outline to scale of each existing building, structure, septic tank, and drainfield, noting whether or not it is to remain. The distances between all buildings and proposed property lines shall be shown; 
(J)  The location of the official plan lines and proposed roads or highways in accordance with the general plan and adopted policy of the Town; 
(K)  The location, proposed name, right-of-way and pavement widths, center line radii, and approximate grade of each proposed road within the land division or subdivision, together with profiles and the location, size, and grade of all proposed drainage facilities; 
(L)  The existing and proposed public utility easements and their location and width; 
(M)  The existing and proposed equestrian and hiking trails and pedestrian and bicycle paths within the land division or subdivision and their location and width and the areas proposed for public use, conservation, open space, and scenic easements; 
(N)  The location and size of existing and proposed sanitary sewers, fire hydrants, gas and water lines, and power, telephone, and other public utilities. The subdivider shall investigate with each required utility entity the scope of work required to serve the land division or subdivision, and the results of the investigation shall be submitted in writing with the tentative map. If sewage disposal is to be by septic tank and drainfield, the approximate locations of the drainfields, with 100 percent of the expansion area, shall be shown, as well as the locations of the percolation test holes and a copy of the test results; 
(O)  The location of areas subject to inundation or stormwater overflow and of all areas covered by water and the location, width, and direction of flow of all watercourses; 
(P)  The existing contours in the range of ten- foot intervals to a one-foot interval to produce one contour at least every 50 feet. The source of the topographical information shall be stated. The contour interval shall be uniform for the entire map. If grading is proposed, the finished grades shall be clearly shown and supplementary cross sections showing the completed elevations of excavations and fills shall be provided. The quantity in cubic yards of cut and fill shall be stated. All grading shall be in conformance with the Town's zoning and site development provisions; 
(Q)  The outlines of groves and orchards and approximate location of all individual trees having a trunk circumference of 20 inches or greater (measured four feet about the ground level). Individual trees shall be shown within all areas where roads, driveways, utility easements, pathways, or buildings will occur. An approximate tree loss count shall be provided; 
(R)  The lot lines, approximate dimensions of all lots, and the areas of each lot given to the nearest one-tenth of an acre; 
(S)  All lots shall be numbered consecutively throughout the entire land division or subdivision; 
(T)  A blank space of at least 90 square inches in area suitable in shape for certificates, conditions, approvals, and other similar matters; and 
(U)  For each proposed lot, the subdivider shall show either on the tentative map or on a development plan the outline, to scale, of a conforming building site and drainfield and the location and grade of the driveway. The development plan, as approved by the Planning Commission, shall become a part of the approved tentative map. The purpose of this procedure is to provide assurance that at least one conforming and adequate building site and driveway are available within each lot within the land division or subdivision. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.402) (Ord. 1982-305, effective 4-8-82)  
Sec. 152.052 - Supplementary maps. 
In the event lots are created which are a minimum of twice the required net lot area for the zoning district, a supplementary map shall be submitted showing possible or proposed future lot lines, roads, utilities, and the like satisfactorily to demonstrate that a resubdivision may occur in compliance with the requirements of this chapter, the general plan and the zoning provisions without interfering with the orderly extensions of roads, utilities, trails, and the like. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.403) (Ord. 1982-305, effective 4-8-82)  
Sec. 152.053 - Statements and materials to accompany tentative maps. 
The following statements and materials shall accompany tentative maps: 
(A)  A map showing the location of the proposed land division or subdivision and surrounding subdivisions and roads located within a ¼-mile radius of the boundaries of the proposed land division or subdivision; 
(B)  Profiles drawn to scale to show clearly all details, showing center lines and the existing ground and finished grade elevations of all roads, paths, trails, sanitary sewers, and storm drains in the subdivision. Profiles other than center line shall be shown if requested by the Town Engineer. All elevations shall be indicated to the nearest one foot and shall be referred to the mean sea level datum as established by the United States Coast and Geodetic Survey or to elevations or bench marks as established by the Town Engineer; 
(C)  Typical cross sections of all roads and, when required, details of berms, gutters, paths, trails, and other improvements drawn to scale to show clearly all details; 
(D)  The existing and proposed uses of the land, with a statement of the respective proportions of the total area of the land division or subdivision represented by each proposed use; 
(E)  The source and adequacy of the water supply verified in writing by the supplier; 
(F)  The method of sewage disposal and soil percolation test results for lots to be served by septic tank systems. The tests shall have been conducted in accordance with the instructions and to the specifications of the Health Officer; 
(G)  A statement of the proposed tree and other planting, including erosion control planting; 
(H)  A statement of the improvements proposed to be made or installed by the subdivider; 
(I)  A statement of the improvements to be made by private utility companies or public agencies, with letters from such compares or agencies confirming their agreements to make such improvements and their evaluations of the adequacy of the rights-of-way or easements proposed; 
(J)  The proposed deed restrictions or covenants; 
(K)  The geotechnical report as prescribed by Section 152.077 of this chapter; 
(L)  Such other information as may be required by the Planning Commission; and 
(M)  Natural land features study pursuant to Section 152.024 of this chapter for land divisions and subdivisions located within Town and state scenic corridors. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.404) (Ord. 1982-305, effective 4-8-82; Am. Ord. 1988-367, effective 6-9-88)  
Sec. 152.054 - Subdivision Review Committee reports. 
In its review of tentative maps for land divisions and subdivisions, the members of the Subdivision Review Committee shall individually report in writing through the Planning Director to the Planning Commission their findings and recommendations with respect to the following matters under their jurisdiction: 
(A)  The Planning Director shall report on: 
(1)  The conformance of the proposed land division or subdivision with the general plan and any relevant precise plan which has been adopted by the Town; 
(2)  The environmental review documents; 
(3)  The conformance of the proposed land division or subdivision to the zoning regulations for the district in which the land division or subdivision is located; 
(4)  The adequacy of the proposed building sites and driveway layout; 
(5)  The lot design, traffic circulation, and other features relative to the design standards of this chapter, adopted Town policies, and developments on properties in the general area of the proposed land division or subdivision; 
(6)  The numbering of the lots; 
(7)  The land division or subdivision name and the road names proposed; 
(8)  The adequacy of the proposed easements for hiking and equestrian trails and pedestrian and bicycle paths; 
(9)  The adequacy of the proposed areas to be dedicated for public use, conservation, scenic, and open space easements; 
(10)  The visual and/or aesthetic impacts; 
(11)  The solar access; and 
(12)  The historical significance of buildings or sites. 
(B)  The Town Engineer shall report on the civil engineering aspects of the following: 
(1)  The adequacy of the right-of-way and pavement widths, type of pavement, and condition of existing roads affected by the land division or subdivision; 
(2)  The adequacy of the proposed roads for motorized or non-motorized vehicles within the land division or subdivision; 
(3)  The adequacy of the existing and proposed trails and paths; 
(4)  The adequacy of the easements proposed for public improvements, utilities, and drainage facilities; 
(5)  The availability of the necessary utilities, including the method of connection; 
(6)  The adequacy of the proposed methods for handling drainage and stormwater runoff and the effect on drainage in the general area; 
(7)  The effect of the proposed grading and the adequacy of proposed erosion control measures during and after grading; 
(8)  The evaluation of proposed driveways to individual lots; 
(9)  The effects of the proposed land division or subdivision on other public improvements within the jurisdiction of the Town Engineer; and 
(10)  The evaluation of the geotechnical report with respect to proposed building sites, roads, and storm drainage. 
(C)  The Town Geologist shall report on: 
(1)  The evaluation of the geotechnical report; and 
(2)  All relevant geological considerations with respect to the individual lots and improvements within the land division or subdivision and any potential geological impact on surrounding properties and public or private improvements. 
(D)  The Fire Chief shall report on: 
(1)  The adequacy of the water supply for fire protection purposes; 
(2)  The location of the fire hydrants and the adequacy thereof; 
(3)  The adequacy of access for emergency vehicles; and 
(4)  Other matters affecting fire safety and fire protection, including any temporary fire protection measures needed during the development of the land division or subdivision. 
(E)  The Health Officer shall report on: 
(1)  The adequacy of the water supply for domestic purposes; 
(2)  The adequacy of the proposed sewage disposal system; and 
(3)  Other matters related to the proposed land division or subdivision which may affect the public health. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.405) (Ord. 1982-305, effective 4-8-82)  
Sec. 152.055 - Reports of Town Trails Committee and Architectural and Site Review Board. 
(A)  Town Trails Committee. The chairperson of the Town Trails Committee shall report in writing with respect to the adequacy of the proposed roads, trails, and paths for hiking, bicycling, pedestrian, and equestrian use through and adjacent to the land division or subdivision and recommend with respect to their locations, widths, and improvements. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.406) 
(B)  Architectural and Site Review Board. The Architectural and Site Review Board, in accordance with the Zoning Code, shall review all land division and subdivision applications. The Board shall be advisory to the Planning Director and shall report to the Planning Commission through the Planning Director with respect to: 
(1)  The visual aesthetics of the proposed land division or subdivision and the aesthetic relationship between the subdivision and the surrounding area; 
(2)  The grading and drainage design; 
(3)  The trees and other vegetation proposed to be planted or to be removed; 
(4)  The solar access for all structures; and 
(5)  The designation of any building site or lot which will require special review when building permits or grading permits are requested. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.407) (Ord. 1982-305, effective 4-8-82)  
Secs. 152.56—152.64 - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS AND STANDARDS OF DESIGN 
 
Sec. 152.065 - Compliance with requirements. 
All lots and improvements created under this chapter shall meet the minimum requirements set forth in this subchapter. If the Planning Commission finds that a greater or lesser standard proposed by the subdivider would be in the public interest, the Planning Commission may approve such modification to the design standards set forth in this subchapter. The burden of proof as to whether the public interest would be so served by the modification shall rest entirely with the subdivider. Until such time as the Town adopts standard specifications and details, improvements shall conform to this chapter or the Department of Transportation, Standard Specifications (January, 1978 or a more recent edition). 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.500) (Ord. 1982-305, effective 4-8-82)  
Sec. 152.066 - Lots. 
All lots created in accordance with this chapter shall conform to the zoning regulations effective in the district in which the land division or subdivision is located, or such modifications of the lot area and dimensions as may have been approved as part of a variance pursuant to the Zoning Code. 
(A)  Lot sizes. 
(1)  The building limitations table set forth in the Zoning Code specifies the minimum net area of a lot, but lots larger than such minimum area may be required by the Planning Commission when necessary to accommodate topography, geologic hazards, stormwater drainage channels, physical obstructions, or other physical conditions. (See Zoning Code to determine the number of lots and amount of area to remain in a natural state for parcels or lots which exceed 15 percent average ground slope). 
(2)  The net area of a lot shall not include access easements, random public utility or drainage easements (not adjacent to the property line), or the panhandle area in excess of five percent of the net lot area required in the particular zoning district. 
(B)  Lot design. All divisions of land shall result in the creation of lots which are capable of being developed or built upon with minimal changes in the natural physical configuration of the site. No lots shall be created which are impractical for improvements or use due to steepness of terrain, location of watercourses, size, shape, periodic flooding or earth movement, or other physical conditions. 
(C)  Lot shape. 
(1)  The average depth of any lot shall not exceed three times its average width, unless the average width is more than 200 feet. All lots created shall contain at a minimum an area of circular or rectangular shape within the required building setback lines equal to the building coverage area permitted in the zoning district. Lot lines shall be free of excessive jogs in alignment, except where existing physical conditions and established property lines preclude the establishment of straight property boundaries. Lot shapes shall not be designed for the sole purpose of achieving the minimum lot area. 
(2)  Panhandle lots shall be permitted only when the Planning Commission determines that they would result in better design of the development. The subdivider shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Planning Commission that, because of unusual physical characteristics, such as topography, a land division or subdivision would be infeasible without the creation of one or more panhandle lots. 
(D)  Lot lines. The lot lines shall be located to yield the best building sites and, where possible, the lot lines shall be at right angles or radial to the road right-of-way lines. 
(E)  Solar access. Consideration of optimum solar orientation for energy conservation shall be given in lot location, design, placement of structures, vegetative removal, and landscaping. 
(F)  Access. 
(1)  All lots created shall have access to a public road or a private road meeting the minimum requirements of this chapter for pavement and right-of-way widths and improved in accordance with the standards for public improvements set forth in this chapter. 
(2)  No lot shall be divided by a road, driveway, or access easement, except where located adjacent to a conservation easement or open space easement extending from the road, driveway, or access easement to the property line. 
(3)  A maximum of two lots may be served by a common driveway when, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, the use of a common driveway will result in reduced adverse physical impacts. 
(G)  Drainage. All lots shall have the necessary slope to drain water away from the building site at a grade of not less than two percent. Whenever the natural drainage is changed, the storm water shall be conveyed to the road, drain, or natural watercourses. Lots shall be designed so that the 100-year floodplain and the stream corridor protection standards contained in the Zoning Code do not interfere with the normal use of any lot. 
(H)  Non-access dedications. All lots shall take access from one road only, and such road shall be the road carrying the least amount of traffic. In the case of corner lots or double frontage lots, one road frontage shall be dedicated to the Town to prevent access. 
(I)  Remnant lots. 
(1)  No parcel of land or lot which is substandard in size and shape shall be created by any land division or subdivision, unless such parcel is required strictly for public or private utilities, approved access purposes, or other approved public uses. 
(2)  No lot shall be split by a Town or County boundary. 
(J)  Noise considerations. All land divisions and subdivisions incorporate into their design noise abatement improvements to render all lots in conformity with the noise element of the general plan. Maximum ambient noise exposure at exterior use areas, such as patios, decks, and tennis courts, shall be no greater than 55 dBA/Ldn. 
(K)  Building sites and related improvements on lots shall be located in areas identified by the Town as least environmentally sensitive as a result of the natural land features study under Section 152.024 of this chapter. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.501) (Ord. 1982-305, effective 4-8-82; Am. Ord. 1988-367, effective 6-9-88) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 152.999.  
Sec. 152.067 - Road pattern. 
(A)  The road pattern in the land division or subdivision shall be in conformity with the circulation element of the general plan and shall be designed to take into consideration the potential development of adjoining areas. 
(B)  The road pattern employed in the land division or subdivision shall conform to recognized traffic engineering practices while limiting the number and the expanse of roads to a minimum. Great care shall be exercised to create curvilinear roads which blend and harmonize with the natural surroundings. Aesthetics and safety shall be considered. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.502) (Ord. 1982-305, effective 4-8-82)  
Sec. 152.068 - Road design. 
The following minimum criteria shall be followed in road design: 
(A)  (1)  The alignment of roads shall be continuous with existing roads. At intersections, the centerlines of roads not in alignment shall be offset a minimum of 250 feet. 
(2)  Private roads shall be permitted only when an agreement satisfactory to the Town Engineer and Town Attorney is filed guaranteeing perpetual maintenance and permitting the Town to compel maintenance adequate to ensure public safety. 
(B)  Centerlines of roads shall intersect at right angles, except in cases of topographical difficulty, the last 300 feet of the road shall curve to the right angle location, and intersections of less than 75 degrees will not be allowed. 
(C)  Roads shall be extended to the boundary of the land division or subdivision, in the case of dead-end roads, and improved to the standards of the future road. All dead-end roads shall have temporary turnarounds, designed and installed to the satisfaction of the Town Engineer. At the request of the Planning Commission, a one-foot strip the width of the right-of-way inside the boundary of the land division or subdivision shall be dedicated to the Town. 
(D)  Intersection corners shall be rounded at the property line by a minimum radius of 15 feet. 
(E)  Horizontal curves shall be a minimum of 150 feet at the centerline on all roads for a minimum design speed of 22 miles per hour. Arterials and important collectors shall be designed for speeds ranging from 30 to 50 miles per hour as designated by the Town Engineer. 
(F)  Grades of roads shall range from a minimum of one percent to a maximum of 15 percent. The minimum vertical curve length in 100-foot stations shall be one-fourth the algebraic difference in grades. Vertical curves shall also supply the standard stopping sight distance for the design speed (22 to 50 miles per hour) and, in addition, be long enough to produce a pleasing appearance. 
(G)  (1)  The maximum length of a cul-de-sac road shall be 1,200 feet, unless the Planning Commission determines that a longer cul-de-sac will result in a better design. Culs-de-sac shall terminate in a property line circle of 80 feet in diameter and a minimum pavement diameter of 60 feet, either concentric or offset. Backarounds, "hammerheads," or other devices to turn vehicles may be allowed in new roads or in existing roads if the Planning Commission finds that their use will result in reduced physical impacts and an improved land division or subdivision design. 
(2)  Landscape islands will be allowed at the end of cul-de-sacs if the pavement width and curvature is adequate to turn a semitrailer truck in a 48-foot radius without running through the landscaping. 
(H)  The road cross section slope shall be a minimum of three percent, and super elevations shall be employed on arterials and collectors in accordance with the design speed. 
(I)  Berms shall be asphalt or alternate construction, and berms shall be employed sparingly to control drainage and to ensure traffic safety. Ramps for the handicapped shall be installed as appropriate. 
(J)  Roads which are continuations of existing roads shall bear the names of such roads. Proposed road names shall be reviewed with the Planning Director, Fire Chief, and Police Chief to avoid duplication and confusion. The subdivider shall propose road names and obtain comments from the Subdivision Review Committee prior to the approval of the tentative map by the Planning Commission. 
(K)  Parking bays adjacent to public and private road rights-of-way may be permitted by the Planning Commission. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.503) (Ord. 1982-305, effective 4-8-82)  
Sec. 152.069 - Road rights-of-way and pavement widths. 
(A)  All new roads shall meet the minimum requirements specified in Table A set forth in this section. Pavement widths shall be the width of surface available to vehicular traffic. Such width shall not include shoulders, bike lanes, berms or paved drainage ditches. 
(B)  PAVEMENT, for the purposes of this section, shall mean a minimum of two-inch thick hot mix asphalt concrete over a minimum of six-inch thick base rock for public and private roads designed for the traffic index (TI) as indicated in said Table A. 
(C)  In the case of land divisions or subdivisions abutting existing Town public roads, the Planning Commission may require reconstruction to Town Standards. 
(D)  Road improvements, with the exception of connections, are not normally required on abutting freeways, expressways, or State highways. The details of a connection to a State highway will be specified by the State. 
(E)  The following minimum standards shall be followed: 
Table A 
Road Type 	Number of lots Served 	Right-of-way Width 
(Feet) 	Pavement Width 
(Feet) 	Traffic Index 
(TI) 
Arterial 	N/A 	80 	22(a)(c) 	6-8 
Collector 	N/A 	60 	20(a)(c) 	5.5 
Cul-de-sac and minor rural 	2-10 
11 or more 	(b) 
(b) 	16(c)(e) 
18(c) 	4.0 
4.0 
Common driveway 	— 	— 	(d) 	— 
(a) Bike lanes of minimum pavement width five feet on each side may be required. 
(b) Forty feet to 50 feet variable, dependent upon the physical characteristics of the terrain and the need to accommodate utilities, trails, or other improvements. 
(c) Public roads shall include three foot graded and rocked shoulders. Private roads shall include two foot graded and rocked shoulders. 
(d) Sixteen feet of paving for that portion serving both lots, and 12 feet of paving for that portion serving one lot. 
(e) Thirty foot minimum pavement radius. 
 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.504) (Ord. 1982-305, effective 4-8-82; Ord. 1991-447, effective 10-10-91) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 152.999.  
Sec. 152.070 - Drainage. 
(A)  The design of drainage facilities shall conform to the Town's Storm Drainage Master Plan and the American Society of Civil Engineer Manual of Practice No. 37. Areas draining into the development shall be considered as fully developed, and the area shall be outlined on a map submitted with the drainage calculations. The drainage design shall be for the 100-year storm or for the ten-year storm when the drainage area is 50 acres or less, and an alternate means of vehicular access to each lot in the land division or subdivision exists. All drainage structures shall terminate in an adequate outfall. 
(B)  Easements shall be dedicated to cover all drainage structures built as a condition of development. The subdivider shall place in conservation or open space easements dedicated to the Town all floodplains and stream corridors identified by the Planning Commission at the time of the consideration of the tentative map (see Zoning Code). 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.505) (Ord. 1982-305, effective 4-8-82)  
Sec. 152.071 - Trails. 
(A)  Trails for equestrian, pedestrian, and bicycle use shall be dedicated and improved by the subdivider along roads and at other such locations within the land division or subdivision in order to provide a trail network in accordance with the circulation element of the general plan. Bicycle paths shall be constructed to state standards. 
(B)  Equestrian and hiking trails may be surfaced with rock or native earth. The trail width shall not be narrower than four feet. The thickness and type of surfacing material, preparation of subbase, and drainage shall be to the satisfaction of the Town Engineer, based on recommendations by the Trails Committee. 
(C)  The clearance of overhead vegetation over equestrian or bicycle trails shall be a minimum of 12 feet in height. The minimum width of a trail easement outside a public road right-of-way shall be 15 feet. A greater easement width may be required where such easement cross slopes in excess of a 15 percent grade or where such physical factors, such as rock outcroppings, trees, and stream corridors, exist. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.506) (Ord. 1982-305, effective 4-8-82)  
Sec. 152.072 - Public utilities and easements. 
All public utilities shall be placed underground, together with all appurtenances. Utilities should normally be located in the public roads, but when other locations are necessary, the normal easement width shall be 20 feet, unless the utility companies request more or less width. Utilities shall be coordinated to permit the joint use of trenches and easements so as to reduce the disturbance of the natural surroundings. All utility services shall be supplied by the subdivider to each lot. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.507) (Ord. 1982-305, effective 4-8-82)  
Sec. 152.073 - Conservation, open space, and scenic easements. 
The Planning Commission may require the dedication of open space, conservation, or scenic easements within a proposed land division or subdivision for the express purpose of protecting the natural vegetation, terrain, watercourses, historic and cultural resources, scenic vistas, and wildlife and for the purpose of preventing or limiting drainage, erosion, and water quality problems and geologic hazards. If so required, the subdivider shall dedicate the easements on the parcel map or final map and shall execute a deed to the Town, in a form acceptable to the Town Attorney, which deed shall include such reasonable restrictions as the Planning Commission may impose to carry out the intent of this chapter, the general plan, or any precise plan of the Town. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.508) (Ord. 1982-305, effective 4-8-82)  
Sec. 152.074 - Parks and recreational areas. 
(A)  Pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code § 66477, and in conformity with the general plan as adopted, and as may be amended, the Council may require as a condition precedent to the approval of a land division or subdivision map the dedication of land for public park and recreational purposes, or the payment of fees in lieu, or a combination of both. 
(B)  All land to be dedicated for park and recreational purposes shall be found by the Planning Commission to be suitable as to location, size, and topography for park and recreational purposes, which may include any of the following uses: 
(1)  Neighborhood playgrounds; 
(2)  Community playfields; 
(3)  Pedestrian paths, equestrian and hiking trails, and bicycle paths; and 
(4)  Areas of unusual natural beauty, such as creeks, canyons, hilltops, groves, and the like. 
(C)  The requirements of this section, upon the approval of the Council, may be satisfied by the provision of areas of permanent open space provided and maintained for the benefit of the land division, the subdivision, or the public. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.509) (Ord. 1982-305, effective 4-8-82)  
Sec. 152.075 - Sewage disposal. 
Each parcel, to be served by an individual on-site sewage disposal system, shall be of such size and characteristics that an effective, reliable disposal system can be installed and maintained. Where the rate of water percolation into the earth is satisfactory, septic tanks and drainfields will be permitted pursuant to the standards of the Town and the satisfaction of the Health Officer and Town Engineer. All drainfields shall be tested under wet-weather conditions and shall be capable of 100 percent expansion. Where sanitary sewer service is available within an existing or approved service area, and is authorized by the Town, connection to such system may be required as a condition of subdivision approval. 
(Ord. 1992-460, effective 8-11-92)  
Sec. 152.076 - Water supply. 
(A)  Domestic supply. Water supply for domestic uses shall meet the requirements of the Health and Safety Code of the state and the standards of the Health Officer. The water system shall have an operating permit from the local or State Health Department. Minimum pressure in any possible structure shall be maintained by a gravity system or pump pressure operated by the water system. An applicant shall submit maps, drawings, and other pertinent records to demonstrate the system's reliability and ability to adequately serve the land division or subdivision. 
(B)  Fire protection supply. 
(1)  The minimum acceptable fire flow in residential areas shall be 1,000 gallons per minute with a 20 pound per square inch residual for two hours. Distribution mains shall be a minimum of six inches in diameter, and the distribution network shall be designed in accordance with American Water Works Association standard practices. Fire hydrants shall be within 900 feet by all-weather road and/or driveway of each existing or potential building site, and the hydrants shall be within at least 600 feet of each other along the road. Where structural concentration exists, the Fire Chief may increase the requirement for fire flow and require less distance between fire hydrants. Every fire hydrant shall have a minimum of one 2½-inch and one 4½-inch (steamer) national standard thread outlet, dry barrel type, unless otherwise specified, and a gate valve between the main and the hydrant. 
(2)  The water supply system layout, design, and construction shall be approved by the Fire Chief and Town Engineer. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.511) (Ord. 1982-305, effective 4-8-82)  
Sec. 152.077 - Geotechnical reports. 
A geotechnical report shall be prepared, submitted, and approved for every land division or subdivision. The geotechnical report shall include data and recommendations on grading, slopes, trenching, erosion, stability, geologic hazards, drainfield stability, subsurface drainage, road pavement design, and other items necessary for a complete report as specified by the Town. The geotechnical report shall be submitted together with the tentative map and shall encompass all land within the proposed subdivision and any adjacent or nearby land containing geologic characteristics which may affect the proposed land division or subdivision. 
(A)  An outline of the geotechnical report shall be filed with the concept map and a final report with the tentative map for referencing on the title page of the parcel map or final map. The final report shall contain a comprehensive geologic and seismic evaluation in addition to the items set forth in this section. Corrective action shall be specified and the conditions for the construction of roads, utilities, and residences specified. The subdivider shall consult with the Town Geologist prior to the preparation of the outline or report in order to obtain the required specific scope. 
(B)  The soils report portion of the geotechnical report shall include the results of at least one soil boring or excavation at each proposed building site. If the soils report indicates the presence of critically expansive soils, historical landslides, or other soil problems, a more detailed investigation shall be made to recommend corrective action by the subdivider or developer at the time a structure is built. The specifications for the corrective action shall be included in the report, and a statement noting the preparation of a soils report, together with the date of the report and the name of the engineer making the report, shall appear on the parcel map and final map. 
(C)  The requirements of this section are enacted pursuant to the requirements of the Statutes of 1965, Sections 66490 and 66491 of the Subdivision Map Act . All geotechnical reports shall be approved by the Town Geologist and Town Engineer, and all corrective action shall be completed prior to the issuance of a building permit or shall be included in the building plans as required construction. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.512) (Ord. 1982-305, effective 4-8-82)  
Sec. 152.078 - Grading. 
All grading work shall be designed based on a geotechnical report with the concurrence of the person preparing the geotechnical report. All cuts shall be two to one or flatter, and all fills shall be two to one or flatter. The slopes shall be contoured in accordance with good landscape practices to provide a natural pleasing appearance, and where a landscape architect or architect is employed, such architect shall specify the shaping. The grading of entire lots shall be prohibited, and only that amount of grading necessary to ensure an adequate residential and accessory use and vehicular access, provide for adequate drainage, or correct geological hazards will be permitted. All cut and fill slopes shall be planted to reduce the potential of soil erosion to the satisfaction of the Planning Director and Architectural and Site Review Board. Grading shall be a balanced cut and fill, and all grading operations shall occur only between April 15 and October 15. All graded areas shall be winterized with planting, netting, and/or erosion control structures by November 1 to the satisfaction of the Town Engineer and Planning Director. An exception to the balance cut and fill requirement may be granted by the Town Engineer and Planning Director upon their reaching a finding that the granting of such exception is consistent with the objectives and other standards of this chapter. The Town Engineer may also grant an exception to the grading period upon reaching similar findings. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.513) (Ord. 1982-305, effective 4-8-82)  
Sec. 152.079 - Landscaping and erosion control. 
For all land divisions and subdivisions involving grading, erosion control planting shall be included as a minimum. Tree planting may be required by the Planning Commission. The extent of the work shall be specified prior to the approval of the tentative map. All land division or subdivision projects shall have planting plans providing for the stabilization and replanting of all cut and fill slopes, landscaping, and erosion control. Any planting shall require plans and specifications prepared by a landscape architect or other qualified person. The plans shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning Director, based on recommendations from the Architectural and Site Review Board and the Planning Commission prior to the approval of the road construction plans. The planting concept shall blend and harmonize with the native planting. All planting shall be maintained for a period of two years by the subdivider. The Town shall require a maintenance bond pursuant to Section 152.080 of this chapter. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.514) (Ord. 1982-305, effective 4-8-82)  
Sec. 152.080 - Improvements. 
(A)  The subdivider shall improve, or agree in writing to improve, all public and private roads, pathways, trails, and easements and to install other improvements required by this chapter as are necessary for the benefit of the lot owners in the land division or subdivision and the surrounding community. 
(B)  Improvement work, including grading, shall not be commenced until improvement plans and specifications have been approved by the Town Engineer. Improvements shall be installed in accordance with the approved plans and specifications to permanent lines and grades to the satisfaction of the Town Engineer. All work shall be completed under his/her supervision and shall be subject to such inspections as he/she deems necessary to protect the interests of the Town. The costs of the inspections shall be borne by the subdivider. 
(1)  Improvement plans. 
(a)  The subdivider shall submit to the Town Engineer a complete set of plans and profiles on suitable material, pencil or ink, size 24 inches by 36 inches, to a scale of one-inch equals 40 feet to one inch equals ten feet, with all necessary details and specifications. Improvement plans shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer who shall sign and seal each sheet of the plans. After the approval and signature of the plans by the Town Engineer, three sets of prints and one set of duplicate tracings shall be delivered to the Town Engineer for his/her use. 
(b)  The subdivider may install such improvements before the parcel map or final map is recorded. If the work is completed in the absence of an improvement agreement, the subdivider shall use a licensed contractor, supply evidence of Workers' Compensation Insurance, and supply evidence of public liability and property damage insurance, naming the Town as an additional insured to the limits normally required in an improvement agreement. The insurance certificates shall be approved by the Town Attorney prior to the commencement of the work. 
(2)  Completion. A complete "as built" improvement plan shall be filed as a permanent record of the Town upon the completion of the required improvements. Upon the acceptance of the "as built" plans, the Town Engineer shall recommend formal acceptance by the Council when he/she is satisfied that the improvements have been installed in conformance with the standards of this chapter. After formal acceptance by the Council, a notice of completion will be recorded by the Town Engineer. 
(3)  Guarantees. The subdivider shall guarantee the completed work and the improvements and shall make or agree to make the necessary repairs or modifications for damages resulting from storms, erosion, or landslides and to correct errors in the design or construction for a minimum of one year after the date of completion, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. The subdivider shall also guarantee the maintenance of all private roads within the land division or subdivision until a majority of the lots have been sold. 
(4)  Building permits. No building permit shall be issued for any lot until all required improvements have been completed. 
(5)  Improvement security. The subdivider shall file with the Town Clerk a faithful performance bond, cash deposit, or other improvement security in the amount deemed sufficient by the Town Engineer to cover all costs of the improvements, engineering, inspection fees, inflation, and incidental expenses. The subdivider shall also cover by bond or other improvement security laborers and materialmen in the amount of 100 percent of the amount of the estimated costs of the improvements. Such security shall be one of the following at the option of the subdivider and subject to the approval of the Town. 
(a)  A bond or bonds by one or more duly authorized corporate sureties; 
(b)  A cash deposit, either with the Town or a responsible escrow agent or trust company; or 
(c)  An instrument of credit from one or more financial institutions subject to regulation by the state or federal government pledging that the funds necessary to carry out the act or agreement are on deposit and guaranteed for payment. 
(6)  Forfeiture of surety. In the event the subdivider shall fail to complete all improvement work, and the Town shall have to complete such work, or if the subdivider shall fail to reimburse the Town for the costs of inspection, engineering fees, and incidental expenses, the Town shall call on the surety for reimbursement or shall appropriate funds for reimbursement from any cash deposit or improvement security. In any event, if the amount of the bond, cash deposit, or improvement security exceeds all the costs and expenses incurred by the Town, the remainder shall be released to the subdivider, and if the amount of the bond or other improvement security is less than the costs and expenses incurred by the Town, the subdivider shall be liable to the Town for the difference. 
(7)  Release of surety. No extension of time, progress payment from a cash deposit, or release of a surety bond, cash deposit, or improvement security shall be made, except upon certification by the Town Engineer that the work covered by the security has been satisfactorily completed and upon the approval of the Council. 
(8)  Improvement agreements. In the event the improvements required have not been made at the time the parcel map or final map is filed with the Council, the subdivider shall execute and file with the Town Clerk an agreement between himself and the Town specifying the period within which he/she shall complete all improvements and work. The agreement shall be in a form prescribed by the Town Attorney and shall be based on improvement plans signed by the Town Engineer. The agreement shall also prescribe that the subdivider shall repair any damage to a public road or any other public or private property or improvement which results from or is incidental to the construction of improvements in the subdivision or that, in lieu of making such repairs, the subdivider shall pay to the owner or to the Town the full cost thereof. The subdivider shall also file with the Town Clerk at the same time a faithful performance bond and labor and materialmen bond or other improvement security as set forth in subsection (5) of this division. 
(9)  Improvement agreements: extensions of time. 
(a)  If a subdivider requests an extension of time in which to comply with the requirements of an improvement agreement, the amount of the improvement agreement security will be adjusted to reflect current inflation upon the recommendation of the Town Engineer. 
(b)  If a subdivider begins grading or any other construction on the property on which improvements are to be constructed as required by an improvement agreement, and is thereafter unable to complete such construction within the time set out therein, and requests an extension of time in which to complete such improvements, the Town will suffer damages, the actual amount of which would be extremely difficult or impractical to ascertain. Therefore, each subdivider entering into a subdivision improvement agreement with the Town shall deposit with the Town cash in an amount to be recommended by the Town Engineer, such amount being a reasonable estimate of the Town's damages, and, upon the granting of an extension of time in which to complete the improvements required by an improvement agreement after the subdivider has begun grading on the property for the required improvements, the Town, at its election, may retain such deposit as its sole right to damages. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.515) (Ord. 1982-305, effective 4-8-82; Am. Ord. 1983-310, effective 7-14-83) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 152.999.  
Secs. 152.81—152.89 - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - PARCEL MAPS AND FINAL MAPS 
 
Sec. 152.090 - Preparation. 
(A)  Within 24 months after the approval or conditional approval of a tentative map for a land division or subdivision, or within such additional period of time as may be granted by the Planning Commission, not to exceed an additional 12 months, the subdivider may cause a parcel map or final map to be prepared. Such map shall conform with the tentative map as approved and shall comply with the provisions of this chapter and the Subdivision Map Act . 
(B)  The parcel map or final map may be compiled from record data when sufficient survey information exists on filed maps to locate and retrace the exterior boundary lines of the parcel map or final map and when the location of at least one of such boundary lines can be established from an existing monumented line. In all other cases, the parcel map or final map shall be based on a field survey. 
(C)  Parcel maps or final maps shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.601) (Ord. 1982-305, effective 4-8-82)  
Sec. 152.091 - Title of parcel maps and final maps. 
The title of parcel maps and final maps shall be in the lower right-hand corner, and the title shall be on all sheets. The title shall include the following items in addition to the specific requirements for the map: the land division or subdivision number assigned by the Town; the words "Parcel Map" or, in the case of a subdivision, the name; then the wording, "lying within the Town of Woodside, being a resubdivision of..."; the current owners' names; the current owners deed record references; any prior subdivision map, parcel map, or record of survey referenced by the recording data; then the wording "Town of Woodside, San Mateo County, California"; a divider bar drawn on the map to separate the legal description from the remaining information; the map scale shown under the left side of the divider bar; the month and year shown under the right side of the divider bar; and the name, address, and telephone number of the person or company preparing the map. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.602) (Ord. 1982-305, effective 4-8-82)  
Sec. 152.092 - Certificates to appear on maps. 
The following certificates and statements shall appear on parcel maps and final maps: 
(A)  Owners' certificates. A certificate signed and acknowledged by all parties having any record title interest in the real property subdivided, consenting to the preparation and recordation of the parcel map or final map, including any dedication of interest in real property. In the event any road shown on a parcel map or final map is not offered for dedication, the certificate shall contain a statement to this effect; 
(B)  Town Clerk's certificate. A certificate executed by the Town Clerk stating that the Council has approved the parcel map or final map and has accepted, accepted subject to improvement, or rejected on behalf of the public any real property offered for dedication for public use in conformity with the final conditions of the offer of dedication. No Town Clerk certificate shall be required for a parcel map which is not considered by the Council; 
(C)  Engineer's or surveyor's certificate. A certificate executed in accordance with the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act ; 
(D)  Town Engineer's certificate. A certificate executed in accordance with the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act ; 
(E)  Recorder's certificate. A certificate executed in accordance with the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act ; and 
(F)  Geotechnical statement. A statement on the title page of the map indicating the date of the geotechnical report and the names of all persons involved in preparing the report and the location where the report is on file for public inspection. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.603) (Ord. 1982-305, effective 4-8-82)  
Sec. 152.093 - Filing. 
(A)  The subdivider shall pay the required fee and deposit to the Town and submit three prints of the map for checking by the Town Engineer. The following documents and materials shall be submitted to the Town: 
(1)  Traverse calculations. One complete set of traverse calculations in a form approved by the Town Engineer giving the coordinates and showing the mathematical closure and area calculations; 
(2)  Improvement data. A statement that all improvements have been completed in accordance with the plans and specifications as approved by the Town Engineer or that the subdivider intends to install such improvements and will enter into an agreement and post a bond or other improvement security with the Town as required by Section 151.080 of this chapter; 
(3)  Plans and specifications. If the plans, profiles, cross sections, and specifications for the required land division or subdivision improvements have not been previously submitted and approved by the Town Engineer, the subdivider shall submit the number of sets required by Section 151.080 of this chapter; 
(4)  Covenants and restrictions. Three copies of the proposed covenants and restrictions, if any; 
(5)  Consents. The written consents of all utility companies and other easements holders shall be obtained in accordance with subsection (c) of this Section 66436 of the Subdivision Map Act ; 
(6)  Improvement agreement. In the event the improvements required have not been installed to the satisfaction of the Town Engineer at the time the parcel map or final map is filed with the Council, the subdivider shall execute and file with the Town Clerk an agreement between himself and the Town as required by Section 151.080 of this chapter; 
(7)  Title guarantee. The subdivider shall furnish a guarantee of title or a letter from a title company certifying that the signatures of all persons whose consent is necessary to pass a clear title to the land being subdivided and all acknowledgments thereto appear on the proper certificates and are correctly shown on the parcel map or final map, both as to consents to the making of such map and affidavits or dedications. Such guarantees shall be issued for the benefit of the Town and the protection of the Council and shall be continued complete up to the instant of the recordation of the parcel map or final map; and 
(8)  Deeds. The subdivider may be required by the Planning Commission, or by the circumstances of the required improvements, to obtain rights-of-way or easements for roads, storm drains, sanitary sewers, and other utilities outside the boundaries of the land being divided or owned by the subdivider. The subdivider shall furnish such deeds to the Town Engineer, and the deeds shall be reviewed and approved by the Town Engineer. After the deeds are approved by the Town Engineer, the deeds shall be executed by all the necessary persons prior to review by the Council. The deeds shall be recorded by the Town Clerk, after approval by the Council, with the parcel map or final map. 
(B)  Within 20 days after receiving such documents and materials and the parcel map or subdivision map, the Town Engineer shall complete his/her review for sufficiency of information, correctness of survey data, and conformance with the approved tentative map. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.604) (Ord. 1982-305, effective 4-8-82)  
Sec. 152.094 - Information to be included on maps. 
The following information shall be included on parcel maps and final maps: 
(A)  The north point; 
(B)  (1)  All lots intended for sale or reserved for private purposes and all parcels offered for dedication for any purpose, with all dimensions, boundaries, and courses clearly shown and defined in every case, and the lot area, gross and net, to the nearest one-thousand an acre. No ditto marks shall be used. 
(2)  Parcels offered for dedication but not accepted shall be designated by letter. Private roads not offered for dedication, or offered but not accepted, shall show the words "Not a Public Road." 
(3)  Where adjoining blocks appear on separate sheets, the roads adjoining both blocks shall be shown on both sheets complete with center line and property line data; 
(C)  The locations of the roads and trails; the names of the roads; the total width of each road and trail; the width on each side of the center line, the width of the portion of the road and trail being dedicated; and the width of the existing dedication, if any, within the land division or subdivision; 
(D)  The locations and widths of the rights-of-way within the land division and subdivision, including the name, type, location, and width of all utility rights-of-way; 
(E)  (1)  The side lines of all easements, public and private, to which the lots are subject. The easements shall be clearly labeled and identified as to nature and purpose and, if already of record, their recorded reference given. If any easement is not definitely located and of record, a statement of such easement shall appear on the title sheet. 
(2)  Easements shall be denoted by fine dotted lines. Distances and bearings on the side lines of lots which are cut by easements shall be shown with the distance from a corner or angle point to the easement and the width of the easement along the lot line. The total length of the lot line and the exact location of the easement shall be clearly indicated. 
(3)  The width of the easements and the lengths and bearings of the lines shall be shown; 
(F)  Any limitation on right of access or nonaccess strips or reserve strips to and/or from roads and lots and other parcels of land; 
(G)  The locations, widths, and names of the roads and the locations and widths of trails and other rights-of-way adjacent to the land division or subdivision; 
(H)  All Town boundaries crossing or adjoining the land division or subdivision shall be clearly designated and located; 
(I)  The approved location of septic drain fields including areas for future septic drainfield expansion; and 
(J)  The location of building sites on lots which are identified as being in proximity to or within an environmentally sensitive area. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.605) (Ord. 1982-305, effective 4-8-82; Am. Ord. 1988-367, effective 6-9-88)  
Sec. 152.095 - Reviews of final maps. 
(A)  The Planning Director, after review by the Town Engineer, shall submit a copy of the final map to the Council. 
(B)  The Council shall determine whether the final map conforms with the approved tentative map. 
(C)  The Council shall also consider dedications, exceptions, and improvement agreements. 
(D)  If the final map conforms with the tentative map, the final map shall be approved by the Council. All offers of dedication, exceptions, and improvement agreements shall be considered for action at the time of the final map approval. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.606) (Ord. 1982-305, effective 4-8-82; Am. Ord. 1988-365, effective 5-12-88)  
Sec. 152.096 - Recording of maps; copies. 
(A)  Recording of maps. 
(1)  After approval by the Council, the Town Engineer and the Town Clerk shall sign the map. The Town Clerk shall present the parcel map or final map to the County Recorder for recording in accordance with the provisions of Article VI of the Subdivision Map Act , and the subdivider shall be billed for or pay the recording fee. 
(2)  In the case of a lot line change, the Town Engineer shall approve the parcel map, and such map shall be submitted for recording by the Town Clerk. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.607) 
(B)  Copies. After recording, two complete sets of blue line prints on cloth and one set of permanent reproducible tracings shall be submitted to the Town by the subdivider and shall be paid for by the subdivider. In addition, two copies of such restrictive covenants and private road maintenance agreements as the subdivider may have recorded shall be included with the sets of blue line prints. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.608) (Ord. 1982-305, effective 4-8-82)  
Sec. 152.097 - Survey requirements. 
All surveys for parcel maps and final maps shall be in accordance with the Subdivision Map Act and the Land Surveyor's Act of the state. Road monuments shall be set as specified by the Town Engineer in all public and private roads at boundaries, curves, and at distances to allow a clear sight between monuments. All monuments shall contain the registration number of the person responsible for the monument. All lot corners shall be monumented and tagged with the registration number with iron pipe monuments or rock bolts. Iron pipe monuments shall be at least one inch in diameter, 18 inches long, and driven flush with the surface of the ground. All monuments and lot corners shall be in place prior to the acceptance of the improvement work. The civil engineer or land surveyor shall certify in writing with a seal that all monuments and lot corners are in place as shown on the recorded maps. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.609) (Ord. 1982-305, effective 4-8-82)  
Secs. 152.98—152.109 - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - VESTING TENTATIVE MAPS 
 
Sec. 152.110 - Statutory authority. 
This subchapter is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by Cal. Gov't Code Chapter 4.5 (commencing with Section 66498.1) of Division 2 of Title 7 (referred to in this article as the Vesting Tentative Map Statute) and may be cited as the Vesting Tentative Map Law. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.1001) (Ord. 1986-335, effective 5-8-86)  
Sec. 152.111 - Purpose and intent. 
(A)  It is the purpose of this subchapter to establish procedures necessary for the implementation of the Vesting Tentative Map Statute and to supplement the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this chapter. Except as otherwise set forth in this subchapter, the provisions of this chapter shall apply to the Vesting Tentative Map Law. 
(B)  To accomplish this purpose, the regulations set forth in this subchapter are determined to be necessary for the preservation of the public health, safety, and general welfare and for the promotion of orderly growth arid development. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.1002) (Ord. 1986-335, effective 5-8-86)  
Sec. 152.112 - Consistency. 
No land shall be subdivided and developed pursuant to a vesting tentative map for any purpose which is inconsistent with the general plan and any applicable specific plan or not permitted by the zoning provisions or other applicable provisions of this Code . 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.1003) (Ord. 1986-335, effective 5-8-86) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 152.999.  
Sec. 152.113 - Definitions. 
(A)  For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
VESTING TENTATIVE MAP. A tentative map for a subdivision, as defined in this chapter, which map shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words "Vesting Tentative Map" at the time it is filed in accordance with Section 152.115 of this subchapter and is thereafter processed in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter. 
(B)  All other definitions set forth in this chapter shall be applicable. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.1005) (Ord. 1986-335, effective 5-8-86)  
Sec. 152.114 - Application. 
(A)  Whenever a provision of the Subdivision Map Act , as implemented and supplemented by this chapter, requires the filing of a tentative map or tentative parcel map for a development, a vesting tentative map may instead be filed in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter. 
(B)  If a subdivider does not seek the rights conferred by the Vesting Tentative Map Statute, the filing of a vesting tentative map shall not be a prerequisite to any approval for any proposed subdivision site, development permit, building permit, or work preparatory to construction. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.1005) (Ord. 1986-335, effective 5-8-86)  
Sec. 152.115 - Application. 
(A)  A vesting tentative map shall be filed in the same form, and have the same contents, accompanying data and reports, and shall be processed in the same manner as set forth in this chapter for a tentative map, except as provided in this subchapter. 
(B)  At the time a vesting tentative map is filed it shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words "Vesting Tentative Map". 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.1006) (Ord. 1986-335, effective 5-8-86)  
Sec. 152.116 - Fees. 
Upon filing a vesting tentative map , the subdivider shall pay the required fees as established by the Council pursuant to Section 152.152(A) of this chapter. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.1007) (Ord. 1986-335, effective 5-8-86)  
Sec. 152.117 - Expiration. 
The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall expire at the end of the same time period, and shall be subject to the same extensions, established by this chapter for the expiration of the approval or conditional approval of a tentative map in accordance with Section 152.034 of this chapter. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.1008) (Ord. 1986-335, effective 5-8-86)  
Sec. 152.118 - Vesting on approval of vesting tentative maps. 
(A)  (1)  The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies and standards described in Cal. Gov't Code § 66474.2. 
(2)  However, if said Cal. Gov't Code § 66474.2 is repealed, the approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies, and standards in effect at the time the vesting tentative map is approved or conditionally approved. 
(B)  Notwithstanding the provisions of division (A) of this section, a permit, approval, extension, or entitlement may be made conditional or denied if any of the following is determined: 
(1)  A failure to do so would place the residents of the subdivision or the immediate community, or both, in a condition dangerous to their health or safety, or both; or 
(2)  The condition or denial is required in order to comply with state or federal laws. 
(C)  The rights referred to in this section shall expire if a final map is not approved prior to the expiration of the vesting tentative map as provided in Section 152.117 of this subchapter. If the final map is approved, such rights shall last for the following periods of time: 
(1)  An initial time period of 18 months after the recordation of the final map. Where several final maps are recorded on various phases of a project covered by a single vesting tentative map , such initial time period shall begin for each phase when the final map for such phase is recorded. 
(2)  The initial time period set forth in subdivision (1) of this section shall be automatically extended by any time used for processing a complete application for a site development permit, design review by the Architectural and Site Review Board and Planning Director, or review by the Town Trails Committee and/or other Town committees if such processing exceeds 30 days after the date the application is deemed complete. 
(3)  A subdivider may apply to the Council for a one-year extension at any time before the initial time period set forth in subdivision (1) of this section expires. 
(4)  If the subdivider submits a complete application for a building permit during the periods of time specified in subdivisions (1), (2), and (3) of this section, the rights referred to in this section shall continue until the expiration of such permit or any extension of such permit. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.1009) (Ord. 1986-335, effective 5-8-86)  
Sec. 152.119 - Inconsistencies. 
(A)  Development inconsistent with zoning: conditional approval. 
(1)  Whenever a subdivider files a vesting tentative map for a subdivision whose intended development is inconsistent with the zoning provisions in existence at that time, such inconsistency shall be noted on the map. The Town may deny such a vesting tentative map or approve it conditioned on the subdivider obtaining the necessary change in the zoning provisions to eliminate the inconsistency. If the change in the zoning provisions is obtained, the approved or conditionally approved vesting tentative map , notwithstanding Section 152.118(A) of this subchapter, shall confer the vested right to proceed with the development in substantial compliance with the change in the zoning provisions and the map as approved. 
(2)  The rights conferred by this section shall be for the time periods set forth in Section 152.118(C) of this subchapter. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.1010) 
(B)  Applications inconsistent with current policies. Notwithstanding any provision of this subchapter, a property owner or his/her designee may seek approvals or permits for development which depart from the ordinances, policies, and standards described in Section 152.118(A) and division (A) of this section, and local agencies may grant such approvals or issue such permits to the extent the departures are authorized under applicable laws. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.1011) (Ord. 1986-335, effective 5-8-86)  
Secs. 152.120—152.129 - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - MERGER OF PARCELS 
 
Sec. 152.130 - Conditions. 
Two or more parcels of real property may be merged by the Town through Planning Commission action when the following conditions are met: 
(A)  The parcels are contiguous; 
(B)  The parcels have the same ownership as of the date the notice of intention to determine status is recorded; 
(C)  At least one of the parcels is nonconforming, having an area less than the minimum prescribed area for the zoning district in which it is located; 
(D)  At least one of the parcels is either: 
(1)  Undeveloped, having no structure on it for which a building permit is required (at the time of the notice of intention to determine status); 
(2)  Developed only with an accessory building; or 
(3)  Developed with a structure for which a building permit is required at the time of the notice of determination of status, located partially on it, and partially on the contiguous parcel; and 
(E)  At least one or more of the following conditions exist with respect to any affected parcel at the time of the notice of determination of status: 
(1)  It comprises less than 5,000 square feet in area; 
(2)  It was not created in conformance with applicable laws and ordinances in effect at the time of its creation; 
(3)  It does not meet current standards for sewage disposal and domestic water supply; 
(4)  It does not meet slope stability standards; 
(5)  It has no legal access which is adequate for vehicular and safety equipment access and maneuverability; 
(6)  Its development would create health or safety hazards; and 
(7)  It is inconsistent with the general plan, and any specific plan, for reasons other than minimum parcel size or density standards. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.1101) (Ord. 1987-349, effective 9-10-87)  
Sec. 152.131 - Notification of intention to determine status. 
(A)  A written notice shall be sent to the owners of the parcels affected, notifying them of the Town's intention to determine status and describing the procedure and standards, as set forth in this subchapter, for a merger to occur. 
(B)  The notice of intention shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owners of the affected parcels. 
(C)  A copy of the notice of intention shall be recorded with the County Recorder on the same date the notice is mailed to the property owners. 
(D)  The written notice of intention shall advise the owners that a hearing before the Planning Commission may be requested, within 30 days after the date of such notice, by written application to the Planning Director to determine the status of the affected parcels and to present evidence that such parcels do not meet the standards for merger. 
(E)  Upon receiving an application for a hearing on the determination of status, the Planning Director shall place the matter, within 60 days on the Planning Commission agenda and shall send the property owners notice of the time and place of the hearing, by certified mall, return receipt requested. 
(F)  All written notices shall be sent to the owners of the affected parcels as they appear on the last County Tax Assessor's roll. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.1102) (Ord. 1987-349, effective 9-10-87)  
Sec. 152.132 - Hearings to determine status of mergers. 
(A)  The Planning Commission shall receive evidence from the Planning Director as to the affected property meeting the standards for merger and shall allow the property owners the opportunity to rebut such evidence and to present any evidence that the affected property should or should not be merged. At the end of the hearing, the Planning Commission shall make a determination whether the affected parcels do or do not meet the standards for merger and should be merged. The Planning Director, within 30 days after the decision, shall send written notice thereof to the affected property owners. 
(B)  If the Planning Commission determines that the parcels are to be merged, the Planning Director, within 30 days after the decision, shall have recorded with the County Recorder a Notice of Merger describing the real property, the owners, and the Planning Commission action. 
(C)  If the Planning Commission determines that the parcels shall not be merged, the Planning Director, within 30 days after the decision, shall have recorded with the County Recorder a Release of Notice of Intention to Merge. 
(D)  The merger of the affected parcels shall become effective on the recordation of the Notice of Merger. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.1103) (Ord. 1987-349, effective 9-10-87)  
Sec. 152.133 - Determination of status of mergers when no hearing is requested. 
If, within the 30-day period specified in Section 152.132 of this subchapter, the owners of the affected parcels do not request a hearing pursuant to said Section 152.132, the Planning Director shall place the matter on the Planning Commission agenda, and the Planning Commission shall determine whether the parcels affected shall be merged or not. The Planning Director shall provide notice of the Planning Commission action to the property owners affected and record either a Notice of Merger, or a Release of Notice of Intention to Merge, whichever is appropriate, in accordance with the procedures set forth in said Section 152.132 of this subchapter. The Notice of Merger or Release of Notice of Intention to Merge shall be recorded with the County Recorder within 90 days after the mailing and recording of the initial notice of intention to merge. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.1104) (Ord. 1987-349, effective 9-10-87)  
Sec. 152.134 - Exempt parcels. 
Parcels otherwise eligible for merger pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter shall be exempt if one of the following conditions exists: 
(A)  On or before July 1, 1981, one or more of the contiguous parcels is enforceably restricted open space land pursuant to a contract, agreement, scenic restriction, or open space easement, as defined and set forth in Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code § 421; or 
(B)  On or before July 1, 1981, one or more of the contiguous parcels is timberland as defined in Cal. Gov't Code § 51104(f) or is land devoted to an agricultural use as defined in Cal. Gov't Code § 51201(b). 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.1105) (Ord. 1987-349, effective 9-10-87)  
Secs. 152.135—152.144 - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 152.145 - Planning Commission as advisory agency. 
The Planning Commission is hereby designated as the Advisory Agency with respect to land divisions and subdivisions, as provided by the Subdivision Map Act , and shall have all of the powers and duties with respect to subdivisions and other divisions of land specified in the Subdivision Map Act and this chapter. The Planning Commission is hereby authorized to report its actions on proposed land divisions and subdivisions directly to the subdivider. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.107) (Ord. 1982-305, effective 4-8-82)  
Sec. 152.146 - Authority of Planning Director. 
The Planning Director or his/her designee are hereby authorized to accept concept and tentative maps for review and transmittal as required by this chapter. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.108) (Ord. 1982-305, effective 4-8-82)  
Sec. 152.147 - Subdivision Review Committee. 
A Subdivision Review Committee, consisting of the Planning Director, Town Engineer, Fire Chief, Health Officer, and Town Geologist, is hereby established and authorized to review land division and subdivision maps and report to the Planning Commission. The Planning Director or, in his/her absence, the Town Engineer, shall serve as chairman of the Committee. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.109) (Ord. 1982-305, effective 4-8-82)  
Sec. 152.148 - Forms and procedures; compliance with Subdivision Map Act. 
(A)  Forms and procedures. The Planning Commission shall establish forms and procedures for filing the maps and information required by this chapter provided such forms and procedures are not inconsistent with this chapter or the Subdivision Map Act . 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.111) 
(B)  Amendments to the Subdivision Map Act. Provisions of this chapter which are in conflict with amendments to the Subdivision Map Act shall comply with the most recent amendments to the Subdivision Map Act . 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.112) (Ord. 1982-305, effective 4-8-82)  
Sec. 152.149 - Appeals. 
(A)  In the event the subdivider or any interested person adversely affected wishes to appeal the decision of the Planning Commission on a tentative map, or the nature and extent of the improvements required, such subdivider or person, within ten days after such action, may appeal to the Council. 
(B)  An appeal shall be filed with the Town Clerk and shall state specifically wherein there was an error or abuse of discretion by the Planning Commission. On the filing of an appeal, the Planning Commission shall transmit to the Town Clerk: 
(1)  A copy of the tentative map on which the Planning Commission action is certified and the statements and materials submitted therewith by the subdivider; 
(2)  The reports from the Subdivision Review Committee, Architectural and Site Review Board, other Town committees, and other officials, private utility companies, and public agencies; and 
(3)  The record of the Planning Commission actions, conditions, and any additional supporting information. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.801) (Ord. 1982-305, effective 4-8-82)  
Sec. 152.150 - Hearings. 
Any appeal to the Town Council under Section 152.149 shall be heard de novo at a public hearing under the procedure set forth in Section 153.338. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.802) (Ord. 1982-305, effective 4-8-82; Am. Ord. 2003-520, effective 10-23-03)  
Sec. 152.151 - Reviews by the Council. 
(A)  (1)  If the Council determines that the Planning Commission action with respect to a tentative map should be reviewed, the Town Clerk shall give notice to the subdivider and the Planning Commission of the date when the action by the Planning Commission will be reviewed. 
(2)  Within 30 days after the date of the Planning Commission's action, or at its next regular meeting, the Council shall consider the reports transmitted by the Planning Commission and the testimony by the subdivider, Planning Commission, and other interested persons. 
(3)  The Council shall record its findings and action on the tentative map and shall report its action to the subdivider, the Planning Commission, the Planning Director, and the Town Engineer, if the action of the Planning Commission is modified or overruled, the action of the Council shall be reported to the public and private agencies and Town committees to which copies of the tentative map were transmitted. 
(B)  In the event the Planning Commission fails to act on any tentative map within the time limits specified by this chapter and the Subdivision Map Act , the Council shall consider such tentative map following the procedures provided for the review of the Planning Commission action. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.803) (Ord. 1982-305, effective 4-8-82)  
Sec. 152.152 - Fees and deposits. 
(A)  Filing fees. The Council shall establish annually by resolution the amounts of the filing fees to accompany the maps filed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. Such fees so established shall be paid to the Town at the time of filing the respective maps. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.901) 
(B)  Deposits for service charges. 
(1)  In addition to the payment of filing fees, the subdivider shall pay the actual costs of reviewing concept maps, tentative maps, and environmental documents, for the checking and recordation of parcel maps or final maps, for such investigations and inspections as are required by law and this chapter, and for the cost of the security as required by this chapter for an improvement agreement, if necessary. 
(2)  The Council shall establish annually by resolution the amounts of deposits for services. The costs for such services shall be based on reasonable hourly charges for actual time required for checking, examining, and/or investigating, plus the actual cost of any tests which may be required. 
(3)  The deposits established by the Council shall be paid by the subdivider to the Town at the time of filing the respective maps. 
(4)  Upon the completion of the land division or subdivision, an accounting of the actual costs shall be rendered to the subdivider, and if the costs exceed the deposit for service charges, the subdivider shall deposit the difference with the Town before the final approval of the parcel map or final map. If the actual cost is less than the amount deposited, the difference shall be refunded to the subdivider by the Town. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.902) 
(C)  Map recordation fees. The County Recorder shall charge and collect, or cause to be charged and collected, the fees for the recordation of the parcel maps and final maps. The subdivider shall pay the recordation fees. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.903) 
(D)  Miscellaneous fees and licenses. It shall be the responsibility of the subdivider to give assurance to the satisfaction of the Town Clerk that his/her prime contractor and any and all subcontractors or material suppliers have paid such fees or taken out such licenses as may be required by law to do business in the Town. The subdivider shall furnish the Town with a current list of all subcontractors and material suppliers, along with their business license numbers. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.904) (Ord. 1982-305, effective 4-8-82)  
Sec. 152.153 - Notice of violation. 
Whenever the Town has knowledge that land has been divided contrary to or in violation of the provisions of this chapter, the Town shall file a notice of violation, pursuant to Section 66499.36 of the Subdivision Map Act . 
(1975 Code, § 9-1-907) (Ord. 1982-305, effective 4-8-82)  
Sec. 152.999 - Penalty. 
Any person, firm, corporation, or association violating any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000.00, or by imprisonment in the County jail for not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(1975 Code, § 9-1.906) (Ord. 1982-305, effective 4-8-82)  
CHAPTER 153 - ZONING 
(A) Lot area requirements. 
(B) Measurement of lot area. 
(C) Exceptions to lot area requirements: Ministerial. 
(D) Exceptions to lot area requirements: Discretionary. 
(A) Floor area requirements. 
(B) Measurement of floor area. 
(C) Exceptions to floor area requirements: Maximum residence size exceptions. 
(A) Setback requirements. 
(B) Measurement of setbacks. 
(C) Exceptions to setback requirements: Ministerial. 
(D) Exceptions to setback requirements: Discretionary. 
(A) Height requirements. 
(B) Measurement of height. 
(C) Exceptions to height requirements: Ministerial. 
(D) Exceptions to height requirements: Discretionary. 
(A) Paved area and surface coverage requirements. 
(B) Measurement of paved area and surface coverage. 
(C) Exceptions to paved area and surface coverage requirements: SCP-5 Zoning District. 
(A) Building coverage requirements. 
(B) Measurement of building coverage. 
(C) Exceptions to building coverage requirements. 
(A) Requirements applicable to all accessory dwelling units. 
(B) Requirements applicable to accessory dwelling units within barns. 
(C) Requirements applicable to efficiency accessory dwelling units. 
(A) Permits required. 
(B) Residential Zoning Districts. 
(C) Community Commercial District.  
153.000 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 153.001 - Adoption; short title. 
There are hereby adopted zoning provisions for the Town . This chapter shall be known and cited as the "Zoning Law of the Town of Woodside." 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.101) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99)  
Sec. 153.002 - Purposes. 
This chapter is adopted to promote and protect the public health, safety, peace, comfort, convenience, and general welfare. Specifically, this chapter is adopted in order to accomplish the following purposes: 
(A)  To guide and regulate current and future growth and development and to protect the established rural and suburban character of the Town in a manner consistent with the General Plan; 
(B)  To preserve the Town's primarily single-family character by prohibiting inharmonious influences and intrusions; 
(C)  To promote a safe and effective circulation system, including roads and trails, consistent with the Town's residential quality; 
(D)  To provide adequate light, air, privacy, and access to property; 
(E)  To control and minimize stormwater runoff, soil erosion, and stream and drainage channel siltation; 
(F)  To secure safety from fire, earth movement, and other natural and artificial hazards; 
(G)  To preserve the rural character of the Town by ensuring adequate open space to prevent excessive population concentrations and congestion; 
(H)  To preserve the beauty of the Town's setting and ensure the conservation of its scenic and natural resources; and 
(I)  To comply with California Government Code, § 65910 which requires every city and county to adopt an open space zoning ordinance consistent with the open space element of the General Plan. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.102) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.003 - Contents. 
This chapter consists of a zoning map designating certain districts and a set of standards regulating the uses of land, the density of population, the height , bulk, locations, and uses of structures , open spaces and natural resources, the area and dimensions of building sites , and the appearance of certain uses , structures and signs . 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.103) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.004 - Application and interpretation. 
(A)  The provisions of this chapter in their interpretation and application shall be held to be minimum requirements, except where such provisions are expressly stated to be maximum requirements. The provisions of this chapter are not intended to impair or interfere with any private lawful restriction placed upon property by contract, covenant, or deed. Where this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon a use than imposed or required by such private restriction, the provisions of this chapter shall control. 
(B)  No building , structure , or land, including life estates, shall be used, maintained, or occupied, nor shall any building or structure be constructed, maintained, modified, moved, or structurally altered , except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.104) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.005 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT (ADU). An attached or a detached residential dwelling unit which provides complete independent living facilities for one or more persons. It shall include a kitchen and permanent provisions for living, sleeping, and sanitation on the same parcel as the single-family dwelling is situated. An accessory dwelling unit also includes the following: 
(1)  An efficiency unit, as defined in Cal. Health and Safety Code § 17958.1. 
(2)  A manufactured home , as defined in Cal. Health and Safety Code § 18007. 
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE OR BUILDING. A detached structure or building , the use of which is subordinate and incidental to the main structure , building , or use on the same parcel . 
ACCESS WAY. The portion of a panhandle lot providing access from a street or access route. 
ADDITION. An increase in the size, bulk, mass or height of an existing structure or building . 
ALTERATION. Any change or addition to a structure or building for which a building permit is required. 
ATTIC. The space enclosed within the roof structure of a building . Spaces or rooms on the same floor as living areas are not included in the definition of attic . 
BARN. A building used for the housing and care of horses and/or other permitted livestock , and for the storage of feed, hay, other crops and farm or equine equipment, accessory dwelling units in accordance with regulations in Section 153.211, and other uses ancillary to the housing and care of horses and/or other permitted livestock . 
BASE FLOOD. A flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
BASEMENT. The improved or unimproved portions of the building which are fully or partially below grade so that the vertical distance from the ceiling to the grade of the adjoining ground is no more than two feet above grade . Grade shall mean the finished or existing grade , whichever results in the lowest building profile. 
BAY WINDOW. Any window projecting from the principal exterior wall surface of a building that is raised at least 12 inches above the finished floor of the story where it is located. 
BUILDABLE AREA. The space remaining within a building site after the minimum setback requirements (coverage limitations, setbacks , and the like) and site development and performance standards have been met. 
BUILDING. A structure built, designed, or used for the support, shelter, or enclosure of persons, animals, or personal property. 
BUILDING COVERAGE. The percentage of the total lot area covered or to be covered by buildings . Building coverage shall be measured on a horizontal plane. 
BUILDING FOR HUMAN OCCUPANCY. An enclosed structure which is designed for and regularly, habitually, or primarily occupied by humans. 
BUILDING PERMIT. A permit issued by the Town for the construction, erection, or alteration of a structure or building . 
BUILDING SITE. An area capable of supporting a permitted principal use and meeting the required conditions prescribed in the zoning district in which the lot is situated. 
CAMPER. Any enclosure designed or used for human occupancy which is or can be placed upon the bed of a truck or the chassis of a similar vehicle. 
CARETAKER. Any person who resides on the property and who performs maintenance or repair services on a regular basis. 
CARPORT. An accessory structure or portion of a main structure open on two or more sides and designed for the storage of motor vehicles. 
CONSTRUCTED EQUESTRIAN RIDING ARENA. An area on a parcel that requires grading for placement of a subsurface or surface material that is included in the definition of paved area and surface coverage that is constructed and used primarily for equestrian riding. 
CORRAL. A fenced enclosure used for the regular confinement of livestock . 
COVERED DECK, COVERED PATIO, COVERED BALCONY, and COVERED PORCH. An area of exterior space which is connected to a building that has a floor, is usable space, and which is partially enclosed or covered. 
DECK. A flat, floored, roofless structure adjoining any main building or accessory building . 
DOMESTIC ANIMAL. An animal commonly kept as a household pet. 
DORMER. An architectural element that projects from a sloping roof; is recessed at least 12 inches from the exterior wall below; and, does not rise above the overall roof ridge. 
DRIP LINE. A line on the surface of the ground occurring directly below the greatest horizontal limit of a tree's canopy of leaves and branches. 
DRIVEWAY. A way or route for use by vehicular traffic leading from a parking area or from a house, garage , or other structure to a road. 
DWELLING. A structure or building designed, built, or used for human habitation . 
DWELLING, MAIN. The principal dwelling located on a lot or parcel when used as the permitted use . 
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A building designed, built, or used as a dwelling by one family . 
EAVES. The unsupported portion of a roof that extends beyond the exterior walls of a building . 
EMERGENCY SHELTER. Housing with minimal supportive services for homeless persons that is limited to occupancy of six months or less by a homeless person. No individual or household may be denied emergency shelter because of an inability to pay. (California Health and Safety Code §§ 50801 and 124250) 
ENTRY FEATURE. Structures within 50 feet (30 feet in R-1 zoning) of the front property line, such as vehicular gates , pedestrian gates , pylons , lighting, wingwalls , mechanical equipment, entry key pads, and call boxes. 
EXISTING STRUCTURE. Existing structure for the purposes of defining an allowable space that can be converted to an accessory dwelling unit means within the walls and roofline of any legal structure existing on or after January 1, 2017 that can be made safely habitable under local building codes at the determination of the Building Official , regardless of any noncompliance with zoning standards. 
EXOTIC ANIMAL. An animal customarily referred to as "wild" and kept in a public or private zoo, including, but not limited to, tigers, lions, leopards, panthers, bears, pachyderms, rhinoceros, and poisonous reptiles. 
FAMILY. An individual, or group of two or more persons occupying a dwelling and living together as a single housekeeping unit in which each adult resident has access to all parts of the dwelling . 
FAULT TRACE, INFERRED. A fault trace identified as an INFERRED FAULT TRACE on the Official Town Fault Map whose existence is probable but not yet proven through field investigation. 
FAULT TRACE, KNOWN. A fault trace specifically located on a site by geologic investigation or as identified on the Official Town Fault Map . 
FENCE. A structure constructed of posts, rails, wire, and, in some cases, barrier panels, used to define a boundary or as a means of protection, confinement, or visual obstruction. 
(1)  OPEN FENCE. A fence constructed in such a way that no more than 20 percent of the surface area of the fence obstructs a view through the fence from a position perpendicular to the fence . 
(2)  SOLID FENCE. A fence constructed in such a way so that more than 20 percent of the surface area of the fence obstructs a view through the fence from a position perpendicular to the fence . 
FINAL MAP. A map prepared in accordance with the subdivision procedures of the subdivision provisions and the Subdivision Map Act of the state, which map is designed to be placed on record with the County Recorder. FINAL MAP shall not include a record of survey or parcel map. 
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). The official map on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the Town . 
FLOODPLAIN AREA. An area subject to flooding as identified in the Town's Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps and any area subsequently identified to supplement or supersede such maps. 
FLOODPROOFED. Watertight construction with walls substantially impermeable and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy. 
FLOOR AREA. The calculated size of a structure as stated in Section 153.206. 
FOOTPRINT. The two-dimensional configuration of an existing building's perimeter boundaries as measured on a horizontal plane at ground level. 
GARAGE, COMMERCIAL. A building or part thereof, used for the repair, storage, parking, or servicing of motor vehicles on a commercial basis or as a part of a business enterprise. 
GARAGE, PRIVATE. An accessory building or portion of a main building , enclosed on three or more sides, designed for the shelter or storage of motor vehicles. 
GATE. A movable frame or solid structure which swings, slides, or rolls controlling ingress and egress through an opening in a fence , wall , or vegetation. 
(1)  OPEN GATE. A gate constructed of such materials as wood, wrought iron, extruded metal, or other materials where no more than 60 percent of the surface area of the face of the gate when in a closed position obstructs a view through the gate from a position perpendicular to the gate . 
(2)  SOLID GATE. A gate constructed entirely of solid opaque material or such material as wood, wrought iron, extruded metal, or other materials where more than 60 percent of the surface area of the face of the gate when in a closed position obstructs a view through the gate from a position perpendicular to the gate . 
GEOLOGICALLY HAZARDOUS. 
(1)  Land located within the special studies zone established by the Alquist-Priolo Geologic Hazards Act; 
(2)  Land within 125 feet of an Inferred and 50 feet of Known active Fault Traces identified on the Official Town Fault Map ; 
(3)  A portion of certain problem areas identified in the General Plan, Natural Hazards and Safety Element; 
(4)  Land identified as having a moderate to high susceptibility to landslides, Basic Data Contribution No. 43, USGS; or 
(5)  Land identified as landslide on the official Town Geologic and Geologic Hazards Map. 
GIRDLING. A horizontal cut around a tree trunk to a depth of one to four inches that severs a tree's vascular cambium layer. 
GRADE. 
(1)  FINISHED. The final elevation of the ground surface after building construction and grading. 
(2)  NATURAL. The original elevation of the existing ground surface prior to building construction and grading; 
GREEN ENERGY. Energy that is derived from resources which are naturally replenished on a human timescale, such as: sunlight, wind, water, and geothermal temperature variations, or represent a reduction on the dependency and use of fossil fuels. 
GUEST. Any person, other than a member of a resident family , who occupies quarters for sleeping purposes and who is not required to pay rent of any kind for such occupancy. 
HABITABLE SPACE. An area in a structure , with a ceiling of seven feet or more in height , and designed, built or used for human habitation . 
HEIGHT, BUILDING or STRUCTURE. The vertical dimension of a building or any type of structure measured as set forth in Section 153.208(B). 
HEIGHT, FENCE and WALL. The vertical distance measured from the surface of the adjoining ground to the top of the fence . For the purpose of applying the fence and wall height regulations, the average height of the fence along any unbroken run, at the option of the landowner, may be used for fence height calculation purposes provided the height at any point along such run is not more than ten percent greater than permitted without calculating such average height . 
HOME OCCUPATION. 
(1)  The conduct of an art, profession, or business as a gainful occupation entirely within a dwelling which use is clearly incidental to the use of the structure as a residence and which use does not alter the residential character of the dwelling and does not change or adversely affect the residential character of the surrounding neighborhood. 
(2)  Typical home occupations include dressmakers, architects, engineers, accountants, attorneys, writers, manufacturers' representatives, artists and artisans, instructors when limited to one pupil at a time, and other occupations when found by the Planning Director to be similar to the occupations listed in this subsection. All home occupations shall be in accordance with the provisions of Section 153.111. HOME OCCUPATION shall not include commercial service enterprises, such as barber shop and beauty shops and massage studios. 
HOUSE TRAILER. A portable enclosure, designed, built, or used for human habitation or sleeping on a permanent or temporary basis and capable of being moved or towed upon the highways of the state with or without a special permit. 
HUMAN HABITATION. The provision of facilities for living, sleeping, eating, food preparation and storage, bathing and sanitation. 
INDEPENDENT LIVING FACILITIES. Any dwelling that has dedicated exterior access. Interior access and light wells accessed by ladder, only, shall not be considered dedicated exterior access. 
KITCHEN. A portion of a dwelling designed and used for food preparation and food storage, and equipped with a sink, a permanent stove/conventional oven that complies with applicable Building Codes, and other appliances such as a refrigerator. 
LANDMARK. A site or feature that is so designated by the Woodside Town Council due to the historic value pursuant to a historic preservation ordinance. 
LANDSCAPED AREA. The portion of a site containing planting areas, including trees, shrubs, lawns, flower beds, and ground cover, suitable for ornamenting or screening the site or a use on the site. 
LANDSCAPE SCREENING. The introduction of plant materials which may be accompanied by features such as walls , fences , or berms and which mitigate the visual impact of large structures from public and private road rights-of-way and if possible from neighboring residents. Landscape screening may provide substantial mitigation of a building but need not constitute complete obstruction. 
LATTICEWORK. A construction where less than 50 percent of the surface plane of the structure remains open to the outside. 
LIVESTOCK. Any breed of mammal, other than hogs and bulls, which is customarily raised on a ranch or farm. 
LOT. An area of land, other than a road, shown as a unit on a recorded subdivision or land division or otherwise legally subdivided. 
LOT AREA. The total area measured in a horizontal plane within the lot lines bounding the lot , excluding the following: 
(1)  Easements for road rights-of-way which are not for the exclusive use of the lot on which located; 
(2)  Any portion of an individual access strip in excess of five percent of the lot area required in the district; and 
(3)  Public utility or drainage easements when not located adjacent to property lines. 
LOT AREA, NET. The lot area , as defined in WMC Section 153.005, excluding all areas with slopes in excess of 35 percent. 
LOT, CORNER. A lot bounded on two or more adjacent sides by roads or other thoroughfares where the angle of intersection or the sum of the angles of intersection does not exceed 135 degrees. 
LOT DEPTH. The distance measured in a horizontal plane between the center point of the front lot line and the center point of the rear lot line . 
LOT LINE, FRONT. The line separating the lot from the edge of the right-of-way of the adjacent road. The front lot line of an interior lot or a corner lot shall be determined by the Planning Director . 
LOT LINE, REAR. The line opposite the front lot line . 
LOT LINE, SIDE. Any lot boundary which is not a front or rear lot line . A side lot line separating a lot from another lot or lots shall be an interior side lot line ; a side lot line separating a lot from a road shall be an exterior side lot line . 
LOT WIDTH. The average horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at right angles to the line followed to the established lot depth . 
MAINTENANCE. Repair work or general upkeep on a structure , including painting, carpentry, glazing, and the reinforcement or replacement of defective parts, including roofs, foundations, structural members, and plant material irrigation and replacement, but shall not include an addition to or the enlargement of the structure . 
MANUFACTURED HOUSING (MOBILE HOME). A structure , transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent foundation, designed to be used as a dwelling , and certified under the provisions of § 18551 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
MAXIMUM SIZE OF A MAIN RESIDENCE. The maximum allowable floor area square footage of the main residence on a lot including the floor area of any detached structure within 15 feet of the main residence in all zoning districts, except the R-1 District which shall include any detached structure within eight feet of the main residence. Maximum size of main residence is measured as set forth in Section 153.206(B). 
MEMORIAL CEMETERY. A place for the burial of human remains. 
MOTOR HOME. A self-propelled vehicle, other than a pickup or similar utility vehicle, upon which is permanently assembled or mounted an enclosure for temporary or permanent human habitation . 
NONCONFORMING LOT. A lot of legal record which does not meet the current requirements of the zoning district in which the lot is located. 
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE OR BUILDING. A structure or building which was lawfully established and maintained, but which does not conform to the current regulations for the zoning district in which such structure or building is located. 
NONCONFORMING USE. The use of land, a building or structure which was lawfully established, but which does not conform with the current use regulations for the zoning district in which it is located. 
NON-RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT. Property development for uses other than residential, such as commercial and institutional uses . 
OFFICIAL TOWN FAULT MAP. The map entitled Fault Zones Map officially accepted by the Town in the natural hazards and safety element of the General Plan. 
ONE OWNERSHIP. The ownership of a lot or parcel in any manner whereby such parcel is under single or unified control. 
OPEN SPACE LAND. Any lot or area of land or water essentially unimproved and designated in the General Plan for any of the open space uses : 
(1)  Open space for public health and safety, including, but not limited to, areas which require special management or regulation because of hazardous or special conditions such as earthquake fault zones, unstable soil areas, flood plains, watersheds, areas presenting high fire risks, areas required for the protection of water quality and water reservoirs and areas required for the protection and enhancement of air quality; 
(2)  Open space for outdoor recreation, including but not limited to, areas of outstanding scenic, historical and cultural value; areas particularly suited for park and recreation purposes, including access to lakeshores, beaches, rivers and streams; and areas which serve as links between major recreation and open-space reservations, including utility easements, banks of rivers and streams, trails, and scenic highway corridors; 
(3)  Open space for the preservation of natural resources including, but not limited to, areas required for the preservation of plant and animal life, including habitat for fish and wildlife species; areas required for ecologic and other scientific purposes; rivers, streams, bays and estuaries: and coastal beaches, lakeshores, banks of rivers and streams, and watershed lands; 
(4)  Open space used for the managed production of resources, including but not limited to, forest lands, rangeland, agricultural lands and areas of economic importance for the production of food or fiber; areas required for recharge of ground water basins; bays, estuaries, marshes, rivers and streams which are important for the management of commercial fisheries; and areas containing major mineral deposits, including those in short supply. 
OPEN SPACE ZONE—OS ZONE. Each and every Open Space Zone , namely: 
OSH  Open space for Health and Safety; 
OSRL  Open space for Low Intensity Outdoor Recreation; 
OSRM  Open space for Medium Intensity Outdoor Recreation; 
OSN  Open space for Preservation of Natural Resources; and, 
OSM  Open space for Managed Production of Resources. 
OUTDOOR DISPLAY. An outdoor arrangement of objects, items, products, or other materials, typically not in a fixed position and capable of rearrangement, designed and used for the purpose of advertising or identifying a business, product, or service. 
PANHANDLE LOT. A site with access to a road by means of an access way having not less than 30 feet of frontage and a width of not less than 30 feet. The length of the panhandle shall be measured from the frontage line to the nearest point of intersection with the nearest property line parallel or most nearly parallel to the frontage line. 
PARCEL. All contiguous land held in one ownership . 
PARKING AREA. A site, or portion of a site, devoted to the off-road parking of motor vehicles, including parking spaces, aisles, access drives, and related landscaped areas . 
PASTURE. An area seasonally used for grazing animals. 
PAVED AREA AND SURFACE COVERAGE. 
(1)  Materials including but not limited to, asphalt, bricks, concrete, decomposed granite, gravel, pavers, plastic, rubber, sand, or similar materials applied to the surface of the ground that alter the natural appearance of a site. 
(2)  Features including but not limited to, artificial grass, stairs, decks three feet or less in height , driveways , on grade or below grade equipment pads without a cover/roof, parking areas , patios, spas/hot tubs, swimming pools, tennis courts with any type of surface material, walkways, manmade water features such as decorative pools, fountains, and manmade ponds. 
PERFORMANCE STANDARD. A minimum requirement of a use of land needed or required for the protection of the physical environment and social and economic values as expressed in the General Plan. Performance standards shall be based on the measurable effects of an activity. 
PLANNING DIRECTOR. The Director of the Planning Department of the Town of Woodside, California, or the designee of the Director. 
PLATE. The point at which the exterior wall surface and lower surface of the roof meet. 
PRINCIPAL ACCESS DRIVEWAY. A driveway leading to either the structure in which the permitted principal use occurs, or the detached garage that serves the structure in which the permitted principal use occurs, up to the maximum width permitted by Section 151.44. Portions of second driveways with separate access to a public or private road, or additional driveways that split from the principal access driveway , shall not be considered a principal access driveway . If there is more than one driveway approach to the structure in which the permitted principal use occurs, the shortest distance to either the structure in which the permitted principal use occurs, or the detached garage that serves the structure in which the permitted principal use occurs, shall be considered the principal access driveway . 
PRIVATE NONCOMMERCIAL CLUBS. A club or organization having nonprofit status and providing services and facilities for members and guests only. 
PUBLIC BUILDING. A building such as a school, Town Hall, fire station, museum, library, post office, or police station. 
PYLON. A vertical structure , pier, or post flanking an entrance way. 
RENT. Any payment in whole or part cash made in exchange for the human habitation or occupation of a building or dwelling unit . 
RENTAL UNIT. An accessory detached, attached, or internal accessory living quarters, for rental purposes only, which contains provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation, located on the same lot or parcel as the principal dwelling unit . Accessory living quarters used to house guests , family members or caretakers are not considered rental units. 
RESERVOIR. A pond, lake, basin, or other space, either natural or created in whole or in part by engineered walls or structures , which is used for storage, regulation and control of water for recreation, power, flood control or drinking. Sometimes called impoundment. 
RESIDENTIAL CARE HOME. A dwelling unit , or portion thereof, used and licensed by the State of California or the County of San Mateo, for the care of up to six persons, including overnight occupancy or care for extended time periods, and including all uses defined in §§ 5115 and 5116 of the California Welfare and Institutions Code, or successor legislation. 
ROAD. Any public or private thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to abutting properties and shall include all of the following categories of roads : 
(1)  ARTERIAL. A road designed for the safe movement of through traffic with intersections at grade but with limited direct access. 
(2)  COLLECTOR. A road usually with no limitations placed on access to abutting properties. A collector may function as a feeder and/or connector between arterial roads . 
(3)  CUL-DE-SAC. A road designed primarily for access to abutting properties and not for general traffic use , having one outlet for vehicles and not designed for extension at a later date. 
(4)  DEAD-END ROAD. Any road having one outlet for vehicular traffic but which may be designed to permit its extension at a later date. 
(5)  MINOR RURAL ROAD. A road designed to carry a minimum amount of traffic and utilizing a narrow right-of-way and pavement width for the purpose of retaining to the greatest extent possible the natural terrain and vegetation and to protect the privacy of the abutting properties. MINOR RURAL ROAD may also include culs-de-sac and dead-end roads . 
(6)  EXPRESSWAY. A road of general Town or county importance which is a limited access road carrying major traffic through several areas. 
(7)  FREEWAY. A divided arterial highway for through traffic, with direct access to abutting property prohibited, and with fully controlled access at connecting streets. 
(8)  PRIVATE ROAD RIGHT-OF-WAY. A road , not dedicated to and accepted by the Town as part of its public road system, which is privately owned, and which serves three or more residential parcels for purposes of ingress and egress. 
ROAD OF VISIBILITY. The road , whether public or private, from which a proposed structure is most visible or has the greatest visual impact as determined by the Planning Director . 
SERVICE STATION. An establishment offering the sale of gasoline, oil, diesel, ethanol, or other fuels, and minor accessories, and minor repair services for the operation of motor vehicles, but not including painting, body work, steam cleaning, or major repairs. 
SETBACK. An open space on the same lot as a main structure , unoccupied and unobstructed from the natural ground upward, except as otherwise provided in this title, including a Front setback, side setback, rear setback , or space between structures . 
SETBACK, FRONT. An open space extending across the full width of a lot , the depth of which is the horizontal distance between the front property line to the nearest wall of any main building or structure on the lot . 
SETBACK, REAR. An open space extending across the full Width of a lot , the depth of which is the horizontal distance between the most rear main building on the lot and the rear lot line . 
SETBACK, SIDE. An open space between the side lot line and the nearest building line, extending from the front setback to the rear setback . 
SIGN. Any writing, pictorial representation, symbol, trademark, flag, display, or other device and/or structure which is used to advertise, communicate, announce, identify, or direct attention and which is visible from outside a building . 
SIGN AREA. The area of a sign which is an integral part of a building , wall , awning, canopy, marquee, or other part of a structure , measured on the shortest line drawn to encompass components of the sign , including all intervening and enclosed open spaces. The area of all other signs shall be the largest area measured by a line encompassing all portions of the sign , including the background and tubing, but excluding the supporting posts and attached lighting. In computing the area of a double-faced freestanding sign , only one face of the sign shall be included provided the two faces are parallel and not more than 18 inches apart at any one point. 
SIGNIFICANT TREE. Any living tree that has a trunk circumference, measured 48 inches above mean natural grade , greater than the size in inches in the table below. (For Madrone, Blue Oaks, and Buckeye trees only, if multiple trunks have developed by 48 inches above grade , the measure of circumference shall be the sum of the circumferences of all of the trunks. For California Bay Laurel trees, the measurement pertains only to the largest of multiple trunks.) 
	Circumference 	Diameter 
Slower growing natives 	24 in. 	7.6 in. 
 Alder (Alnus rhombifolia) 		
 Big Leaf Maple (Acer macrophyllum) 		
 Blue Oak (Quercus douglasii) 		
 Buckeye (Aesculus californica) 		
 Fremont Cottonwood (Populus fremontii) 		
 Madrone (Arbutus menziesii) 		
 Tan Bark Oak (Lithocarpus densiflorus) 		
Faster growing natives 	30 in. 	9.5 in. 
 Black Oak (Quercus kelloggii) 		
 California Bay Laurel (Umbellularia californica) 		
 Coast Live Oak (Quercus agrifolia) 		
 Coast Redwood (Sequoia sempervirens) 		
 Douglas Fir (Pseudotsuga menziesii) 		
 Valley Oak (Quercus lobata) 		
 Western Sycamore (Platanus racemosa) 		
Other 	36 in. 	11.5 in. 
 
SLOPE. The steepness of terrain defined as the ratio between the horizontal and vertical distances and expressed in percent, degrees, or a numerical ratio. 
SLOPE, GROSS AVERAGE. The average ground slope of the entire lot , as expressed by the formula: 
S = (0.00229*I*L)/A 
where, 
S = Gross average slope in percent 
I = Contour interval in feet 
L = Combined length of the contour lines in feet; and 
A = The gross area in acres of the parcel or lot . 
Measurements along contours shall be made at contour intervals not to exceed ten feet, and a horizontal map scale of one inch equals 200 feet or larger. 
SLOPE, NET AVERAGE. The average ground slope of the net lot area when all areas with slopes in excess of 35 percent are removed, as expressed by the formula: 
S[N] = (0.00229*I*L)/N 
where, 
S[N] = Net average slope in percent 
I = Contour interval in feet 
L = Combined length of the contour lines in feet; and 
N  = The net area in acres of the parcel or lot when all areas with slopes in excess of 35 percent are removed 
Measurements along contours shall be made at contour intervals not to exceed ten feet, and a horizontal map scale of one inch equals 200 feet or larger. 
STABLE, PRIVATE. A building , or portion thereof, designed or used for the housing or feeding of livestock for private use and accessory to the principal use allowed on the parcel , subject to all the provisions of Chapter 115 of this Code . 
STABLE, PROFESSIONAL. Any establishment regularly providing services or facilities for the keeping or use of horses, other than for private use , as regulated and defined by Sections 115.15 through 115.17 of this Code . 
STANDING SPACE. An area of 3½ square feet of floor area used by standing patrons of establishments which sell alcoholic beverages or food. 
STORY. The vertical space within a building between the surface of a floor and the surface of the floor next above or, if there is no floor above, the roof, but not including attic or underfloor space. 
STREAM CORRIDOR. A horizontal distance of 50 feet, measured from each side of the center line of the stream, or a horizontal distance of 25 feet, measured from the top of the stream or creek bank , whichever is greater. The Planning Commission may establish greater horizontal measurements for specific stream corridors . 
STREAM OR CREEK BANK. The point at which the break in slope occurs. 
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION. Any change in supporting members of a building , including, but not limited to, bearing walls , columns, beams, girders, floor or ceiling joists, roof rafters, foundations, piles, retaining walls , or similar building components, and shall also include any change in the roof or exterior lines. 
STRUCTURE. Anything which is built or constructed and requires a location on the ground, including a building or edifice of any kind and any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts, including swimming pools, fences , and walls . 
STRUCTURE, MAIN. A building or structure housing the principal use of a site or functioning as the principal use . 
STUBBING. Removal of the top of the tree or trimming of its branches to a point that the life of the tree is threatened. 
SUBDIVIDER. The individual or legal entity which causes land to be subdivided for himself, itself, or others. 
SUBDIVISION. The division of any unit of land, or portion thereof, into two or more lots or building sites for the purpose of sale, lease, or financing. 
SUPPORTIVE HOUSING. Housing with no limit on length of stay, that is occupied by the target population , and that is linked to onsite or offsite service that assists the supportive housing resident in retaining the housing, improving his or her health status, and maximizing his or her ability to live and when possible, work in the community (Government Code § 65582(g)). 
SWIMMING POOL, PRIVATE. Any constructed or prefabricated structure for the containment of water used for swimming or bathing that is 24 inches or more in depth with a filtration system and a control drain and is located on the site of a private residence for the exclusive use of residents of the site and their guests . 
TARGET POPULATION. Persons with low incomes who have one or more disabilities, including mental illness, HIV or AIDS, substance abuse, or other chronic health condition, or individuals eligible for services provided pursuant to the Lanterman Developmental Disabilities Services Act Division 4.5 (commencing with Section 4500) of the Welfare and Institutions Code) and may include, among other populations, adults, emancipated minors, families with children, elderly persons, young adults aging out of the foster care system, individuals exiting from institutional settings, veterans, and homeless people (Government Code § 65582(i)). 
TOTAL FLOOR AREA (TFA). The combined floor area of a building or buildings on a lot or building site in square feet. Each residential zoning classification contains a maximum TFA limit. The maximum total floor area limits are defined in Section 153.206(A) and floor area is measured as described in Section 153.206(B). Lot area is defined in Section 153.205(A). 
TOWN. The Town of Woodside, California. 
TOWN CENTER. The area designated as Town Centerin the General Plan. 
TRANSITIONAL HOUSING. Buildings configured as rental housing developments, but operated under program requirements that require the termination of assistance and recirculating of the assisted unit to another eligible program recipient at a predetermined future point in time that shall be no less than six months from the beginning of the assistance (Government Code § 65582(j)). 
TREE DESTRUCTION. The cutting of significant trees to the ground or to stumps, complete extraction, killing by chemical application, stubbing , girdling , placing fill within the drip line , other actions which threaten the life of the tree, or other willful actions that result in the premature death of the tree. 
TRELLIS. A construction of where 50 percent or more of the surface plane of the structure remains open to the outside and over which plants may be trained. 
TURNOUT. A fenced area for the confinement of horses. 
USE. The purpose for which a site or structure is arranged, designed, intended, constructed, erected, moved, altered, or enlarged or for which either a site or structure is or may be occupied or maintained. 
USE, ACCESSORY. The use of a building , or site, or a portion of a building or site, which is incidental to the principal use conducted on or occupying a site. 
USE, COMMERCIAL. Businesses that primarily serve the day-to-day needs of the local community. Secondarily, low-intensity, small scale office use is acceptable. 
USE, CONDITIONAL. A use of land or structure which is permitted under this chapter only after the applicant secures a use permit. 
USE, INSTITUTIONAL, PUBLIC and QUASI-PUBLIC. Educational, governmental, and institutional uses , such as schools, libraries, places of worship, meeting halls, and public parks. 
USE, PERMITTED or PRINCIPAL. A primary use of land or structure permitted without the need to secure additional zoning permits. 
WALL. An upright structure of wood, stone, brick, or other substance or combination of substances serving to enclose, divide, or support and usually having greater mass than a fence . Wall shall include wing wall which shall mean a wall extending from a pylon to form an entrance way. 
WATER SUPPLY LAND. Land devoted to the protection of the water quality as an adjunct to a water supply system. 
WET BAR. A countertop equipped with running water and a sink that does not include a permanent stove/conventional oven, but may include appliances such as a refrigerator or a dishwasher. 
WINERY. An agricultural processing facility used for: 
(1)  The fermenting and processing of fruit juice into wine; or 
(2)  The refermenting of still wine into sparkling wine. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.105) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1990-430, effective 5-10-90; Am. Ord. 1991-441, effective 3-12-91; Am. Ord. 1991-451, effective 1-9-92; Am. Ord. 1997-486, effective 6-26-97; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2005-525, effective 5-12-05; Am. Ord. 2006-534, effective 1-11-07; Am. Ord. 2007-535, effective 3-29-07; Am. Ord. 2012-553, effective 8-23-12; Am. Ord. 2012-554, effective 8-23-12; Am. Ord. 2012-557, effective 12-27-12; Am. Ord. 2012-558, effective 1-10-13; Am. Ord. 2013-559, effective 3-14-13; Am. Ord. 2014-563, effective 2-13-14; Am. Ord. 2015-566, effective 6-11-15; Am. Ord. 2017-582, effective 2-23-17; Am. Ord. 2017-584, effective 4-13-17; Am. Ord. 2017-585, effective 4-27-17; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17; Am. Ord. 2018-596 , § 2(Exh. A, §§ I, III), effective 10-26-18)  
153.100 - ZONING DISTRICTS AND USES 
 
Sec. 153.101 - Establishment of Zoning Districts. 
The following zoning districts into which the Town is divided are established in order to provide a range of adequate housing opportunities, and commercial services to meet day-to-day needs, and a high degree of environmental quality for all economic segments of the community and are designated as follows: 
SCP 	Special Conservation Planning 
RR 	Rural Residential 
SR 	Suburban Residential 
R-1 	Residential 
CC 	Community Commercial 
PCCD 	Planned Community Commercial 
OSH 	Open Space for Health and Safety 
OSRL 	Open Space for Low Intensity Outdoor Recreation 
OSRM 	Open Space for Medium Intensity Outdoor Recreation 
OSN 	Open Space for Preservation of Natural Resources 
OSM 	Open Space for Managed Production of Natural Resources 
MFRD 	Multi-family Residential Development Overlay Zoning 
 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.106) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1988-376, effective 12-8-88; Am. Ord. 1989-394, effective 10-12-89; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2015-565, effective 2-26-15)  
Sec. 153.102 - Classification of zoning districts. 
(A)  The SCP District applies to certain lands designated in the General Plan diagram and text as "problem areas" and other land with similar characteristics as designated by the Planning Commission where more than one significant problem exists. The Special Conservation Planning (SCP) Districts are special rural residential classifications where the minimum lot size is either five acres, 7½ acres, or ten acres, and where minimum lot size for newly created lots shall increase as the average slope of the lot increases for lots over 15 percent average slope where the provisions of Section 153.414 of this chapter apply. The purpose of the SCP District is to provide for reduced human densities for lands containing characteristics such as, but not limited to, steep hillsides, geological hazards, difficult road access, or soil or water problems, and to implement the policies of the General Plan. Below are guidelines for SCP District classification. 
(1)  Findings. 
(a)  In 1988, the Town Council adopted a revised Woodside General Plan. Said General Plan set forth certain policies for evaluating lot densities, goals for development, defining environmentally sensitive areas and the constraints found therein. 
(b)  Also in 1988 and 1989, the Town staff did a detailed study of the various constraints as identified in General Plan Policy 2111. A constraints map of the Town was prepared (herein the "Map"). The most constrained areas were compared with other zoning districts to determine whether their zoning designation reflected the level of constraints shown for the property. It was determined that areas with greater constraints were zoned with a similar density to areas less constrained. 
(c)  A broader range of districts for environmentally sensitive areas were created for the SCP Zoning District as set forth in division (A)(1) above, which districts were created to allow residential density to be varied in the SCP District according to environmental constraints. 
(d)  In order to provide greater consistency with the General Plan, and to provide guidelines for application of the SCP Zoning classifications the following regulations shall apply: 
(2)  Constraints/definitions. Environmental constraints have been identified in the Town . The Town's Constraints Map, dated April, 1988, on file with the Town Clerk , is incorporated herein by reference. The constraints which have been identified are relevant to the public health, safety and welfare of the residents of the Town . The constraints and their definitions are as follows: 
Constraints 	Definition 
Unstable lands 	Lands identified on Town's official geological hazards map 
Alquist-Priolo zones 	660 feet in either side of faults 
Low soil permeability 	Soils above Butano formation 
High ground water 	San Mateo County Department of Environmental Health 
Steep slopes 	Slopes >35% 
Fire hazard 	High and Moderate High Hazard (GP) 
Noise 	>= 60 dba 
Scenic corridor 	Viewshed from Skyline and 280 scenic corridors 
Flood zones 	100-year flood zones 
 
(3)  Application of constraints. In order to control the density of development on more constrained property, and protect the health, safety and welfare of persons and property, the following zoning classifications shall be applied in the SCP District consistent with the greater number of identified constraints: 
SCP - 10 	4+ constraints 
SCP - 7.5 	3 constraints 
SCP - 5 	1 or 2 constraints 
 
(4)  Further reduction of lot density. In addition to the minimum lot sizes in the SCP Zoning District, lot density may be further reduced at the time of any subdivision of such property pursuant to the applicable rules and regulations of the Town in effect at the time of subdivision . 
(5)  Identification of constraints. Identification of constraints affecting a parcel shall be determined by the Planning Director , with the assistance of Town staff. The Planning Director shall make such determination in accordance with the following procedure: 
(a)  Ascertain the constraints affecting the parcel ; 
(b)  Ascertain the percentage of the parcel subject to one constraint, then two constraints, and then to each respective multiple of constraints thereafter, up to a maximum of six constraints. 
(c)  A parcel shall be identified as having a total number of constraints, for classification purposes, equal to the number of constraints shown for 50 percent or more of the parcel's area, counting backwards from the areas subject to the greatest number of constraints. 
For example: A parcel of 600 acres is identified as having 15 percent (90 acres) with constraints, 20 percent (120 acres) with constraints, 60 percent (360 acres) with constraints, five percent (30 acres) with constraints and zero percent with (five or six) constraints. Counting backwards from the higher number of constraints 50 percent of the property is reached with three constraints. This property would be assigned to the SCP 7.5 District Classification. 
(d)  In addition, a parcel shall be classified as if 50 percent of its property were subject to one additional constraint where the total parcel is subject to four or more constraints. 
For example: In the 600-acre parcel above, there are constraints applicable to the property. Instead of being classified with constraints, as are applicable to 50 percent of its area, it would be classified with constituents due to the greater number (four or more) of constraints that apply overall to the property. It would be classified therefore in the SCP-10 District Classification. 
(B)  The RR District is a rural residential classification where the minimum three-acre lot size requirement, for newly created lots , shall increase as the average slope of the ground increases where the provisions of Section 153.414 apply. The purpose of the RR District is to preserve the Town's primarily rural single-family character. 
(C)  The SR District is a suburban residential classification where the minimum one-acre lot size requirement, for newly created lots , shall increase as the average slope of a lot increases where the provisions of Section 153.414 of this chapter apply. The purpose of the SR District is to provide suburban residential opportunities within the Town's predominately rural setting. 
(D)  The R-1 District is a residential classification where the minimum 20,000 square feet lot size requirements, for newly created lots , shall increase as the average slope of a lot increases where the provisions of Section 153.414 of this chapter apply. Note: Newly created lots in the R-1 District shall comply with the slope density requirements for the SR District in Section 153.414. 
(E)  The CC District is a commercial classification designating uses which have the probability of primarily serving the frequent recurring day-to-day needs of the local community. 
(F)  The Open Space Zone Districts, OSH, OSN, OSRL, OSRM and OSM, have no minimum lot size. The purpose of the OSH, OSN, OSRL, OSRM and OSM Districts are to implement the polices of the open space element of the General Plan, principally to conserve open space for the preservation of natural resources, outdoor recreation and the public health and safety. The provisions of Section 153.414 of this chapter shall not apply to lots in the OSH, OSN, OSRL, OSRM and OSM Districts. 
(G)  (1)  Definition of Planned Community Commercial District. A Planned Community Commercial District is intended to govern and accommodate various types of commercial development, as may be allowed in a Community Commercial District ("CCD"), while allowing greater flexibility in design and planning consistent with the General Plan. Any commercial development that is a subject of an application for enactment of a PCCD under the ordinance codified in this section is hereinafter referred to as a "Project." A PCCD is further intended to obtain substantial public benefit and to provide for maximum review of any proposed project by the Town Council and the agencies of the Town . 
(2)  Relationship of Planned Community Commercial District to Community Commercial District. All or any part of a CCD may be designated under the provisions of this chapter as a PCCD. One or more PCCDs may exist within a CCD. 
(3)  Alternative rules for governing a PCCD. A PCCD may be governed solely under existing zoning ordinances, applicable to a CCD ("CCD Rules") or under rules that may be established specifically for the purposes of the PCCD as provided in this chapter ("PCCD Rules"). The PCCD Rules may incorporate all or part of the CCD Rules under the terms and conditions established in division (G)(2) above. 
(H)  Definition of Multi-family Residential Development Overlay Zoning. Multi-family Residential Overlay Zoning (MFRD) is intended to accommodate the development of multi-family housing opportunities in areas of few constraints and sufficient infrastructure. MFRD is further intended to obtain substantial public benefit and to provide for maximum review of any proposed development project by the Planning Commission and the agencies of the Town. One or more MFRDs may exist on a single parcel . 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.107) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1989-385, effective 4-13-89; Am. Ord. 1989-389, effective 9-1-89; Am. Ord. 1989-393, effective 10-12-89; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2012-553, effective 8-23-12; Am. Ord. 2015-565, effective 2-26-15; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.103 - Zoning Map. 
A map entitled "Zoning Map, Town of Woodside" is incorporated by reference, made a part of this chapter, and designated as Section 153.103. The zoning map shall be available for public inspections at the Town Hall under the same terms and conditions as other public documents. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.108) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.104 - Zoning district boundaries. 
The boundaries of the zoning districts shall be shown on the zoning map maintained in the office of the Planning Department. Where any uncertainty exists as to the boundary of a district as shown on the zoning map, the following regulations shall apply: 
(A)  Where a boundary line is indicated as following a road , the boundary line shall be construed as following the road right-of-way center line. 
(B)  Where a boundary line appears to follow or coincides approximately with a lot line or property ownership line, the boundary line shall be construed as following the line or property ownership line. 
(C)  Where a boundary line is not indicated as following a road and does not follow or coincide approximately with a lot line or property ownership line, the boundary line shall be determined by scaled measurement of the zoning map. 
(D)  Where further uncertainty exists, the Planning Commission , upon a written application or on its own motion, shall determine the location of the boundary line in question, giving due consideration to the location indicated on the zoning map, the objectives of the General Plan, and the purposes set forth in the zoning district regulations. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.109) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.105 - Prezoning of adjoining unincorporated territory. 
(A)  Where adjoining unincorporated land has been prezoned in accordance with the procedures prescribed in the California Government Code, the zoning district applied by the prezoning action shall become effective when such lands are annexed to the Town . 
(B)  Where a prezoning action has not been taken, all land or territory annexed to the Town , simultaneously with such action, shall be classified in the SCP District and shall be so shown on the zoning map until such time as the property is rezoned to a district consistent with its use and with the General Plan. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.110) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99)  
Sec. 153.106 - Conformity required. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter: 
(A)  No structure shall be erected, reconstructed, relocated, or structurally altered to have a greater height or bulk or to cover a greater proportion of the lot upon which it is situated under the limitations set forth in this chapter for the district in which such structure is located. If such structure , on or before August 12, 1980, is larger than the maximum otherwise permitted under the provisions of this chapter, the structure shall not be further increased in such height , bulk, or parcel coverage, except as provided in Section 153.236(B). 
(B)  No structure shall be erected, reconstructed, relocated, or structurally altered which would result in smaller yards than permissible under the limitations set forth for the district in which such structure is located, except as provided in Sections 153.236(C) and 153.237. 
(C)  No setback , off-road parking space, or loading space for any structure or upon any lot shall be reduced below the minimum requirements set forth for such setback , parking space, or loading space. If already less than the minimum required for the district in which each is located, there shall be no further intrusion into the required setback area. 
(D)  No lot shall be used for a principal use , conditional use , or accessory use , except: 
(1)  Lots shown on a land division or subdivision map approved by the Town ; and 
(2)  Lots which are excepted from the area requirements of this chapter by Section 153.205(C). 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.111) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.107 - Residential and commercial zoning districts: permitted, conditional, and accessory uses. 
The table set forth in this section indicates by the symbol "X" the permitted, conditional and accessory uses allowed in each district. Uses not listed in the table under any case category, shall not be permitted under this chapter unless the Planning Commission determines that the use is similar to the uses listed in the table. 
TABLE A-1: Permitted Uses and Structures in Residential and Commercial Zoning Districts 
Permitted uses and structures 	SCP 	RR 	SR 	R-1 	CC 	MFRD 
Agricultural uses 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Banks and savings and loan facilities not exceeding 2,000 square feet of usable floor area 					X 	
Beekeeping 	X 	X 	X 			
Business, administrative, and professional offices not exceeding 2,000 square feet of usable floor area 					X 	
Emergency shelters 					X 	
Manufactured homes ( mobile homes ) 	X 	X 	X 	X 		
Open space and conservation uses 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Residential care homes 	X 	X 	X 	X 		
Single-family residential use, including any use associated within a single-family dwelling , including but not limited to, attached garages and carports , wine storage, exercise rooms, home occupations as defined in § 153.005 and limited by § 153.111 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Supportive housing 	X 	X 	X 	X 		
Stores and facilities not exceeding 2,000 square feet for the sale or provision of: 						
 Apparel 					X 	
 Art supplies 					X 	
 Objects of art and antiques 					X 	
 Bakery goods 					X 	
 Bicycle sales and repairs 					X 	
 Books 					X 	
 Catering food 					X 	
 Confectioneries 					X 	
 China and glassware 					X 	
 Curtains and draperies 					X 	
 Drugs and pharmacies 					X 	
 Dry-cleaning agencies without bulk cleaning 					X 	
 Small electrical appliances and repairs 					X 	
 Equestrian supplies 					X 	
 Feed 					X 	
 Finance 					X 	
 Florists 					X 	
 Garden supplies provided all equipment and merchandise, other than plants, shall be kept within a completely enclosed building or fully screened enclosure 					X 	
 Gifts and greeting cards 					X 	
 Haircutting and styling 					X 	
 Hardware 					X 	
 Hobby materials 					X 	
 Interior decorating with incidental retail sales 					X 	
 Jewelry 					X 	
 Laundry agencies without bulk laundering 					X 	
 Leather goods and luggage 					X 	
 Linens 					X 	
 Liquor 					X 	
 Locksmiths 					X 	
 Mail order and catalog services 					X 	
 Messenger services 					X 	
 Musical instruments 					X 	
 Nurseries, retail 					X 	
 Paint, glass, and wallpaper and related supplies 					X 	
 Pets 					X 	
 Phonograph records 					X 	
 Photocopying services 					X 	
 Photographic equipment and supplies 					X 	
 Picture framing 					X 	
 Pool supplies 					X 	
 Printing and engraving services 					X 	
 Radio and television sales and repairs 					X 	
 Real estate services 					X 	
 Secretarial services 					X 	
 Shoes and shoe repair 					X 	
 Sporting goods 					X 	
 Stamps and coins 					X 	
 Stationery 					X 	
 Taxidermist services 					X 	
 Toys 					X 	
 Travel agency services 					X 	
 Watch and clock sales and repairs 					X 	
 Yard goods 					X 	
Transitional housing 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
 
TABLE A-2: Conditional Uses in Residential and Commercial Zoning Districts 
Conditional uses 	SCP 	RR 	SR 	R-1 	CC 	MFRD 
Additional dwelling : One additional single-family dwelling for parcels in excess of ten acres provided the location does not preclude future land divisions; and access, water supplies, and sewage disposal meeting the standards of the subdivision provisions are available 	X 	X 	X 			
Banks, savings and loan facilities, and business and administrative and professional offices exceeding 2,000 square feet of usable floor area 					X 	
Cafes and coffee shops containing not more than 50 seats 					X 	
Churches 		X 	X 	X 	X 	
Covered or uncovered constructed equestrian riding arenas totaling more than 10% of the lot area . The CUP shall only be approved if the constructed equestrian riding arena is an accessory use , not a primary, use on the property. 	X 	X 	X 	X 		
Delicatessens 					X 	
Food stores 					X 	
Golf courses 					X 	
Green energy production and/or distribution 					X 	
Greenhouses the aggregate area of which exceeds 250 square feet 	X 	X 	X 	X 		
Hay/feed sales 	X 	X 			X 	
 Minimum parcel size shall be 7½ acres (not applicable to CC zone) 						
 Hay/feed uses shall be accessory to principal residential uses (not applicable to CC zone) 						
 Storage of equipment, such as trucks, loaders, conveyors, and the like, shall not be visible from adjacent public or private roads or properties 						
 Hay/feed storage piles may not be visible from adjacent public or private roads or properties 						
 Hay/feed storage areas shall meet yard setback requirements 						
 Sales shall be by off-site delivery by proprietor only. On-site pick-ups shall not be permitted (not applicable to CC zone) 						
 The serving road network shall be adequate to accommodate hay/feed delivery trucks. Property shall have direct access to and be within 600 feet of an arterial or collector road as defined in Sections 2409 and 2410 of the General Plan 						
 Other conditions may be imposed by the Planning Commission if deemed appropriate 						
Ice cream stores 					X 	
Livestock , subject to the provisions of this Code 						
Memorial cemeteries 	X 					
Moving permit: No structure shall be moved into or out of the Town or from one lot to another lot within the Town unless a moving permit is authorized by the Planning Commission . 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 
Multi-family residential use, including any use associated with a multi-family dwelling , including, but not limited to, garages and carports , exercise rooms, utility enclosures, home occupations as defined in § 153.005 and limited by § 153.111 						X 
Music and dance instruction 					X 	
Nurseries, wholesale 	X 	X 			X 	
Nurseries, retail, with building area in excess of 2,000 square feet 					X 	
Private and parochial schools 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Philanthropic and/or charitable institutions 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Private noncommercial clubs and recreation facilities 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Professional stables , subject to the requirements of §§ 115.01 through 115.17 of this Code and any additional conditions required by the Planning Commission 	X 	X 				
Public buildings , parks, and schools only when consistent with the general plan 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Public parking facilities 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Public utility and public service structures and installations and transmission lines when found by the Planning Commission be necessary to service land, structures , or the Town as a whole 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Reservoirs and appurtenances 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Restaurants, cocktail lounges, and bars 					X 	
Sandwich shops 					X 	
Soda fountains 					X 	
Service stations 					X 	
Stores and facilities in excess of 2,000 square feet listed as permitted uses 					X 	
Tree farming 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Wineries * 	X 	X 	X 		N/A 	
Wireless communication facilities 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
* There are three SCP Zoning Districts for wineries: 5, 7.5, and 10 
 
TABLE A-3: Accessory Uses in Residential and Commercial Zoning Districts 
Accessory uses 	SCP 	RR 	SR 	R-1 	CC 	MFRD 
Attached accessory dwelling units , within or attached to the main dwelling , or within a building in the CC zone. (See § 153.211(A)(5) to determine the number of accessory dwelling units permitted on a lot .) 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 
Detached accessory dwelling units , detached from the main dwelling . (See § 153.211(A)(5) to determine the number of accessory dwelling units permitted on a lot , and lot size requirement for detached accessory dwelling units on lots in the R-1 District.) 	X 	X 	X 	X 		X 
Animal as follows: 						
 Keeping of fowl, rabbits, or other small animals not to exceed an aggregate total of 25 in number per acre up to a maximum of 50 per lot . Structures housing such fowl or animals shall comply with § 153.207 	X 	X 	X 	X 		
 Horses and cattle—the minimum property size shall be one acre and the maximum allowable livestock shall be one equine or bovine for each one-half acre, except as provided by §§ 115.14 and 115.17 	X 	X 	X 	X 		
 Sheep and goats—the maximum allowable shall be two animals for each one-half acre 	X 	X 	X 	X 		
General: 						
 The number of animals of any species allocated for any area shall preclude that area's numerical allocation to another species; and 						
 Seasonal and educational group projects, including the raising of hogs, shall be exempt from the provisions of this section 						
 Keeping of domestic animals for noncommercial purposes, together with the necessary buildings and structures ; and the keeping of not more than three adult dogs. A kennel permit shall be required for the keeping of more than three adult dogs, subject to review and approval as per § 115.14(A)(1) and (2) and (B)—(E) (Stable permit exceptions) of the code. The limitation on the number of dogs shall not apply to animals less than six months old 	X 	X 	X 	X 		
Covered or uncovered constructed equestrian riding arenas totaling no more than 10% of the lot area . 	X 	X 	X 	X 		
Electric vehicle charging stations 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Fences and walls subject to the height and area requirements of this chapter 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Garden structures other than greenhouses 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Greenhouses 250 square feet or less 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Habitable structures , including but not limited to, guest suites, workshops, pool cabanas, exercise rooms, home offices, and media rooms. A change of use shall not be required for the conversion of a nonconforming single-family residential structure to the uses listed in this box, or for the conversion of an accessory habitable structure to a single-family residential use. (See § 153.235(C)(3)) 	X 	X 	X 	X 		
Hay/feed sales (see conditional uses ) 						
Natural gas fueling dispensers to serve vehicles for the principal permitted or conditional use 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Off-road parking 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Storage of house trailer , motor home , camper , or boat provided that: 						
 Vehicles shall not be parked more than 14 days within any 90 day period; wheels shall not be removed; storage of vehicles exceeding the time limits above shall be within an enclosed building or structure or screened by natural vegetation and/or Solid Fencing to the satisfaction of the Planning Director so as not to be visible from roads and adjacent property and located to conform with all the provisions of this chapter 	X 	X 	X 	X 		
Private detached garages and carports 	X 	X 	X 	X 		
Private stables 	X 	X 	X 	X 		
Private swimming pools , tennis courts, and similar recreation facilities 	X 	X 	X 	X 		
Signs subject to the provisions of §§ 153.501 through 153.506 of this chapter 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Storage buildings 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Storage of farm and garden equipment for use on the same premises 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Sales of agricultural products grown on the premises 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
 
  
SCP 	Special Conservation Planning 
RR 	Rural Residential 
SR 	Suburban Residential 
R-1 	Residential 
CC 	Community Commercial 
MFRD 	Multi-family Residential Development Overlay Zoning 
 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.112) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1989-399, effective 10-12-89; Am. Ord. 1991-451, effective 1-9-92; Am. Ord. 1995-478, effective 4-23-95; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2001-510, effective 6-7-01; Am. Ord. 2003-518, effective 7-24-03; Am. Ord. 2005-525, effective 5-12-05; Am. Ord. 2012-554, effective 8-23-12; Am. Ord. 2012-557, effective 12-27-12; Am. Ord. 2012-558, effective 1-10-13; Am. Ord. 2013-559, effective 3-14-13; Am. Ord. 2015-565, effective 2-26-15; Am. Ord. 2015-566, effective 6-11-15; Am. Ord. 2015-567, effective 7-9-15; Am. Ord. 2015-569, effective 1-7-16; Am. Ord. 2017-582, effective 2-23-17; Am. Ord. 2017-585, effective 4-27-17; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17; Am. Ord. 2018-594 , § 2, effective 5-24-18)  
Sec. 153.108 - Open space zoning districts: Permitted, conditional, and accessory uses. 
The table set forth in this section indicates by the symbol "X" the permitted, conditional and accessory uses allowed in each district. Uses not listed in the table under any case category, shall not be permitted under this chapter unless the Planning Commission determines that the use is similar to the uses listed in the table. 
TABLE B-1: Permitted Uses and Structures in Open Space Zoning Districts 
Permitted uses and structures 	OSH 	OSRL 	OSRM 	OSN 	OSM 
Agricultural uses (food and fiber products) 		X 	X 		X 
Agricultural uses ( livestock pasture ) 	X 				X 
Beekeeping 	X 			X 	X 
Conservation easements 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 
Ecologic study 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 
Fences 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 
Greenhouse (noncommercial) not to exceed 750 square feet 	X 				X 
Planting of native vegetation 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 
Scenic easements 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 
Signs (subject to the provisions of §§ 153.501 through 153.506) 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 
Trails, hiking and equestrian (as part of master plan approved by Town ) 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 
Uses of historical and cultural value 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 
 
TABLE B-2: Conditional Uses in Open Space Zoning Districts 
Conditional uses 	OSH 	OSRL 	OSRM 	OSN 	OSM 
Animals, permitted only if there is a caretaker living either on the premises or on contiguous premises not zoned open space on a 24-hour basis, as follows: 					
 Keeping of fowl, rabbits, or other small animals not to exceed an aggregate total of 25 in number per acre up to a maximum of 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 
 50 per lot ; structures housing such fowl or animals shall comply with § 153.207. 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 
 Horses and cattle; the minimum lot size shall be one acre; the maximum allowable shall be one equine or bovine for each one-half acre 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 
 Sheep and goats; the maximum allowable shall be two animals for each one-half acre 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 
 Keeping of domestic animals for noncommercial purposes, together with the necessary buildings and structures ; and the keeping of not more than three adult dogs; a kennel permit shall be required for the keeping of more than three adult dogs; the limitation on the number of dogs shall not apply to animals less than six months old 	X 	X 		X 	X 
Athletic fields and courts 			X 		
Caretaker residence (not to exceed 1,500 square feet and including mobile homes for caretakers ) 		X 	X 	X 	X 
Covered or uncovered constructed equestrian riding arenas . The CUP shall only be approved if the constructed equestrian riding arena is an accessory use on the property. 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Garages incidental to a caretaker unit, not to exceed 600 square feet 		X 	X 	X 	X 
Greenhouse (noncommercial) from 750 to 2,500 square feet 		X 			X 
Hay/feed sales (see Table A) 		X 	X 		X 
Livestock , subject to the provisions of this Code 				X 	X 
Moving permit: No structure shall be moved into or out of the Town or from one lot to another lot within the Town unless a moving permit is authorized by the Planning Commission . 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 
Nursery, wholesale 					X 
Off-road parking, private 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 
Ornamental garden structures 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 
Private, Noncommercial Clubs and recreation facilities 			X 		
Private stables 		X 	X 	X 	X 
Professional stables 		X 	X 		
Public and private parks, including picnic areas 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Public buildings 		X 	X 		
Public parking facilities for Town approved recreational facilities 		X 	X 	X 	
Public swimming pools, tennis courts and similar recreation facilities 			X 		
Public utilities and public service structures and installations and transmission lines when found by the Planning Commission to be necessary to service land, structures , or the Town as a whole 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 
Reservoirs and appurtenances 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 
Sales of agricultural products grown on the premises 					X 
Stables and barns , Private 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Storage buildings (not to exceed 1,500 square feet) 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 
Storage of farm land garden equipment for use on the premises 		X 	X 		X 
Tree farms 					X 
Trails, bicycle (as part of master plan approved by Town ) 		X 	X 		
Wireless communication facility 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 
 
  
TABLE B-3: Accessory Uses in Open Space Zoning Districts 
Accessory uses 	OSH 	OSRL 	OSRM 	OSN 	OSM 
Electric vehicle charging stations 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 
Natural gas fueling dispensers to serve vehicles for the Principal Permitted or conditional use 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 
 
  
OSH 	Open Space for Health and Safety 
OSRL 	Open Space for Low Intensity Outdoor Recreation 
OSRM 	Open Space for Medium Intensity Outdoor Recreation 
OSN 	Open Space for Preservation of Natural Resources 
OSM 	Open Space for Managed Production of Resources 
 
(Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17; Am. Ord. 2017-591, effective 12-14-17)  
Sec. 153.109 - Planned Community Commercial District. 
(A)  Imitation of a PCCD: Application for creation. A PCCD may be established as an overlay zoning district for property which is within a CCD in accordance with the procedures set forth in this chapter for amendments of the Town zoning ordinance. Application for a PCCD may be made at any time by any one of the following parties: 
(1)  The Town Council ; 
(2)  The Planning Commission ; or 
(3)  Any holder of a fee or possessory interest in any of the real property located in a CCD. 
(B)  Establishment and scope of PCCD rules. Any applicant for the establishment of a PCCD may seek approval for the imposition of PCCD rules on that PCCD from the Town Council and the Planning Commission (the "reviewing bodies") pursuant to division (D) below. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, however, no PCCD rule shall change or deviate from the applicable height and parking standards of the CCD rules, and, without limiting the foregoing, no PCCD rule shall deviate from any other quantified CCD rule by more than 25 percent. Upon such approval of the proposed PCCD by the reviewing bodies, the PCCD rules shall become a part of the zoning ordinances of the Town . 
(C)  Conceptual plan. Each application for the establishment of a PCCD shall be accompanied by a conceptual plan in written and graphic form (a "conceptual plan"). Upon approval of the proposed PCCD by the reviewing bodies pursuant to division (D) below, the conceptual plan shall become a part of the zoning map of the Town . 
(1)  Elements of a conceptual plan. Each conceptual plan shall show the following information in respect of any project in graphic or schematic form in a scale reasonably satisfactory to the Planning Director : 
(a)  Land uses ; 
(b)  Location of new and existing buildings , structures and building groups; 
(c)  Architectural plans, elevations and cross sections in standard schematic format; 
(d)  Floor area ratios and maximum heights of proposed new buildings and structures ; 
(e)  Vehicular, equestrian, bicycle and pedestrian circulation systems, including preliminary street cross-sections; 
(f)  Location and type of existing and proposed landscaping, including identification of any trees to be removed; 
(g)  Narrative and graphic depiction of the relation to and impact on present and future (u contemplated by the General Plan) land use in surrounding area; 
(h)  Narrative and graphic depiction of proposed off-street parking, including the location and number of parking spaces and the proposed ratio of parking spaces to number of persons using project facilities; 
(i)  Any additional data as may be reasonably required by the Planning Director to analyze the application for the PCCD in respect of the requirements and goals of this section. 
(2)  Submission of conceptual plan to Architectural and Site Review Board. The conceptual plan (together with any proposed PCCD rules) shall be submitted by the applicant to the Architectural and Site Review Board ("ASRB") for its review and report of its recommendations to the Planning Director . 
(3)  Requirements for additional information to be submitted with proposed PCCD rules or conceptual plan. The Town Council , the Planning Commission or the Planning Director may, at any time before any proposed PCCD rules or conceptual plan are finally approved, require an applicant to submit information, in addition to that required to be submitted as part of the conceptual plan or otherwise required by this section, which will reasonably assist the reviewing bodies to determine the substantial conformity of the proposed project with the General Plan and to make or fail to make the findings required under division (H) below. Such additional information may include without limitation data concerning whether the project is economically feasible or any information suggested by the ASRB in its report to the Planning Director . 
(D)  Approval of PCCD rules and conceptual plan. Each conceptual plan and, if applicable, any proposed PCCD rules shall be required to be approved by the Planning Commission and, thereafter, by the Town Council . 
(E)  Conditional use permit and specific development plan. A conditional use permit shall be required for any and all uses in a PCCD. 
(1)  Conditions to development. An application for a conditional use permit under this section shall include a specific development plan covering the entire PCCD and all projects proposed to be located therein (the "specific development plan"). No construction or other development shall commence within the proposed PCCD until the Planning Commission and then the Town Council shall approve the specific development plan. The specific development plan, upon approval by the reviewing bodies, shall become a part of the subject conditional use permit. 
(2)  Time for submission of specific development plan. The applicant shall submit the application for approval of a specific development plan within one year following the adoption of the conceptual plan for the proposed PCCD. 
(3)  Elements of specific development plan. The specific development plan shall include the following elements: 
(a)  A map showing the existing topography and the proposed topography of the project at one-foot contour intervals, or as otherwise approved by the Town Planning Director's staff; 
(b)  A site plan for the entire area of the proposed PCCD showing: 
1.  Vehicular, pedestrian, bicycle and equestrian, if applicable, circulation; 
2.  Parking areas and the proposed ratio of parking spaces (off-street/on-street) to the number of persons using project facilities, all parking aisles, stall and curve radii dimensions and landscaped areas ; 
3.  Areas proposed for dedication for parks, parkways, playgrounds or public buildings ; 
4.  Landscaped public open space; 
5.  Landscaped private open space; 
6.  Placement of all proposed buildings and structures and property lines, 
7.  A detailed tabulation of the densities; 
8.  Any or all additional plans, diagrams and information, when deemed reasonably appropriate by the Planning Director , of the following types: 
a.  An off-street parking and loading plan; 
b.  A circulation diagram showing proposed movement of vehicles, pedestrians, bicycles, equines and goods within the proposed PCCD and to and from adjacent public thoroughfares; 
c.  Information and diagrams showing special engineering features and traffic regulation devices needed to facilitate or [ensure] the safety of movement of vehicles, pedestrians, bicycles, equines and goods; 
d.  A landscaping and tree planting plan showing, inter alia, the approximate location, type and size of tree and plant materials to be retained or installed; 
e.  An engineering site grading plan showing proposed finished grades , public improvements and site drainage; 
f.  A detailed engineering improvement plan showing public utilities within the proposed PCCD, including provisions for off-site connections and facilities necessary to serve the project; 
g.  A written statement describing proposed recreation and open space areas, including proposals for ownership, development and maintenance thereof; 
(c)  Complete preliminary architectural plans, elevations and cross sections; 
(d)  A development schedule providing the following: 
1.  The approximate date on which construction of any proposed project within the PCCD can be expected to begin. 
2.  The anticipated rate of development. 
3.  The anticipated completion date. 
Such schedule, if approved by the reviewing bodies in the course of approval of the conditional use permit, shall be known as the development schedule. 
(F)  Applications by Town Council or Planning Commission. Notwithstanding the requirements of divisions (B), (C) and (E) above, a PCCD initiated by the Planning Commission or the Town Council shall require only a graphic conceptual plan containing, at the discretion of the Town Council , all or part of the information required under division (C) above. 
(G)  General development standards and requirements. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, all projects shall be subject to the goals, policies, standards and requirements, taken from and referring to paragraphs of the General Plan, that are set forth in Exhibit A that is appended to the ordinance codified in this section and hereby incorporated herein. 
(H)  Findings. 
(1)  Conformity to General Plan. As a condition to approval of a conceptual plan, any PCCD rules or a conditional use permit under the provisions of this section, the Planning Commission or the Town Council , as the case may be, shall make all of the following findings with respect to the matter under consideration: 
(a)  The conceptual plan, PCCD rules or conditional use permit, as the case may be, and any proposed project will conform to the General Plan, including without limitation all of the goals, policies, standards and requirements set forth in division (G) above; 
(b)  The uses proposed for the PCCD will not be detrimental to present and planned uses of surrounding property, as the latter are described in the General Plan; 
(c)  The PCCD and any projects proposed therefor will be consistent with the applicable provisions of Section 153.927; 
(d)  The PCCD and any projects proposed therefor will not have a materially adverse and unmitigatable impact on finances of the Town . 
(2)  Special findings regarding PCCD rules. If any PCCD rules are to be adopted, then in addition to the findings required under division (H)(1) above, the Planning Commission or the Town Council , as the case may be, shall make all of the following findings with respect to the matter under consideration: The proposed PCCD rules will result in or permit a public benefit exceeding the public benefit that would result if the PCCD were governed solely under the CCD rules. For the purposes of this section, examples of such benefits may include but not be limited to the providing of: 
(a)  Landscaping or open space; 
(b)  On-site or off-site public improvements such as trails, pathways, off-road parking or retail services for local residents; or 
(c)  Off-site public improvements not normally required as part of a commercial development. 
(3)  Special findings regarding Conditional Use permits. If an application for a conditional use permit is to be approved, then in addition to the findings required under division (H)(1) above, the Planning Commission or the Town Council , as the case may be, shall also find with respect to the matter under consideration that the specific development plan conforms to the conceptual plan approved in respect of the proposed PCCD. 
(I)  Amendment of elements of PCCD. 
(1)  Changes in conceptual plan. Changes in the conceptual plan shall be considered the same as changes in a zoning ordinance and shall be made in accordance with the procedures set forth in Sections 153.961 through 153.965. 
(2)  Changes in specific development plan. Changes in the specific development plan shall be considered the same as changes in a use permit and shall be made in accordance with the procedures set forth in Sections 153.921 through 153.930. 
(J)  Forfeiture of conditional use permit. A conditional use permit granted under this section shall become null and void unless the development schedule is met in all respects. For good cause shown by the person to whom the conditional use permit has been issued in a writing delivered to the Town Clerk prior to the expiration of the development schedule, the Town Council may extend the limits imposed by the development schedule in accordance with Sections 153.961 through 153.965. Extensions of the conditional use permit may be granted for up to one year at the discretion of the Town Council , provided that such extensions shall not exceed two years cumulatively. 
(K)  Rezoning. If, in the opinion of the Planning Commission or the Town Council , a private applicant shall at any time fail to meet any requirement of the applicable conditional use permit other than the requirements of the development schedule, then, notwithstanding the granting of any extensions pursuant to division (G) above, upon a written recommendation by the Planning Commission to the Town Council , or upon motion of the Town Council , as the case may be, the Town Council may initiate proceedings under Sections 153.961 through 153.965 to rezone the property to another zoning district which shall conform to the General Plan. 
(L)  Relationship of PCCD ordinance to other ordinances. Unless expressly provided otherwise in this chapter, the general provisions of the Town zoning ordinance which apply to all zones shall also apply to PCCDs. 
(M)  Application and fees. Applications for establishment of a PCCD in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall be made by the applicant or any duly authorized agent thereof on forms to be prescribed by the Town and shall be accompanied by fees to be established by resolution adopted by the Town Council . 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.112.1) (Ord. 1988-376, effective 12-8-88; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.110 - Multi-Family Residential Development Overlay Zone. 
(A)  Multi-family residential development (MFRD), as defined and regulated in this section and shown and defined on the Town Zoning Map, may occur within the Cañada College Campus provided that it follows the regulations of this section. 
(B)  Initiation of a multi-family residential development application: MFRD may be developed on property which is within the defined area and owned by Cañada College Campus in accordance with the procedures set forth in this section. Application to construct a MFRD may be made at any time by any holder of a fee or possessory interest in any of the real property located on the defined Cañada College Campus. 
(C)  Development standards and requirements. 
(1)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, all MFRD projects shall be subject to the goals policies, standards and requirements of the General Plan. 
(2)  For the purposes of this section, the applicant shall designate a "MFRD lot" or "MFRD lots" as the site(s) of the MFRD. Each "MFRD lot" may be a legal parcel , or it may be a portion of a legal parcel within the defined Cañada College campus that will accommodate MFRD. Each "MFRD lot" shall not include any other buildings , or uses such as parking or open space that supports other buildings not on the MFRD lot. 
(3)  The following standards shall be met by any proposed MFRD (see Table A: MFRD Development Standards): 
(a)  Lot dimensions . Lots accommodating MFRD shall be no less than 75 feet in any dimension. 
(b)  Lot coverage . No more than 60% of the lot shall be covered by buildings . 
(c)  Unit density. The minimum unit count on the lot shall be at least one unit per 4,500 square feet of lot area. The maximum unit count on the lot shall be no more than one unit per 2,400 square feet. 
(d)  Building height . No residential structure shall exceed 35 feet in height, and no accessory structure shall exceed 17 feet in height. 
(e)  Setback requirements . For the purposes of this section, setbacks shall be measured from 1) the legal parcel boundary, 2) the edge of the "MFRD lot" defined in division (C)(2) of this section, or 3) the edge of any internal roadway on the Cañada College site, whichever is more restrictive. The Planning Director shall determine the location of the front, side, and rear setbacks . 
1.  Required front-yard setbacks : Front yards shall have a minimum setback of 15 feet, and provide further that no garage or carport space shall have its entrance located within 20 feet of any property or "MFRD lot". 
2.  Required side-yard setbacks : 
a.  Side-yard setback: Side yards shall have a minimum setback of six feet, provided that the horizontal distance to the side lot line of any point on any building face shall not be less than one-half its height above the side lot line . 
b.  Wherever a main entrance to a building containing three or more units opens into an interior side yard, the minimum side-yard setback shall be 15 feet to the entrance of that portion of the building. 
c.  Exterior side yards. Wherever a side yard is adjacent to a street, such side yard shall have a minimum yard setback of 15 feet. 
d.  Multiple-story dwellings and additions: Multiple-story structures shall maintain a minimum side yard of 25% of the lot depth or 35 feet, whichever is less. Remaining portions of a multiple-story structure shall have a minimum setback equal to one half the height measured at the plateline or ridge beam, whichever is highest. 
e.  For accessory dwelling units , no setback shall be required for an existing garage that is converted to an accessory dwelling unit , and a setback of no more than five feet from the side and rear lot lines shall be required for an accessory dwelling unit that is constructed above a garage . See Section 153.211(A)(11)(5) for setback exception provision for access stairs for accessory dwelling units above garages . 
3.  Required rear-yard setbacks : Rear yard setbacks shall have a minimum yard setback of 20 feet. 
a.  Minimum pervious area and stormwater requirements. A minimum of 20% of each lot shall be pervious area, to be composed of landscaping, vegetated open space, or natural state. 
b.  Required pervious area in front yard. A minimum of 60% of the area of the front yard shall be pervious area, primarily comprised of pervious landscaped material. Area devoted to public sidewalks shall not be included in the calculations. 
c.  MFRD projects may deviate from the standards in this division (C)(3) of this section if it is determined by the Planning Commission that the project requires deviations in order to promote the most appropriate use and design, and if the other requirements of this section are met. 
TABLE C: MFRD Development Standards 
Regulation 	Requirement 
Lot Dimensions 	75 feet minimum (in any dimension) 
Lot Coverage 	60% of lot (maximum) 
Unit Density 	Minimum 	Maximum 
	1 unit/4,500 sq. ft. 	1 unit/2,400 sq. ft. 
Building height 	Main structure 	Accessory structure 
	35 ft. maximum 	17 ft. maximum 
Front-Yard Setbacks 	Main structure 	Garages/carports 
	15 ft. minimum 	20 ft. minimum 
Side-Yard Setbacks 	Interior Side Yard 	Where Main Entrance Opens Onto Side Yard 	Exterior Side Yard 	Multiple story Side Yard 
	Minimum is 6 ft. or ½ of building height 	15 ft. minimum 	15 ft. minimum 	Minimum setback is required for 25% of lot depth or 35 ft., whichever is less; Remainder shall be setback ½ of building height at plateline or ridge beam, whichever is higher 
Rear-Yard Setbacks 	20 ft. minimum 
Setbacks for
Accessory
Dwelling Units
on MFRD lots 	No setback shall be required for an existing garage that is converted to an accessory dwelling unit , and a setback of no more than five feet from the side and rear lot lines shall be required for an accessory dwelling unit that is constructed above a garage . 
See § 153.211(A)(11)(a)5 for setback exception provision for access stairs for accessory dwelling units above garages . 
Pervious Area 	Total Lot 	Front Yard 
	20% of lot minimum 	60% of yard minimum 
Parking 	1 space per bedroom 
Parking for
Accessory
Dwelling Units
on MFRD lots 	Shall not exceed one parking space per accessory dwelling unit . These spaces may be provided as tandem parking, including on an existing driveway or in setback areas, excluding the non- driveway front yard setbacks . Parking is not required when the accessory dwelling unit is located: 
 • within ½ mile of public transit, including transit stations and bus stations; 
 • within an architecturally and historically significant district; 
 • when on-street parking permits are required but not offered to the occupant of the accessory dwelling unit ; or, 
 • when there is a car share vehicle located within one block of the accessory dwelling units. 
 
(D)  Evaluation criteria. The evaluation criteria for reviews of MFRD by the ASRB and Planning Commission shall be as follows: 
(1)  The criterion enumerated in Section 153.220 shall apply, except that criterion 1.4 entitled "Equestrian Lifestyle" shall not apply and criterion 1.1 entitled "Rural Character and Community Aesthetics" shall be interpreted with the understanding that MFRD projects are typically multi-story buildings . 
(2)  The chosen architectural style shall be applied in its simplest form. 
(3)  Project design, massing, and color shall be chosen with consideration for visibility from Interstate 280. 
(E)  Review process. MFRD development in the Cañada College Residential Overlay Zone shall be reviewed by the Town following the process outlined in Section 153.221 and the Town's Residential Design Guidelines, and shall include both conceptual review by the ASRB, as well as formal review by both the ASRB and the Planning Commission , except for the conversion of existing space for an accessory dwelling units , and/or construction of a new addition or structure for an accessory dwelling units , which shall be by the Planning Director . 
(F)  Findings. In addition to the findings required by Section 153.221 and the Town's Residential Design Guidelines, the ASRB and Planning Commission shall make all of the findings required by Section 153.251 for use permits. 
(G)  Amendment of an approved MFRD . Any change to an approved MFRD, shall be processed and reviewed following the same evaluation criteria and process described for MFRD review and approval in division (D) and (E) of this section, except for the conversion of existing space for an accessory dwelling units , and/or construction of a new addition or structure for an accessory dwelling units , which shall be by the Planning Director . 
(H)  Lapse of permits. Lapse and extensions of permits issued under this section shall be governed by Section 153.917, except that the Planning Director may issue up to two extensions of the formal design review permit for up to two years each, for a maximum extension of no more than four years. 
(I)  Relationship of MFRD ordinance to other ordinances. Unless expressly provided otherwise in this section, the general provisions of the Town zoning ordinance which apply to all zones shall also apply to MFRDs. 
(J)  Application and fees. Applications for establishment of a MFRD in accordance with the provisions of this section shall be made by the applicant or any duly authorized agent thereof on forms to be prescribed by the Town and shall be accompanied by fees to be established by resolution adopted by the Town Council . 
(Ord. 2015-565, effective 2-26-15; Am. Ord. 2017-585, effective 4-27-17; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17; Am. Ord. 2018-593 , effective 4-26-18)  
Sec. 153.111 - Home occupations: Special requirements. 
Home Occupations shall comply with the following regulations: 
(A)  Such occupations shall be conducted by no more than two resident occupants entirely within either the main dwelling unit or accessory dwelling unit . 
(B)  The total floor area used for home occupations shall not exceed one-fourth of the total floor area of the main residence or 400 square feet, whichever is less, regardless of where on the parcel such occupation is carried on. 
(C)  No products shall be sold or stocked for sale other than those produced on the premises. No outdoor storage of material shall be permitted. No vehicle related to the home occupation larger than a three-fourths ton truck nor more than two vehicles related to the home occupation shall be parked on the premises. 
(D)  There shall be no show window, window display, or sign to attract customers or clients. 
(E)  Home occupations shall not require internal or external structural alterations , nor shall construction features or mechanical equipment not customary in dwellings be permitted. 
(F)  Home occupations shall not result in a change of the character of the dwelling or adversely affect the uses permitted in the residential district. 
(G)  No equipment or process shall be used in a home occupation which equipment or process creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference detectable to the normal senses off the premises. In the case of electrical interference, no equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or audible interference in any radio or television receiver or causes fluctuations in line voltages off the premises. 
(H)  A home occupation shall not cause an increase in parking demand or a significant increase in pedestrian or vehicular traffic in the vicinity. 
(I)  A home occupation shall not be conducted on any site unless a permit authorizing the use has been issued by the Town . An application for a home occupation permit shall be filed with the Town . No public hearing shall be required, but the public notice shall be the same as that for public hearings as set forth in Section 153.963 of this chapter. A home occupation permit shall be valid for a period of one year and shall be renewed annually. The provisions of Chapter 110 shall apply to all home occupations and the renewal of the home occupation permit shall be concurrent with the business license renewal. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.113) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1987-350, effective 10-8-87; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2003-519, effective 7-24-03; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.112 - Wineries: Special requirements. 
Wineries established and bonded prior to June 1, 1991 shall be deemed legal nonconforming uses. All such pre-existing wineries shall register with the Planning Department of the Town within 90 days of the effective date of this section on a form prepared by the Planning Director . Wineries , which are bonded after June 1, 1991 shall comply with the following regulations: 
(A)  Two acres shall be the minimum lot size of a property proposed for a winery ; a minimum of one-half acre of the winery property must be planted in grapes; if contiguously owned parcels are required to satisfy this requirement, then the conditional use permit is effective only as long as the owner owns those lots which satisfy the acreage requirement; 
(B)  Production shall be limited to 1,000 gallons of wine annually, sales are limited to 2,000 gallons annually, and on-site storage is limited to no more than 4,000 gallons; 
(C)  The network of roads serving the area shall be adequate to accommodate trucks related to a winery operation. The property shall have access to and be within 2,000 feet of an arterial or collector road as defined in Sections 2410 and 2411 of the General Plan (Exhibit 8). The impact of traffic added to an area, over and above what currently exists, or is anticipated, shall be considered in the review of each application or renewal. 
(D)  The requirements of the San Mateo County Health Officer and Town ordinances regarding disposal and treatment of winery wastes and washdown water shall be complied with. No waste water or washdown water from the winery operations shall be connected or disposed of into a domestic septic tank. 
(E)  The conditional use permit shall be reviewed annually for the first three years, and once every three years thereafter, and will be subject to cancellation if it is determined by the Planning Commission that the conditions contained herein or any other conditions that may be attached to the permit have not been followed; 
(F)  The setback requirements for winery operations shall be as follows: 
(1)  Interior winery operations shall be 50 feet from a property line shared with a different owner, and 100 feet from a residence on an adjacent property not under the same ownership as that of the winery ; 
(2)  Seasonal exterior winery operations, such as bottling and crushing, shall be at least 50 feet from a property line shared with a different property owner, and 100 feet from a residence on an adjacent property not under the same ownership as that of the winery ; 
(G)  Crushing shall be limited to a maximum of seven days of activity per year; 
(H)  The premises shall be kept in a clean, sanitary condition at all times, and maintained and operated in accordance with all federal, state and local laws and ordinances; 
(I)  The applicant shall obtain a manufacturer's, type 02, license from the California Alcohol Beverage Commission (ABC), and a bonded winery permit, from the US Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms; 
(J)  Sales shall be by off-site delivery only, except at events held under division (N) below. On-site pick-up and delivery shall be limited to routine parcel service pickup and delivery; 
(K)  No trucking of fermented or refermented wine juice, or fruit juice shall be permitted to the site; 
(L)  The winery shall be accessory to the principal residential use ; 
(M)  Equipment shall be stored when not in use so it is not visible from adjacent public or private roads or properties; 
(N)  Wine tasting and tours shall be by invitation only; and 
(O)  A bottling truck shall be allowed to park on a driveway and bottle the wine/fruit juice for a maximum of ten business days per year. 
(Ord. 1991-451, effective 1-9-92; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.113 - Use of residential parcels for commercial purposes in the Town Center. 
Parcels zoned residential in or adjoining the Town Center may not be used to facilitate or support commercial use of other parcels , including parking or access, 
(1)  Except where a permit was granted by the Town for the use of the residential parcel and improvements were constructed prior to June 1, 1988, and 
(2)  Except residentially zoned parcels within the Woodside Road-Whiskey Hill Road Parking Assessment District, as established November 2, 1988, which may be improved only as shown on the Town Center Site Plan, dated March 8, 1989 with at least (50 percent) percent of each residential parcel remaining undeveloped or landscaped. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.114) (Ord. 1988-375, effective 11-6-88 [repeal by vote of people]; Am. Res. 1989-4590, effective - -; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
153.200 - DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS AND EXCEPTIONS 
 
Sec. 153.201 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this subchapter is to set forth the general requirements applicable to the development and occupancy of all sites and buildings within each of the zoning districts and to establish the nature of the limitations which modify the provisions of this chapter. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.201) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.202 - General conformity required. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter: 
(A)  No parcel shall be used for a principal use, conditional use , or accessory use , and no building permit shall be issued, except as follows: 
(1)  For lots shown on a land division or subdivision map approved by the Town ; and 
(2)  For parcels which are excepted from the area requirements of this chapter by subsections 153.205(C) through 153.205(D) of this subchapter. 
(B)  No lot or structure shall be used or designated for use for any purpose or in any manner other than in conformity with the regulations for the district in which the lot or structure is located. 
(C)  No accessory use shall be permitted in a district where such use is not provided for in this chapter or which accessory use effectively converts a principal use to a use not permitted in the district. 
(D)  No accessory building or structure shall be used for human habitation , except in accordance with regulations set forth in this chapter for accessory dwelling units . 
(E)  No structure shall be erected, and no existing structure or use shall be moved, altered, or enlarged, except in conformity with the regulations for the district in which the structure or use is located. 
(F)  No required setback or open space area related to any structure or use shall be used, encroached upon, or reduced in any manner, except in conformity with the regulations for the district in which the setback or open space is located. 
(G)  A lot having a width or frontage less than the minimum prescribed for the district in which the lot is located, which lot is shown on a duly approved and recorded subdivision map, or for which a certificate of compliance has been filed, and which had a legal area, width , and frontage at the time the subdivision map was recorded or the lot was otherwise legally created, may be used as set forth in Section 153.205. 
(H)  No setback , off-road parking space, garage space, or loading space provided for a structure , building , or use shall be considered as providing all or part of the setback , off-road parking space, garage space, or loading space required for any other building or use on any other parcel , except as permitted by Section 153.224 for the joint or collective use of parking space. 
(I)  The building limitations respecting the OSH, OSRL, OSRM, OSN, and OSM Districts shall be applied, and all uses therein be limited, in a manner that will reasonably restrict structures to those presently existing or to replacements thereof and will limit the number, size, and dispersion of all structures with the goal of optimum preservation of the open space and enhancement of the rural characteristics of the open space . 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.202) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 153.999.  
Sec. 153.203 - Required conditions in all zoning districts. 
The following conditions shall be required in all zoning districts: 
(A)  No building or other improvement shall be constructed or enlarged so as to create a change in the physical configuration of a lot by means of cuts or fills, unless a grading permit is issued pursuant to the requirements of the site development provisions. 
(B)  Prior to the establishment of a principal use or conditional use on any lot , existing vegetation shall not be removed, nor shall any grading by power equipment be undertaken, except as follows: 
(1)  As may be required for construction authorized by a valid building permit ; 
(2)  As may be authorized by the terms of any conditional use permit authorized by the Planning Commission pursuant to Sections 153.921 through 153.930; 
(3)  As may be required or authorized by any Town official for the purpose of preventing or correcting any hazardous condition; 
(4)  As may be authorized by the Town Engineer to permit necessary surveys, soil tests, or geological explorations to provide a basis for decisions regarding building construction or land division projects; 
(5)  As may be required in conjunction with the development of a subdivision or land division which has been approved and authorized by the Town ; 
(6)  As may be permitted by Sections 153.411 through 153.415; 
(7)  As may be required for the construction of trails as authorized by the Town . 
(C)  Where the natural runoff of stormwaters is changed by grading, structures , buildings , driveways , or paved areas, the landowner shall prevent the unnatural diversion of surface waters to downslope lots . 
(D)  Grazing shall be limited in duration and intensity to that which will not induce damages to ground cover resulting in erosion or the rapid runoff of stormwaters. 
(E)  All residents shall maintain the vegetation adjacent to public and private roads in such a manner as not to obstruct necessary and adequate sight distances as determined by the Town Engineer . New plantings adjacent to public and private roads shall not be of the variety which will grow to a size which will obstruct sight distances. 
(F)  All subdivisions and land divisions shall include specific provisions for erosion control by the planting of bare earth surfaces. The landowner shall be responsible for the replacement or restoration of trees, ground cover, and natural vegetative character lost as a result of such construction. Site improvement plans shall be prepared by a professional landscape architect or other professionally qualified person. The site improvement plan shall be formulated to provide grading, drainage, and planting consonant with the best practical and aesthetic results. The planting program shall be part of the construction contract, and such plantings shall be maintained by the landowner until self-sufficient. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.218) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1988-362, effective 4-29-88, Am. Ord. 1989-383, effective 4-13-89; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2012-554, effective 8-23-12; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.204 - Exceptions for minor improvements for disabled access. 
(A)  Purpose. To allow the Planning Director to grant limited exceptions to development standards for minor improvements to existing residences to accommodate access needs for persons with disabilities of all types, including developmental disabilities and/or physical disabilities. 
(B)  Procedure. Exceptions to existing development standards may be granted by the Planning Director , upon making all of the findings outlined under division (C) below. 
(1)  The applicant shall submit an application, together with a site plan, elevations and additional supporting information required by the Director to provide sufficient understanding of the request and compliance with development standards. 
(2)  No public notice or hearing is required. 
(3)  Exceptions shall be granted subject to the following restrictions: 
(a)  The improvements may be made to any existing main residence or accessory living quarters. 
(b)  Exceptions are not permitted for a proposed new residence or proposed new accessory living quarters. 
(c)  Improvements shall be restricted to those necessary for enhanced access for disabled persons of all types including persons with developmental disabilities and/or physical disabilities, including but not limited to, access ramps, widening of hallways, or expansion of bathrooms or closets. 
(d)  Exceptions to development regulations shall be limited to any, or all, of the following, over the life of each structure : 
1.  Paved area coverage not greater than 250 square feet in excess of allowable limits for the site; and/or 
2.  Floor area not greater than 150 square feet in excess of allowable limits for the site; and/or 
3.  Encroachment into setbacks not greater than ten percent of the allowable setback width; and/or 
4.  Increased maximum house size for a main residence not to exceed 150 square feet in excess of the allowable maximum for the site; and/or 
5.  Exceptions to zoning regulations for fencing or other item to secure facilities to provide a safe environment. 
(C)  Findings. The Planning Director shall make all of the following findings in order to grant an exception for minor improvements for disabled access: 
(1)  The request for reasonable accommodation will be used by an individual with a disability protected under fair housing laws. 
(2)  The proposed improvements are necessary to provide for housing access for disabled persons of all types, including persons with developmental disabilities and/or physical disabilities. 
(3)  The proposed exception(s) will cause no significant negative environmental impacts to the applicant's property, adjacent properties, or to the surrounding neighborhood and Town . 
(4)  The proposed exception(s) will cause no significant negative impacts on the privacy of the applicant or adjacent neighbors. 
(5)  The requested accommodation is consistent with the Town's General Plan, Woodside Municipal Code, and Residential Design Guidelines. 
(Ord. 2005-525, effective 5-12-05; Am. Ord. 2017-582, effective 2-23-17; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
153.205 - LOT AREA 
 
(A) - Lot area requirements. 
(1)  Except as provided elsewhere in this chapter, every building in which a principal use is conducted shall be located upon a lot having an area not less than that required for the district in which the lot is located. 
(2)  No lot shall be reduced in any manner below the minimum area prescribed for the district in which the lot is located, unless a lot area variance is granted in accordance with Section 153.940 of this chapter or the Planning Commission waives the lot size requirement, pursuant to division (D)(1) of this section. 
(3)  Table D sets forth the basic lot area requirements which apply to all zoning districts. Such basic regulations are further defined and supplemented by the additional requirements and exceptions set forth in this section. 
TABLE D: Lot Area Requirements 
Zone District 	Minimum Lot Area 	Minimum Average Lot Width 
R-1 	20,000 square feet 	80 feet 
SR 	1 acre 	100 feet 
RR 	3 acres 	175 feet 
SCP-5 	5 acres 	200 feet 
SCP-7.5 	7.5 acres 	200 feet 
SCP-10 	10 acres 	200 feet 
OSH 	none 	none 
OSRL 	none 	none 
OSRM 	none 	none 
OSN 	none 	none 
OSM 	none 	none 
CC 	10,000 square feet 	40 feet 
  
(B) - Measurement of lot area. 
(1)  Pursuant to the definition of lot area in Section 153.005, for the purposes of this chapter, " lot area " shall mean the total area measured in a horizontal plane within the lot lines bounding the lot , excluding the following: 
(a)  Easements for road rights-of-way which are not for the exclusive use of the lot on which located; 
(b)  Any portion of an individual access strip in excess of five percent of the lot area required in the district; and 
(c)  Public utility or drainage easements when not located adjacent to property lines.  
(C) - Exceptions to lot area requirements: Ministerial. 
(1)  If a particular lot , regardless of the lot area , falls within the following exemptions, the owner of the lot or the owner's successor in title or interest may use the lot as a building site for a use permitted in the zoning district in which such lot is located provided all other applicable regulations for the zoning district and all other local regulations are complied with: 
(a)  Any lot or parcel which was created and was established in full compliance with the zoning and subdivision regulations in force at the time such lot or parcel was created, except those nonconforming lots which are subject to the merger provisions of Section 152.130 et seq.; and 
(b)  Any lot specifically excepted by the subdivision provisions.  
(D) - Exceptions to lot area requirements: Discretionary. 
(1)  The Planning Commission , upon reaching a finding that land under consideration for division contains unique visual, biological, cultural, or other physical characteristics, may waive the lot size or locational requirements in order to preserve one or more of such amenities. In no case shall the Planning Commission approve more building sites or lots than the applicant would be entitled to under the strict application of all of the applicable zoning and subdivision requirements, and in no case shall the Planning Commission approve individual lot sizes smaller than 50 percent but not less than three-fourths of an acre of the required minimum lot area (excluding the slope-density requirements) within the zone district. The Planning Commission may require that such preserved-environmental features be placed within protective open space or conservation easements or other ownership arrangements. The lot area may be modified by the slope-density standards pursuant to Section 153.414 of this chapter. The number of permitted building lots may also be modified by the findings of the environmental review process and the requirements of the subdivision provisions. 
(Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
153.206 - FLOOR AREA 
 
(A) - Floor area requirements. 
(1)  Table E sets forth the basic floor area requirements which apply to all zoning districts. Such basic regulations are further defined and supplemented by the additional requirements and exceptions set forth in this section. 
TABLE E: Floor Area Requirements 
Zone District 	Total Floor Area (TFA) Allowed 	Maximum Size of 
Main Residence 3 	Barns and 
Stables 	Accessory 
Structures 5 
R-1 	1.4 × Maximum Residence Size permitted without an exception, up to a maximum of 36% of the lot area 	10% of lot area + 1,000 sq. ft., up to a maximum of 3,000 sq. ft. (subject to TFA limit) 
Maximum with exception: Sliding scale 3 up to 4,200 square feet 	2,500 square feet 	1,500 square feet 
SR 	18.0% of lot area 	4,000 square feet 
Maximum with exception: Sliding scale 3 up to 5,500 square feet 	2,500 square feet 	1,500 square feet 
RR 	9.00% of lot area 2 	6,000 square feet 4 
Maximum with exception: Sliding scale 3 up to 8,800 square feet 	2,500 square feet 	1,500 square feet 
SCP-5 	5.50% of lot area 2 	6,000 square feet 4 
Maximum with exception: Sliding scale 3 up to 8,800 square feet 	3,000 square feet 	1,500 square feet 
SCP-7.5 	3.50% of lot area 2 	6,000 square feet 4 
Maximum with exception: Sliding scale 3 up to 8,800 square feet 	3,000 square feet 	1,500 square feet 
SCP-10 	2.75% of lot area 2 	6,000 square feet 4 
Maximum with exception: Sliding scale 3 up to 8,800 square feet 	3,000 square feet 	1,500 square feet 
OSH 1 	2.75% of lot area 	1,500 square feet 	3,000 square feet 	N/A 
OSRL 1 	2.75% of lot area 	1,500 square feet 	3,000 square feet 	N/A 
OSRM 1 	2.75% of lot area 	1,500 square feet 	3,000 square feet 	N/A 
OSN 1 	2.75% of lot area 	1,500 square feet 	3,000 square feet 	N/A 
OSM 1 	2.75% of lot area 	1,500 square feet 	N/A 	N/A 
1 See § 153.202(I) of the Woodside Mun. Code. 
2 Adjusted TFAs for legal nonconforming lots in the SCP and RR zone districts are listed in § 153.206(A)(1)(a)(Tables E-1 through E-4) of the Woodside Mun. Code. 
3 For exceptions to maximum residence size limitations, see § 153.206(C) of the Woodside Mun. Code. 
4  Maximum size of a main residence may be limited by the adjusted TFA allowed for legal nonconforming lots , see footnote 2. 
5 See §§ 153.107—153.108 of the Woodside Mun. Code, for size requirements related to greenhouses and covered equestrian riding arenas . 
 
(a)  The following tables modify the maximum permissible total floor area limits for legal nonconforming lots in the SCP and RR zones: 
Table E-1: 
Adjusted TFAs for Legal Nonconforming Lots 
in the SCP-5 Zone District 
Lot Area 	Total Floor Area Allowed in the 
SCP — 5 Zone District 
5 acres 	11,979 square feet (5.5%) 
4.9 acres 	11,923 square feet 
4.8 acres 	11,845 square feet 
4.7 acres 	11,768 square feet 
4.6 acres 	11,691 square feet 
4.5 acres 	11,613 square feet 
4.4 acres 	11,536 square feet 
4.3 acres 	11,459 square feet 
4.2 acres 	11,381 square feet 
4.1 acres 	11,304 square feet 
4 acres 	11,227 square feet 
3.9 acres 	11,149 square feet 
3.8 acres 	11,072 square feet 
3.7 acres 	10,995 square feet 
3.6 acres 	10,917 square feet 
3.5 acres 	10,840 square feet 
3.4 acres 	10,763 square feet 
3.3 acres 	10,686 square feet 
3.2 acres 	10,608 square feet 
3.1 acres 	10,531 square feet 
3 acres 	10,454 square feet (8.00%) 
2.9 acres 	10,232 square feet (8.10%) 
2.8 acres 	10,001 square feet (8.20%) 
2.7 acres 	9,762 square feet (8.30%) 
2.6 acres 	9,514 square feet (8.40%) 
2.5 acres 	9,257 square feet (8.50%) 
2.4 acres 	8,991 square feet (8.60%) 
2.3 acres 	8,716 square feet (8.70%) 
2.2 acres 	8,443 square feet (8.80%) 
2.1 acres 	8,141 square feet (8.90%) 
2 acres 	7,841 square feet (9.00%) 
1.9 acres 	7,532 square feet (9.10%) 
1.8 acres 	7,214 square feet (9.20%) 
1.7 acres 	6,887 square feet (9.30%) 
1.6 acres 	6,551 square feet (9.40%) 
1.5 acres 	6,207 square feet (9.50%) 
1.4 acres 	5,854 square feet (9.60%) 
1.3 acres 	5,493 square feet (9.70%) 
1.2 acres 	5,123 square feet (9.80%) 
1.1 acres 	4,744 square feet (9.90%) 
1 acre 	4,356 square feet (10.00%) 
<1 acre 	10.00% of lot area 
 
Table E-2: 
Adjusted TFAs for Legal Nonconforming Lots 
in the SCP-7.5 Zone District 
Lot Area 	Total Floor Area Allowed in the 
SCP — 7.5 Zone District 
7.5 acres 	11,435 square feet (3.5%) 
7 acres 	11,396 square feet 
6.5 acres 	10,780 square feet 
6 acres 	10,163 square feet 
5.5 acres 	9,547 square feet 
5 acres 	8,931 square feet 
4.9 acres 	8,807 square feet 
4.8 acres 	8,684 square feet 
4.7 acres 	8,561 square feet 
4.6 acres 	8,438 square feet 
4.5 acres 	8,314 square feet 
4.4 acres 	8,191 square feet 
4.3 acres 	8,068 square feet 
4.2 acres 	7,945 square feet 
4.1 acres 	7,821 square feet 
4 acres 	7,698 square feet 
3.9 acres 	7,575 square feet 
3.8 acres 	7,451 square feet 
3.7 acres 	7,328 square feet 
3.6 acres 	7,205 square feet 
3.5 acres 	7,082 square feet 
3.4 acres 	6,958 square feet 
3.3 acres 	6,835 square feet 
3.2 acres 	6,712 square feet 
3.1 acres 	6,589 square feet 
3 acres 	6,465 square feet 
2.9 acres 	6,342 square feet 
2.8 acres 	6,219 square feet 
2.7 acres 	6,095 square feet 
2.6 acres 	5,972 square feet 
2.5 acres 	5,849 square feet 
2.4 acres 	5,726 square feet 
2.3 acres 	5,602 square feet 
2.2 acres 	5,479 square feet 
2.1 acres 	5,356 square feet 
2 acres 	5,232 square feet 
1.9 acres 	5,109 square feet 
1.8 acres 	4,986 square feet 
1.7 acres 	4,863 square feet 
1.6 acres 	4,739 square feet 
1.5 acres 	4,616 square feet 
1.4 acres 	4,493 square feet 
1.3 acres 	4,370 square feet 
1.2 acres 	4,246 square feet 
1.1 acres 	4,123 square feet 
1 acre 	4,000 square feet 
<1 acre 	9.00% of lot area 
 
Table E-3: 
Adjusted TFAs for Legal Nonconforming Lots 
in the SCP-10 Zone District 
Lot Area (Acres) 	Total Floor Area Allowed in the 
SCP — 10 Zone District 
10 acres 	11,979 square feet (2.75%) 
9.5 acres 	11,535 square feet 
9 acres 	11,062 square feet 
8.5 acres 	10,590 square feet 
8 acres 	10,117 square feet 
7.5 acres 	9,644 square feet 
7 acres 	9,172 square feet 
6.5 acres 	8,699 square feet 
6 acres 	8,227 square feet 
5.5 acres 	7,754 square feet 
5 acres 	7,281 square feet 
4.9 acres 	7,187 square feet 
4.8 acres 	7,092 square feet 
4.7 acres 	6,998 square feet 
4.6 acres 	6,903 square feet 
4.5 acres 	6,809 square feet 
4.4 acres 	6,714 square feet 
4.3 acres 	6,620 square feet 
4.2 acres 	6,525 square feet 
4.1 acres 	6,431 square feet 
4 acres 	6,336 square feet 
3.9 acres 	6,241 square feet 
3.8 acres 	6,147 square feet 
3.7 acres 	6,052 square feet 
3.6 acres 	5,958 square feet 
3.5 acres 	5,863 square feet 
3.4 acres 	5,769 square feet 
3.3 acres 	5,674 square feet 
3.2 acres 	5,580 square feet 
3.1 acres 	5,485 square feet 
3 acres 	5,391 square feet 
2.9 acres 	5,296 square feet 
2.8 acres 	5,202 square feet 
2.7 acres 	5,107 square feet 
2.6 acres 	5,013 square feet 
2.5 acres 	4,918 square feet 
2.4 acres 	4,824 square feet 
2.3 acres 	4,729 square feet 
2.2 acres 	4,635 square feet 
2.1 acres 	4,540 square feet 
2 acres 	4,446 square feet 
1.9 acres 	4,351 square feet 
1.8 acres 	4,256 square feet 
1.7 acres 	4,162 square feet 
1.6 acres 	4,067 square feet 
1.5 acres 	3,973 square feet 
1.4 acres 	3,878 square feet 
1.3 acres 	3,784 square feet 
1.2 acres 	3,689 square feet 
1.1 acres 	3,595 square feet 
1 acre 	3,500 square feet 
<1 acre 	8.00% of lot area 
 
Table E-4: 
Adjusted TFAs for Legal Nonconforming Lots in the RR Zone District 
Lot Area 	Total Floor Area Allowed in the RR Zone District 
3.0 acres 	11,791 square feet (9%) 
2.5 acres 	9,801 square feet (9.0%) 
2 acres 	7,928 square feet (9.1%) 
1.9 acres 	7,614 square feet (9.2%) 
1.8 acres 	7,292 square feet (9.3%) 
1.7 acres 	6,961 square feet (9.4%) 
1.6 acres 	6,621 square feet (9.5%) 
1.5 acres 	6,273 square feet (9.6%) 
1.4 acres 	5,914 square feet (9.7%) 
1.3 acres 	5,550 square feet (9.8%) 
1.2 acres 	5,175 square feet (9.9%) 
1.1 acres 	4,791 square feet (10.0%) 
1.0 acre 	10.1% of lot area 
 
(2)  The gross floor area of any accessory building shall not exceed 1,500 square feet, except barns and stables, which shall not exceed 2,500 square feet unless the barn or stable is located in the OS or SCP Districts, where barns and stables may not exceed 3,000 square feet; 
(3)  The gross floor area of a covered constructed equestrian riding arena shall not exceed the size permitted for an accessory use or permitted conditional use as outlined in Sections 153.107 Table A-2 and 153.107 Table A-3, subject to the total floor area limit for a property.  
(B) - Measurement of floor area. 
(1)  The floor area of structures as set forth in division (A) of this section on a site shall be measured as related to plate height as explained in Table F. 
(2)  Measurements of floor area shall be from the outside surfaces of the exterior wall . 
(3)  Plate height is measured from existing grade at time of application, or from finished grade , whichever is lower. 
(4)  Table F applies to all structures except stables , barns , and covered equestrian arenas, whose floor areas equal their footprint areas. 
(5)  The Community Commercial District utilizes building coverage , in place of floor area . See Section 153.210, for building coverage requirements, measurement, and exceptions. 
TABLE F — Floor Area Calculation Method 
STEP 1: 
Divide the floor plan of the building into non-overlapping rectangular, triangular and circular sections, each with the following characteristics: 
a. The slope of the grade under each section remains the same over the entire section (±5%). If the slope changes by more than 5%, break the section into multiple sections at the point that the slope changes. 
b. If the roof line changes (e.g., a second story), start a new section at that point. 
NOTE: Floor area is counted to the outside of the exterior stud wall . Thick finishes and veneers, or unused spaces such as decorative pilasters, are also included in floor area . 
  
STEP 2: 
Add up the plate heights at each corner of the section and divide the total by four if the section is a rectangle, and divide by three if the section is a triangle. If the section is a circle, measure the plate height at the center. This gives the average plate height (APH) for each section. 
The plate height is the distance from the existing grade at the time of application or finished grade (whichever is lower) to the intersection of the exterior wall plane with the underside of the roof plane. Flat soffits do not lower the plate height. 
  
Clarification 1:  Plates DO NOT run up the ends of gable roofs, but are assumed to run in a straight line from the plate height at one corner of the building to the plate height at the other corner. 
Clarification 2:  Plates DO run along the roof line of shed roofs, which are defined as a roof which terminates at its high point with a wall which has more than four feet exposed. 
Clarification 3:  Plates DO run along roofs that have a pitch greater than 12:12, which are considered a wall . 
Clarification 4: Gambrel roofs and parapets are a judgment call by the Planning Director based on the pitch of the gambrel and the appearance of the roof. 
  
STEP 3: 
If the average plate height for a section is 11 feet or less, the floor area for that section is equal to its footprint area. If the average plate height of a section is over 11 feet, multiply the footprint area of that section by an additional 0.1 for each foot the average plate height (APH) is over 11 feet. (Example: If a section's APH is 13 feet, multiply the corresponding footprint area by 1.2 to get that section's floor area .) 
  
STEP 4: 
Add up the floor areas for each section to determine the total floor area for the building . 
Apply floor area credits or exclusions, as specified in the following Table F-1. 
TABLE F-1: Floor Area Exclusions and Credits 
Feature 	Multiplier 
One-story portions of main residences: 
  - Up to 600 square feet of footprint area that would otherwise have a floor area multiplier of either (i) more than 1.0 but less than 1.5 shall have its multiplier reduced to 1.0, or (ii) greater than 1.5 shall have its multiplier reduced by 0.5. 
 Clarification 1: Basements shall not be counted as stories in determining what constitutes one-story portions. 
 Clarification 2: Stairwells are considered two-story elements, except when they only provide access to the main floor, from a basement . 	
Attic spaces: 
  - Are spaces within the roof structure of a building and usually do not count toward floor area , except when associated roof pitches exceed 12:12, per Table F. 	
Garages and carports : attached and detached. 	=1.00 
Covered Decks /Porches/Patios/Balconies: 	
  - Covered with a roof, eave, overhang of an upper story , or another deck , that does not extend beyond 8 feet from the structure and is not enclosed except for exterior walls of the structure . 	0.00 
  - Covered with a roof, eave , overhang of an upper story , or another deck that does extend beyond 8 feet from the structure (only that portion that extends beyond 8 feet counts). 	=1.00 
  - Covered with a trellis or other covering that is at least 50% open. 	0.00 

 Clarification 3: Solid or latticework walls , screens, glass or glazing shall constitute exterior walls . 
 Clarification 4: The footprint of a barn , stable , or covered equestrian riding arena shall be measured to the support posts of any covered areas. 	
Eaves : 	
  - Up to 8 feet from the structure . 	0.00 
  - Any portion extending beyond 8 feet from the structure . 	=1.00 
Basements : 	
  - Areas of basements that are below exterior grade shall not count toward floor area . 	0.00 
  - Areas of basements that are above exterior grade that contribute to plate heights will add floor area to a structure , as defined by Table F. 	=1.00 
Bay windows : 	
  - Up to 25 square feet for each bay window . 	0.00 
  - Greater than 25 square feet or exceeding one story in height (only that portion in excess of 25 square feet and/or one story would count). 	=1.00 
Dormers : 	
  - Up to 25 square feet of an individual dormer . 	0.00 
  - Greater than 25 square feet of an individual dormer . 	=1.00 
 Clarification 5: If the total length of dormers on a roof section is more than 30% of the length of that roof section, floor area of the building shall be calculated based on plate heights measured to the dormers , per Table F. 	
Dormers for ADUs above detached garages , pursuant to § 153.211 and § 153.110): 	
  - Up to 50% of the length of the roof. 	0.00 
Chimneys and fireplaces, shall be counted as normal floor area , per Table F. 	=1.00 
 Clarification 6: Freestanding fireplaces shall not be counted as floor area . 
 Clarification 7: The plate height of the adjacent building wall shall be used to calculate the floor area of a chimney. 	
Stairwells are counted for each floor and counted as normal floor area , per Table F. 	=1.00 
Feature walls , walls which exceed the 6-foot height limit for fences and walls and/or are attached to a building , shall be counted as normal floor area , per Table F. 	=1.00 
 
(6)  Measurement of size of main residence. The size of a main residence shall include the total gross floor area of a main residence using the rules for calculating floor area stated in division (B) above with the following exceptions: 
(a)  Detached structures shall be excluded unless they are attached to the main residence by an aboveground structural element, or they are separated from the main residence by less than eight feet in the R-1 Districts or less than 15 feet in all other zoning districts. Structures are not considered attached if they are only connected via a covered walkway that is 100 percent open on one of the long sides, 50 percent open on the other long side, less than eight feet wide, have a plate height under 11 feet and do not have a wall higher than four feet on one long side. 
(b)  Floor area utilized exclusively for attached garages and carports , including those existing at the time of the adoption of the amendment codified in this division shall be excluded as follows: 
1.  In the R-1 and SR Zoning Districts, the maximum amount of area excluded shall be 440 square feet or the actual size of the garage or carport , whichever is less. If a maximum residence size exception has been approved for a property in the SR Zoning District, the maximum garage or carport exclusion shall be 550 square feet. 
2.  In the RR and SCP Zoning Districts, the maximum amount of area excluded shall be 660 square feet or the actual size of the garage or carport , whichever is less.  
(C) - Exceptions to floor area requirements: Maximum residence size exceptions. 
(1)  In the SR, RR and SCP Residential Zoning Districts. An exception shall be granted to the maximum size of the main residence , pursuant to the formulas in Table G of this section, by the body and evaluation criteria designated in Sections 153.912 through 153.918 for lots in the SR, RR and SCP Residential Zoning Districts. For purposes of such exceptions, conforming parcels shall consist of no more than one lot . In order for the approving body to grant an exception in the SR, RR and SCP Residential Zoning Districts, all of the following conditions must be satisfied: 
(a)  The maximum size of a main residence , with an exception granted, may not exceed the following limits: 
SR: 5,500 square feet 
RR and SCP districts: 8,800 square feet 
(b)  The property shall not be subdivided to create a lot smaller than the minimum acreage required for the exception; and 
(c)  The front , rear and side setbacks shall be increased from 50 feet to 100 feet for ten to 15 acre parcels , to 150 feet for 20 acre parcels to 200 feet for 25 acre parcels and to 250 feet for 30+ acre parcels (allowing for interpolation between steps at the rate of ten feet for every acre of lot size increase). 
(2)  In the R-1 Residential Zoning District. An exception shall be granted to the maximum size of main residence , pursuant to the formulas in Table G of this section, by the body and evaluation criteria designated in Sections 153.912 through 153.918, in the R-1 Residential Zoning District, provided the following condition is satisfied: 
(a)  The maximum size of a main residence , with an exception granted, may not exceed the following limits: 
R-1 District: 
 For nonconforming lots : TFA limit, up to 3,000 sq. ft. 
 For conforming lots : 4,200 sq. ft. 
TABLE G: Maximum Residence Size Allowed With An Exception 
Zone District 	Lot Area 	Calculation 
R-1 	< 0.458 acres 	10% of lot area (sq. ft.) + 1,000 square feet 
	= 0.458 acres 	5,217 × ( lot area in acres - 0.458) + 3,000; not to exceed 4,200 sq. ft. 
SR 	< 0.519 acres 	Subject to TFA limitations for nonconforming lots , see § 153.206(A)(1)(a) 
	= 0.519 acres 	1,530 × ( lot area in acres - 0.519) + 4,000; not to exceed 5,500 sq. ft. 
RR 	< 1.439 acres 	Subject to TFA limitations for nonconforming lots , see § 153.206(A)(1)(a) 
	= 1.439 acres 	915.03 × ( lot area in acres - 1.439) + 6,000; not to exceed 8,800 sq. ft. 
SCP-5 	< 1.450 acres 	Subject to TFA limitations for nonconforming lots , see § 153.206(A)(1)(a) 
	= 1.450 acres 	462.83 × ( lot area in acres - 1.450) + 6,000 not to exceed 8,800 sq. ft. 
SCP-7.5 	< 2.669 acres 	Subject to TFA limitations for nonconforming lots , see § 153.206(A)(1)(a) 
	= 2.669 acres 	326.34 × ( lot area in acres - 2.669) + 6,000; not to exceed 8,800 sq. ft. 
SCP-10 	< 3.680 acres 	Subject to TFA limitations for nonconforming lots , see § 153.206(A)(1)(a) 
	= 3.680 acres 	247.35 × ( lot area in acres - 3.680) + 6,000; not to exceed 8,800 sq. ft. 
 
(Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17; Am. Ord. 2018-593 , effective 4-26-18; Am. Ord. 2018-596 , § 2(Exh. A, § II), effective 10-26-18)  
153.207 - SETBACKS 
 
(A) - Setback requirements. 
(1)  Table H sets forth the basic setback requirements which apply to all zoning districts. Setback exceptions for accessory dwelling units within Residential Zoning Districts are set forth in Section 153.211. Such basic regulations are further defined and supplemented by the additional requirements and exceptions set forth in this section. 
TABLE H: Setback Requirements in Zone Districts 1, 2 
Zone 
District 	Height 	Basic Setbacks in Feet 	Minimum Setbacks with 
Exceptions 6 in Feet 
		Front 	Rear 	Side 	Front 	Rear 	Side 
R-1 	<17 feet 
17-28 feet 	30 
30 	25 
25 	15 
22.5 	20 
25 	17 
20 	10 
17.5 
SR 	<17 feet 
17-30 feet 	50 
* 	25 
30 	20 
30 	30 
* 	20 
30 	15 
20 
RR 	<17 feet 
17-30 feet 	50 
* 	50 
50 	50 
50 	30 
* 	30 
30 	30 
30 
SCP 	<17 feet 
17-30 feet 	50 
* 	50 
50 	50 
50 	30 
* 	30 
30 	30 
30 
OS 3 	N/A 	75 	75 	50 	N/A 	N/A 	N/A 
CC 	N/A 	— 4 	25 7 	— 5 	N/A 	N/A 	N/A 
  1 Refer to § 153.207(A)(9) for special setbacks applicable for parcels located on Moore Road, Valley Road, Valley Court, Lawler Ranch Road, and Cañada College. 
  2 Refer to § 153.211 for setback provisions related to accessory dwelling units . 
  3 OS refers to OSH, OSN OSRL, OSN and OSM 
  4 See § 153.208(A)(2) 
  5 See § 153.207(A)(8)(a) 
  6 Refer to §§ 153.207(A)(8)(a) and 153.207(D)(1) 
  7 Refer to § 153.207(A)(8)(b) 
  * Any portion of a structure having a height in excess of 17 feet above the ground elevation at the front setback line shall be set back an additional two feet from the property line for each foot of height in excess of 17 feet, except in the R-1 District. Height shall be measured from the existing or finished grade , whichever presents the lower building profile. 
 
(2)  No setback space provided for any structure in compliance with the regulations for the district in which the setback space is located shall be deemed to provide a setback space for any other structure , and no setback on one lot shall be deemed to provide a setback space for a structure on any other lot . 
(3)  Accessory buildings and structures used for sheltering livestock shall conform to the following requirements in addition to conforming with all other applicable code provisions: 
(a)  Pasture or corral fences for maintaining or concentrating livestock shall conform with the location requirements of Chapter 115 of this Code . 
(b)  Structures , other than fences for housing, maintaining or concentrating livestock , fowl and small animals, shall be located as follows: 
1.  Not less than 80 feet from any main dwelling existing on an adjoining lot in an SR and R-1 District, and 100 feet from any main dwelling , on an adjoining lot , in an OS, SCP and RR District at the time such structure is erected; 
2.  Not less than 50 feet from any neighboring property line, when either the parcel upon which the structure is located or the adjoining parcel is in the OS, SCP or RR District; and not less than 40 feet from any neighboring property line, when either the parcel upon which the structure is located or the adjoining parcel is in the SR or R-1 District; and 
3.  Not less than 50 feet from any front property line or a property line adjoining a street. 
(c)  Fenced enclosures, other than those included in division (a) of this division (3), for the concentration of fowl and other small animals shall not be less than 25 feet from any property line. 
(4)  Structures housing fowl, rabbits, or other small animals shall be kept a minimum of 50 feet from dwellings on neighboring properties, and all required setbacks shall apply. 
(5)  No part of a constructed equestrian riding arena shall be located within ten feet of any property line or ingress/egress easement pursuant to Section 153.207(B)(1). 
(6)  Tennis courts, including fences , shall be set back at least 15 feet from the side and rear property lines. Front setbacks shall conform to those required for the zone district. 
(7)  Swimming pools shall conform to the same setback requirements as the principal structure within each zoning district. 
(8)  The following setback requirements shall apply to parcels in the CC District: 
(a)  No side setback shall be required for a parcel in the CC District, except where the side parcel line of the property in the CC District abuts directly on property in any residential district or on a public street, in which case the minimum width of the side setback for such parcel shall be 15 feet. 
(b)  No rear setback shall be required in the CC District for structures on parcels located entirely within the boundaries of the Town Center Parking Assessment District where a portion of the original parcel has been acquired by the Town for use in the same Town Center Parking Assessment District, consistent with the Town Center Site Plan , dated March 8, 1989, and with the engineer's report for the Woodside Road - Whiskey Hill Road Parking Assessment District, adopted October 5, 1989 by the Town . 
(9)  Notwithstanding the other requirements of this chapter, the following special setback lines shall prevail where applicable for parcels located on Moore Road, Valley Road, Valley Court, Lawler Ranch Road, and Cañada College: no building or structure shall be constructed closer than 200 feet from the right-of-way of I-280.  
(B) - Measurement of setbacks. 
(1)  Required setbacks shall be measured horizontally from the front, side, or rear property line and from the interior boundaries of easements for ingress and egress, as appropriate to the measurement, to a line parallel thereto at the nearest point of a structure on the lot . 
(2)  Where a lot abuts on a road having only a portion of its required width dedicated or reserved for road purposes, the required setback shall be measured from the line establishing the additional width required for road purposes abutting the lot . 
(3)  On a lot which is not rectangular or approximately rectangular in shape, required setbacks shall be measured in the manner prescribed by the Planning Director . 
(4)  For lots with frontage on more than one roadway, the Planning Director shall determine the road from which the building site would be most visible and apply front setback regulations to that roadway frontage of the lot .  
(C) - Exceptions to setback requirements: Ministerial. 
(1)  Chimneys; fire escapes; bay windows ; eaves ; cornices; canopies; stairway landings; uncovered balconies; decks ; porches; stairs from the ground to an uncovered balcony; deck ; or, accessible ramp or lift on buildings that are not open to the general public that comply with all applicable requirements in the Federal Americans with Disabilities Act or equivalent requirements in the California Code, whichever are applicable, may extend into a required side setback a distance of not more than three feet and into a required front or rear setback a distance of not more than six feet. 
(2)  Walls ; hedges; walks; driveways ; garage aprons; uncovered decks three feet or less above the ground; landscape features, such as patios, and water features, other than swimming pools ; or, accessible ramp or lift on buildings that are open to the general public that comply with all applicable requirements in the Federal Americans with Disabilities Act or equivalent requirements in the California Code, whichever are applicable, may be located in any required setback . 
(3)  Utility meters may be located in any required setback , at the discretion of the Planning Director . 
(4)  When attached to a building , electrical vehicle charging stations six feet or less in height and natural gas fueling dispensers six feet or less in height may be located in any required setback . 
(5)  Waterline backflow preventer devices. 
(a)  Waterline backflow preventer devices may encroach into any required setback if all of the following criteria are met: 
1.  Devices for waterlines that are two inches in diameter or smaller shall be located at least ten feet from the edge of the driving surface of adjacent roads , and from the edge of the trail tread, defined as the travel surface of any trail. Devices for waterlines that are over two inches in diameter shall be located at least 25 feet from the edge of the driving surface of adjacent roads , and from the edge of the trail tread, defined as the travel surface of any trail. 
2.  The bottom of the horizontal portion of the device, or the point where two angled pipes intersect on the device, must not be more than 12 inches above grade as measured from the grade to the lowest part of the device, and not more than 30 inches above grade as measured from the grade to the tallest part of the device, unless an exception is obtained pursuant to division (C)(5)(b) below. The intent is to install the device as low as possible. 
3.  Devices on residential properties shall be painted to blend into the surrounding area. Devices on commercial properties shall be painted to blend into the surrounding area, unless painting the device is prohibited by the most recently adopted fire protection regulations. Bronze, brass, copper, and stainless steel devices may be left unpainted. 
4.  The devices shall be screened by planting, and/or fencing approved by Town staff, so that they are not visible from the road or adjacent properties, unless prohibited by the most recently adopted fire protection regulations. All approved screening shall remain in place as long as the devices are located within any required setbacks . 
5.  The location of the devices shall not create a health and safety hazard. 
(b)  The Planning Director may allow an exception to the requirements in divisions (C)(5)(a)1. through (C)(5)(a)3. if there are natural or manmade physical limitations existing on the site that prohibit meeting one or more of the requirements in divisions (C)(5)(a)1. through (C)(5)(a)3. of this section. 
(6)  Where a building wall is not parallel to a parcel line, a portion of the building may project into the required setback provided: 
(a)  The average depth or width of the setback is at least equal to the required least depth or width otherwise required; and 
(b)  The setback is not less in depth or width at any point than 90 percent of the least width or depth otherwise required in the zoning district in which the lot is located. 
(7)  Setback encroachments for nonconforming main residences and additions to nonconforming building features, listed in division (C)(1), are permitted, pursuant to Subsections 153.236(B)(2) and 153.236(B)(3). 
(8)  Where a lot is situated between two lots , each of which has a main building located within 25 feet of the side lines of the lot in question, and such buildings are located nearer the street line than the depth of the front setback required for the district in which they are situated, the least depth of the front setback required for such parcel shall be equal to the greater depth of the front setbacks of such existing buildings .  
(D) - Exceptions to setback requirements: Discretionary. 
(1)  Setback exceptions for residential zones 
(a)  Purpose. 
1.  To allow for the granting of exceptions to the setback regulations in the Town's four residential zones, the Town has determined that in certain lot , site, and neighborhood situations, in the R-1, SR, RR, and SCP Districts, exceptions to setback regulations shall be considered; 
2.  To establish a procedure allowing for flexible design of all residential zoned properties, in hillside areas or elsewhere, so that development may be concentrated in those areas with the greatest environmental carrying capacity and limited in areas with low environmental carrying capacity; 
3.  To establish a procedure or eliminate the rigidity, delays, and inequities that otherwise would result from the application of conventional residential setback regulations designed primarily for larger parcels or more level sites; 
4.  To establish a procedure whereby the Town may authorize desirable residential developments consistent with the spirit and intent of the General Plan and the zoning ordinance without requiring numerous and difficult variance applications; 
5.  To encourage variety, avoid monotony, and maintain natural features of residential areas by allowing property owners greater freedom in selecting the means to provide access, light, open space and amenities. 
(b)  Exception procedures. Residential setback exception may be granted by the Planning Commission . An application and a brief but adequate site plan and elevations are required, as prescribed by the Planning Director . The Planning Director shall provide public notice of the exception as prescribed in Section 153.963(B)(2). A public hearing shall be held before any exception shall be granted. Exceptions may be granted subject to the following restrictions: 
1.  Setback exceptions may be granted for the main residence, and, except in the R-1 zone, for accessory structures ; 
2.  Except where the findings under division (D)(1)(c) can be made, an exception to a setback may only be allowed if the setback on the opposite side of the property is increased by a like amount, e.g., side to side, front to rear, and the like. Prior to issuance of any building permit , a restrictive covenant running with the property shall be recorded reflecting the revised setbacks , and shall be accompanied by a site map reflecting the same; 
3.  The Planning Commission may grant exceptions subject to conditions in order to assure privacy of the applicant or adjacent neighbors. Measures required to protect privacy, may include, but are not limited to, additional second story setbacks , deletion of windows on certain walls or revising their location or size or design to minimize viewing opportunities, landscaping, fencing, or other appropriate screening, restricting outdoor living space and activities or equipment which generates excessive noise in the reduced setback , and other measures deemed necessary to prevent visual intrusion, noise impacts, or obstruction of view corridors or light. 
4.  Exceptions shall not be granted to permit encroachment greater than the limits prescribed in Table H, in Section 153.207. 
(c)  Findings. The Planning Commission shall make all of the following findings as a condition to granting a setback exception: 
1.  a.  There are no alternatives available to the owner which would conform with zoning regulations; or 
b.  The available conforming alternatives would cause greater adverse impact on natural features or adjacent residents than the proposed exception; or 
c.  The applicant demonstrates that the proposed exception will conform to the setback pattern of development in the surrounding area (if finding (C)(1) shall be made pursuant to division (c), the applicable setback provided in the table may be reduced accordingly provided that no setback be reduced to less than that allowed by Section 153.207, Table H); and 
2.  The proposed exception will cause no significant negative environmental impacts to the applicant's property, adjacent properties, or to the surrounding neighborhood and Town ; 
3.  The proposed exception will cause no significant adverse impact on the privacy of the applicants or the adjacent neighbors; 
4.  The proposed exception is consistent in spirit and intent with residential zoning district purposes, including the purposes for granting setback exceptions, and regulations as adopted in this title; and 
5.  The proposed exception is consistent in spirit and intent with the goals and objectives of the Town's General Plan. 
(Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
153.208 - HEIGHT 
 
(A) - Height requirements. 
(1)  Table I-1 through I-3 set forth the basic height requirements which apply to all zoning districts. Such basic regulations are further defined and supplemented by the additional requirements and exceptions set forth in this section. 
Table I-1: Height Requirements in Residential Zone Districts 
Zone District 	Buildings (Permitted and Conditional) 	Barns and Stables 	Covered Equestrian Riding Arenas 	Accessory Structures 	Accessory Structure 
Plate Height 
(Not applicable to barns, stables, or covered equestrian riding arenas) 
R-1 	28 feet 	24 feet 	30 feet 	17 feet 	11 feet 
SR 	30 feet 	24 feet 	30 feet 	17 feet 	11 feet 
RR 	30 feet 	24 feet 	30 feet 	17 feet 	11 feet 
SCP-5 	30 feet 	24 feet 	30 feet 	17 feet 	11 feet 
SCP-7.5 	30 feet 	24 feet 	30 feet 	17 feet 	11 feet 
SCP-10 	30 feet 	24 feet 	30 feet 	17 feet 	11 feet 
 
  
Table I-2: Height Requirements in Open Space Zone Districts 
Zone District 	Buildings (Permitted and Conditional) 	Barns and Stables 	Covered Equestrian Riding Arenas 	Accessory Structures 	Accessory Structure 
Plate Height 
(Not applicable to barns, stables, or covered equestrian riding arenas) 
OSH 	24 feet 	N/A 	30 feet 	17 feet 	11 feet 
OSRL 	24 feet 	24 feet 	30 feet 	17 feet 	11 feet 
OSRM 	24 feet 	24 feet 	30 feet 	17 feet 	11 feet 
OSN 	24 feet 	24 feet 	30 feet 	17 feet 	11 feet 
OSM 	24 feet 	24 feet 	N/A 	17 feet 	11 feet 
 
  
Table I-3: Height Requirements in the Community Commercial Zone District 
Zone District 	Buildings (Permitted and Conditional) 	Barns and Stables 	Covered Equestrian Riding Arenas 	Accessory Structures 	Accessory Structure 
Plate Height 
(Not applicable to barns, stables, or covered equestrian riding arenas) 
CC 	25 feet 1, 2 	N/A 	N/A 	17 feet 	11 feet 
  1 See § 153.208(A)(2) of the Woodside Mun. Code 
  2 See § 153.208(A)(3) of the Woodside Mun. Code for height limits in the Town Center area. 
 
(2)  In the Community Commercial District: 
(a)  The map attached to the ordinance codified in this division and found on file in the office of the Clerk entitled "Community Commercial District Building Height Map" (hereinafter CCD Map) shall be referred to for identifying building locations in the Community Commercial District. 
(b)  For all buildings located all or in part within 100 feet of Woodside Road, and located in area A on the CCD Map, no building may exceed a height of 17 feet above the edge of the paved right-of-way of Woodside Road, as measured from the elevation of the building nearest to Woodside Road. 
(c)  For all buildings located all or in part within 100 feet of Woodside Road, and located in area B on the CCD map, no building may exceed 21 feet in height above the edge of the paved right-of-way of Woodside Road as measured from the elevation of the building nearest to Woodside Road, and may not exceed one story . 
(d)  For all buildings located all or in part within 200 feet of the right-of-way of Highway 35, no building may exceed a height of 17 feet above the edge of the paved right-of-way of Highway 35 as measured from the elevation of the building nearest to Highway 35. 
(e)  Any building existing as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this division that is rendered nonconforming by the ordinance codified in this division may, in the event of destruction of more than 50 percent of the building by reason of fire or natural disaster, replace the same building without provision for the height limitations of the ordinance codified in this division, provided it is rebuilt in an identical architectural style, building footprint and building volume. 
(3)  In the Town Center Area: 
(a)  Buildings on commercially zoned parcels immediately adjacent to Woodside Road in the Town Center may not be constructed or altered or exceed one story facing Woodside Road, notwithstanding division (A)(2). These buildings may include a basement , as defined in Section 153.005, on June 1, 1988, and the exceptions in division (C)(1) and (D)(2), or successor sections, for structures or mechanical equipment covering not more than 150 square feet shall apply. 
(b)  If a building existing on June 1, 1988, has more than one story , it shall be subject to the then current provisions of this Code governing nonconforming uses and buildings .  
(B) - Measurement of height. 
(1)  The height of a building or structure shall be measured vertically from the finished grade to the uppermost point on the roof, wall , or parapet above the finished grade . 
(2)  On sloping ground the maximum allowable height of a building shall be determined by establishing a hypothetical line at the maximum building height parallel to the natural grade , or finished grade building elevation, whichever elevation creates a lower building profile.  
(C) - Exceptions to height requirements: Ministerial. 
(1)  Towers, spires, cupolas, chimneys, flagpoles, radio and television antennas, and similar structures and necessary mechanical equipment covering not more than 150 square feet may be erected to a height not more than 20 feet above the height limit prescribed by the regulations for the district in which the site is located. In no case shall such structures exceed a height of 50 feet.  
(D) - Exceptions to height requirements: Discretionary. 
(1)  The Planning Commission may approve a 35-foot height limit for the main residence, as an exception to the provisions of this section, provided all the following findings are made: 
(a)  The lot size is 150 percent or more of the minimum lot size required in the applicable zoning district; 
(b)  The building setbacks are a minimum of 100 feet or more from all property lines; and 
(c)  The additional height will not obstruct the view from public or private roads or neighboring properties. 
(2)  In any district a use permit secured in the manner set forth in Sections 153.921 through 153.930 shall be required for a tower, spire, water tank, flagpole, commercial radio or television transmission antenna, transmission tower, or fire tower which exceeds the height set forth in division (C)(1). 
(Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17; Am. Ord. 2018-596 , § 2(Exh. A, § IV), effective 10-26-18)  
153.209 - PAVED AREA AND SURFACE COVERAGE 
 
(A) - Paved area and surface coverage requirements. 
(1)  Residential and Special Conservation Planning Zoning Districts. Paved area and surface coverage limits in the R-1, SR, RR, SCP-5, SCP-7.5, and SCP-10 Zoning Districts shall be subject to Tables J-1 through J-6: 
Table J-l: Maximum Paved Area and Surface Coverage Allowed in the R-1 Zone District 
Lot Area Range 	Nonconforming Lots 
(< 20,000 square feet) 	Equal to 20,000 square feet to 25,000 square feet 	> 25,000 square feet to 30,000 square feet 	> 30,000 square feet to 35,000 square feet 	> 35,000 square feet to 40,000 square feet 	> 40,000 square feet 
Maximum Paved Area and Surface Coverage 	1.2 × Maximum Residence Size permitted without an exception 	1.2 × Maximum Residence Size permitted without an exception 	(( lot area - 25,000 s.f.) × 0.05) + 3,600 s.f. = Total 	(( lot area - 30,000 s.f.) × 0.04) + 3,850 s.f. = Total 	(( lot area - 35,000 s.f.) × 0.03) + 4,050 s.f. = Total 	(( lot area - 40,000 s.f.) × 0.02) + 4,200 s.f. = Total, up to a maximum of 5,000 square feet 
 
  
Table J-2: Maximum Paved Area and Surface Coverage Allowed in the SR Zone District 
Lot Area Range 	Nonconforming Lots 
(< 1 acre) 	Equal to 1.0 acre to 3.0 acres 	> 3.0 to 4.0 acres 	> 4.0 to 5.0 acres 	> 5 acres 
Maximum Paved Area and Surface Coverage 	15,000 square feet or 50% of the lot area , whichever is less 	15,000 square feet 	(( lot area - 3 acres) × 0.03) + 15,000 s.f. = Total 	(( lot area - 4 acres) × 0.02) + 16,306.8 s.f. = Total 	(( lot area - 5 acres) × 0.01) + 17,178 s.f. = Total, up to a maximum of 20,000 square feet 
 
  
Table J-3: Maximum Paved Area and Surface Coverage Allowed in the RR Zone District 
Lot Area Range 	Nonconforming Lots 
(< 3 acres) 	Equal to 3.0 acre to 9.0 acres 	> 9.0 to 11.0 acres 	> 11.0 to 13.0 acres 	> 13 acres 
Maximum Paved Area and Surface Coverage 	15,000 square feet or 50% of the lot area , whichever is less 	15,000 square feet 	(( lot area - 9 acres) × 0.03) + 15,000 s.f. = Total 	(( lot area - 11 acres) × 0.02) + 16,306.8 s.f. = Total 	(( lot area - 13 acres) × 0.01) + 17,178 s.f. = Total, up to a maximum of 20,000 square feet 
 
  
Table J-4: Maximum Paved Area and Surface Coverage Allowed in the SCP-5 Zone District 
Lot Area Range 	Nonconforming Lots 
(< 5 acres) 	Equal to 5.0 acres to 9.0 acres 	> 9.0 to 10.0 acres 	> 10.0 to 11.0 acres 	> 11.0 acres 
Maximum Paved Area and Surface Coverage 	9,000 square feet or 50% of the lot area , whichever is less 1 	9,000 square feet 1 	(( lot area - 9 acres) × 0.03) + 9,000 s.f. = Total 1 	(( lot area - ten acres) × 0.02) + 10,306.8 s.f. = Total 1 	(( lot area - 11 acres) × 0.01) + 11,178 s.f. = Total 1 , up to a maximum of 15,000 square feet 
1   Lots may receive more paved area and surface coverage if a paved area and surface coverage exception is approved subject to § 153.209(C). 
 
  
Table J-5: Maximum Paved Area and Surface Coverage Allowed in the SCP-7.5 Zone District 
Lot Area Range 	Nonconforming Lots 
< 7.5 acres 	Equal to 7.5 acre to 13.5 acres 	> 13.5 to 14.5 acres 	> 14.5 to 15.5 acres 	> 15.5 acres 
Maximum Paved Area and Surface Coverage 	9,000 square feet or 50% of the lot area , whichever is less 	9,000 square feet 	(( lot area - 13.5 acres) × 0.03) + 9,000 s.f. = Total 	(( lot area - 14.5 acres) × 0.02) + 10,306.8 s.f. = Total 	(( lot area - 15.5 acres) × 0.01) + 11,178 s.f. = Total, up to a maximum of 15,000 square feet 
 
  
Table J-6: Maximum Paved Area and Surface Coverage Allowed in the SCP-10 Zone District 
Lot Area Range 	Nonconforming Lots 
< 10 acres 	Equal to 10.0 acre to 18 acres 	> 18 to 19.0 acres 	> 19.0 to 20 acres 	> 20 acres 
Maximum Paved Area and Surface Coverage 	9,000 square feet or 50% of the lot area , whichever is less 	9,000 
square feet 	(( lot area - 18 acres) × 0.03) + 9,000 s.f. = Total 	(( lot area - 19 acres) × 0.02) + 10,306.8 s.f. = Total 	(( lot area - 20 acres) × 0.01) + 11,178 s.f. = Total, up to a maximum of 15,000 square feet 
 
  
(2)  Open Space Zoning Districts. Paved area and surface coverage limits in the OSH, OSRL, OSRM, OSN, and OSM Zoning Districts shall be subject to the following table: 
TABLE J-7: Maximum Paved Area and Surface Coverage Allowed in the Open Space Districts 
Zone District 	Maximum Paved Area and Surface Coverage 
OSH 	2.75% of lot area 
OSRL 	2.75% of lot area 
OSRM 	2.75% of lot area 
OSN 	2.75% of lot area 
OSM 	2.75% of lot area 
 
(3)  Community Commercial Zoning District. Paved area and surface coverage limits in the CC Zoning District, and for any site designated for institutional use in the Town's General Plan and used for such use, may be regulated under the terms of a conditional use permit or by the Architectural and Site Review Board. In no event shall the paved area and surface coverage allowed under this chapter for any site designated for institutional use in the Town's General Plan exceed 25 percent of the total lot area .  
(B) - Measurement of paved area and surface coverage. 
(1)  The materials and features listed in the definition of paved area and surface coverage in Section 153.005 shall count towards the maximum permitted paved area and surface coverage for each zoning district. 
(2)  The following features or designated portions thereof shall not count towards the maximum permitted paved area and surface coverage for each zoning district: 
(a)  Constructed equestrian riding arenas so long as there is no change in use. If a change in use occurs all or a portion of the materials that are defined as paved area and surface coverage shall be removed so the remaining paved area and surface coverage on the property do not exceed the maximum permitted paved area and surface coverage . 
(b)  Portions of principal access driveways that are beyond 50 feet from either the structure in which the permitted principal use occurs, or the detached garage that serves the structure in which the permitted principal use occurs. 
(c)  Up to 2,500 square feet for each required fire truck turnaround or required fire truck driveway turnout , or the size of the required fire turnaround or turnout, whichever is less. 
(d)  Portions of informal water features, such as ponds, or other water features without formal linear or uniform circular/oval shapes if the paved material does not project above the grade so long as the portions of such informal water features cover less than 2.5 percent of the lot area or 10,000 square feet, whichever is less. 
(e)  Required drainage facilities. 
(f)  Retaining walls and landscape walls of any material. 
(g)  Up to 500 square feet total of decomposed granite, gravel, sand, or similar material that is not used for driveways or parking areas . 
(h)  Up to 3,000 square feet of turnout area, or up to 1,000 square feet of turnout area per horse allowed on the property without an exception granted pursuant to Section 115.14 of the Municipal Code , whichever is greater. 
(i)  Up to a maximum of 140 square feet per parcel for installation of a mechanical equipment/utility pad(s). 
(j)  Ramps used as an accessible route that comply with all applicable requirements in the Federal Americans with Disabilities Act or equivalent requirements in the California Code, whichever requirements are applicable.  
(C) - Exceptions to paved area and surface coverage requirements: SCP-5 Zoning District. 
(1)  An exception may be granted to the maximum paved area and surface coverage in the SCP-5 Zoning District by the Planning Director : 
(a)  Where the gross average slope of the entire parcel is less than ten percent; 
(b)  If a recreational court is proposed, the average slope of the area beneath the proposed recreational court before grading must be less than five percent; 
(c)  If a septic system is the method of waste disposal, a proven area for a 100 percent expansion of a septic leachfield must exist; 
(d)  The maximum paved area and surface coverage if it does not exceed: 
1.  15,000 square feet on lots three acres or larger; 
2.  12,000 square feet on lots two to 2.99 acres. 
(Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17; Am. Ord. 2018-596 , § 2(Exh. A, § II), effective 10-26-18)  
153.210 - BUILDING COVERAGE 
 
(A) - Building coverage requirements. 
(1)  Table K sets forth the building coverage limit which only applies to the Community Commercial Zoning District. Such basic regulations are further defined and supplemented by the additional requirements and exceptions set forth in this section. 
TABLE K: Building Coverage Limit 
Zone District 	Building Coverage Limit 
CC 	20% maximum building coverage 
 
   
(B) - Measurement of building coverage. 
(1)  The percentage of the site area covered by structures shall be measured by dividing the total number of square feet of horizontal grounds area covered by structures , open or enclosed, by the total horizontal area of the site. The area of uncovered and unenclosed off-road parking spaces, walks, patios, in-ground swimming pools or pools which do not project more than three feet above the ground, uncovered decks or garage aprons three feet or less above the ground, and eaves projecting three feet or less shall not be counted, and only one-half of the area of uncovered and unenclosed decks 15 feet or less above the ground shall be counted. Any portion of a lot that has been acquired by the Town for use in a Parking Assessment District shall be added back to the total square footage of that lot for purposes of computing allowable building coverage on the lot . 
(2)  The area of all accessory buildings shall be considered in calculating building coverage .  
(C) - Exceptions to building coverage requirements. 
(1)  The Planning Commission may however, allow greater lot coverage, without limitation, for such lots in the Town Center Parking Assessment District, upon approval of a conditional use permit after finding that the proposed development would be consistent with the policies regarding use , intensity, design, and circulation in the Woodside General Plan, with the Town Center Site Plan, dated March 8, 1989, and with the October 5, 1989 engineer's report for the Woodside Road - Whiskey Hill Road Parking Assessment District (the engineer's report). The Commission shall condition the use permit requiring participation in the District to the full extent outlined in the engineer's report prior to the use permit becoming effective. 
(Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
153.211 - ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS 
 
(A) - Requirements applicable to all accessory dwelling units. 
All accessory dwelling units , whether internal, attached to, or detached from the main dwelling unit, shall conform to the following requirements: 
(1)  Building and fire safety. Conformance with all applicable building, housing, zoning, and site development laws, codes, and regulations shall be required, as applicable to accessory dwelling units . Accessory dwelling units shall not be required to provide fire sprinklers if they are not required for the primary residence and may employ alternative methods for fire protection. 
(2)  Parking and driveway access. Off-road parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of Sections 153.221 through 153.225, as applicable to accessory dwelling units ; and specifically as follows: 
(a)  Parking requirements. Parking requirements for accessory dwelling units shall be one parking space per accessory dwelling unit . Off-street parking shall be permitted in setback areas in locations determined by the Town , or through tandem parking, unless specific findings are made that parking in setback areas or tandem parking is not feasible based upon specific site or regional topographic or fire and life safety conditions. 
(b)  Parking waiver. Parking is not required in the following instances: 
1.  The accessory dwelling unit is located within one-half mile of public transit, including transit stations and bus stations; 
2.  The accessory dwelling unit is located within an architecturally and historically significant historic district; 
3.  The accessory dwelling unit is part of the existing primary residence or an existing accessory structure ; 
4.  The accessory dwelling unit is located in an area where parking permits are required, but are not offered to the occupant of the accessory dwelling unit ; or 
5.  The accessory dwelling unit is located within one block of a car share vehicle. 
(c)  Replacement parking : When a garage , carport , or covered parking structure is demolished or converted in conjunction with the construction of an accessory dwelling unit , the Town requires that those parking spaces be replaced. The replacement spaces may be located in any configuration on the same lot as the accessory dwelling unit , including but not limited to, as covered spaces, uncovered spaces, or tandem spaces, or by the use of mechanical automobile parking lifts. 
(d)  Baseline parking. Regardless of the parking requirement for any accessory dwelling unit , the parking requirement for the main residence must be met to develop any accessory dwelling unit . 
(e)  Driveway access. Any lots that have two or more existing permitted driveways shall use the principal access driveway as the primary access to any proposed accessory dwelling unit . Any additional existing driveways other than the principal access driveway shall not be used as the primary access for any proposed accessory dwelling unit . Pursuant to Municipal Code Section 151.44, a second driveway exception shall not be granted if the second driveway is the primary access for a proposed accessory dwelling unit . 
(3)  Design review. All plans for accessory dwelling units shall be subject to review and approval by the Planning Director . In addition, all plans for the new construction or exterior modification of accessory dwelling units shall also, prior to the issuance of any permit, be subject to review according to Section 153.912. In considering architectural review, the Planning Director shall be required to find that the accessory dwelling units are subordinate to the main dwelling , and compatible with the neighboring property and uses in height , bulk, location, appearance, color, materials, and landscaping. 
(4)  General accessory structure regulations. All requirements related to accessory buildings contained in this chapter, including, but not limited to: height , setbacks , floor area , lot coverage, and landscaping shall apply. 
(5)  Number of accessory dwelling units allowed. No more than two accessory dwelling units , including accessory dwelling units in barns , are permitted on a parcel . For parcels equal to or greater than 1.5 acres in size, a maximum of two accessory dwellings units , whether attached or detached, shall be permitted. For parcels equal to or greater than 1.0 acre in size, but less than 1.5 acres in size, a maximum of one detached and one attached accessory dwelling units shall be permitted. For parcels less than 1.0 acre in size, no more than one accessory dwelling unit accessory living quarters, whether attached or detached, shall be permitted. In the R-1 District, no more than one accessory dwelling unit is permitted, and detached accessory dwelling units may only be permitted if the lot area is at least 20,000 square feet. Further restrictions apply to efficiency accessory dwelling units , see to Section 153.912(C)(1). 
TABLE L-1*: Number of Accessory Dwelling Units Allowed 
Parcel Size or Zoning 	Number of Accessory 
Dwelling Units Allowed 
Equal to, or greater than, 1.5 acres 	A maximum of two, whether attached or detached. 
Equal to, or greater than, 1.0 acre; but less than 1.5 acres 	A maximum of one detached and one attached. 
Less than 1.0 acre 	No more than one, whether attached or detached. 
In the R-1 District 	No more than one, and detached may only be permitted if the lot area is at least 20,000 square feet. 
 
*Ord. No. 2018-597 , effective 10-26-18, § 2(Exh. A), adopted Sept. 25, 2018, set out provisions intended for use as Table L. Inasmuch as there was already a table so designated, and at the editor's discretion, this table has been included as Table L-1 and the original Table L in Section 153.212(B) has been renumbered as Table L-2. 
(6)  Attached accessory dwelling units. The floor area of an attached accessory dwelling unit shall not exceed 50 percent of the size of the main residence, including the accessory dwelling unit , or 1,500 square feet, whichever is less. 
(7)  Detached accessory dwelling units. The floor area of a detached accessory dwelling unit , including the floor area of any attached garage , shall not exceed 1,500 square feet. 
(8)  Basement accessory dwelling units. Basement area used for an accessory dwelling unit , or a portion thereof, shall be limited to the unit sizes prescribed in divisions (A)(6) and (A)(7) of this section. 
(9)  Rental accessory dwelling units. Accessory dwelling units which are rented shall not be rented for less than 30 consecutive days. 
(10)  Existing garages converted to accessory dwelling units. No setback shall be required for an existing garage that is converted to an accessory dwelling unit , and a setback of no more than five feet or the setback of the existing garage , whichever is greater, from the side and rear lot lines shall be required for an accessory dwelling unit that is constructed above a garage , as long as access and egress requirements, as prescribed by the Building Code and Municipal Code height requirements are met. 
(11)  Processing requirements: 
(a)  Accessory dwelling units within an existing structure. An accessory dwelling unit within an existing structure (including the primary structure , attached or detached garage , or other accessory structure ) shall be permitted ministerially with a building permit , and within 120 days of application, in compliance with other standards within the chapter, if complying with the following codes and requirements: 
1.  Building and safety codes; 
2.  Independent exterior access from the existing residence; 
3.  Sufficient side and rear setbacks for fire safety, as set forth in the Building Code; and, 
4.  A minimum five-foot setback for a second-story accessory dwelling unit above an existing nonconforming garage . 
5.  Construction of a new access stair a minimum of five feet from the side or rear property line, or the existing setback , whichever is greater, to access a new ADU built above an existing, legal nonconforming garage is allowed. Additionally, the Planning Director will review the design of such an access stair to ensure that: an access stair cannot be accommodated within the existing nonconforming garage because it would reduce the parking in the garage to less than two spaces or would eliminate the only feasible required parking on site. An existing garage located at the required setback shall be allowed an access stair which may encroach a maximum of five feet into the required setback . 
(b)  Denial. In order to deny an accessory dwelling unit , the Planning Director shall find that the accessory dwelling unit would be detrimental to the public health and safety or would introduce unreasonable privacy impacts to the immediate neighbors.  
(B) - Requirements applicable to accessory dwelling units within barns. 
In addition to the requirements applicable to all accessory dwelling units , any such accessory dwelling units located within barns shall conform to the following additional requirements: 
(1)  No more than one accessory dwelling unit within a barn shall be permitted on a parcel with the following exception: up to two accessory dwelling units may be permitted within a barn located on a property containing a Town-approved professional stable . Such additional accessory dwelling units shall only be permitted after approval of a conditional use permit by the Planning Commission , in accordance with applicable conditional use permit procedures. 
(2)  The floor area of the accessory dwelling unit within a barn shall be no greater than 50 percent of the footprint area of the barn , or 1,200 square feet, whichever is less. 
(3)  The accessory dwelling unit and the barn shall contain an automatic fire sprinkler system, and the accessory dwelling unit shall be separated from the other portions of the barn with a one-hour firewall, in accordance with the Town's Building Code. 
(4)  An accessory dwelling unit in a barn may be located on either a first or second floor, of that portion of the barn adheres to required setbacks .  
(C) - Requirements applicable to efficiency accessory dwelling units. 
Efficiency accessory dwelling units , a unit that is no more than 500 square feet in size and contained entirely within an existing single-family structure , shall be allowed the following provisions and shall conform to the following requirements: 
(1)  Only one efficiency accessory dwelling unit is allowed per lot . 
(2)  Owner-occupancy is required in any residence that contains an efficiency accessory dwelling unit . The owner may reside in either the remaining portion of the structure or in the newly created efficiency accessory dwelling unit . Owner-occupancy shall not be required if the owner is a governmental agency, land trust, or housing organization. 
(3)  An efficiency accessory dwelling unit shall be constructed within the existing walls of the structure , and shall include an existing bedroom. 
(4)  An efficiency accessory dwelling unit may include separate sanitation facilities, or may share sanitation facilities with the existing structure . 
(5)  An efficiency accessory dwelling unit shall include a separate entrance from the main entrance to the structure , with an interior entry to the main living area. An efficiency accessory dwelling unit may include a second interior doorway for sound attenuation. 
(6)  An efficiency accessory dwelling unit shall have an efficiency kitchen , which shall include all of the following: 
(a)  A sink with a maximum waste line diameter of one and one-half inches; 
(b)  A cooking facility with appliances that do not require electrical service greater than 120 volts, or natural or propane gas; and, 
(c)  A food preparation counter and storage cabinets that are of reasonable size in relation to the size of the junior accessory dwelling unit. 
(7)  An efficiency accessory dwelling unit does not require additional parking, however, the main residence in which it is contained shall meet the Town parking requirement. 
(8)  This subdivision shall not be interpreted to prohibit the requirement of an inspection, including the imposition of a fee for that inspection, to determine whether the efficiency accessory dwelling unit is in compliance with applicable building standards. 
(9)  An application for a permit pursuant to this section shall, notwithstanding Section 65901 or 65906 or any local ordinance regulating the issuance of variances or special use permits , be considered ministerially, without discretionary review or a hearing. A permit shall be issued within 120 days of submission of an application for a permit pursuant to this section. A local agency may charge a fee to reimburse the local agency for costs incurred in connection with the issuance of a permit pursuant to this section. 
(10)  For the purposes of any fire or life protection ordinance or regulation an efficiency accessory dwelling unit unit shall not be considered a separate or new dwelling unit. This section shall not be construed to prohibit a city, county, city and county, or other local public entity from adopting an ordinance or regulation relating to fire and life protection requirements within a single-family residence that contains an efficiency accessory dwelling unit so long as the ordinance or regulation applies uniformly to all single-family residences within the zone regardless of whether the single-family residence includes an efficiency accessory dwelling unit or not. 
(11)  For the purposes of providing service for water, sewer, or power, including a connection fee, an efficiency accessory dwelling unit shall not be considered a separate or new dwelling unit. 
(12)  This section shall not be construed to prohibit a local agency from adopting an ordinance or regulation, related to parking or a service or a connection fee for water, sewer, or power, that applies to a single-family residence that contains an efficiency accessory dwelling unit , so long as that ordinance or regulation applies uniformly to all single-family residences regardless of whether the single-family residence includes an efficiency accessory dwelling unit . 
(Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17; Am. Ord. 2018-593 , effective 4-26-18; Am. Ord. 2018-597 , § 2(Exh. A), effective 10-26-18)  
153.212 - FENCES, WALLS, GATES, PYLONS, AND BERMS 
 
(A) - Permits required. 
(1)  No fence or wall shall be erected without the prior issuance of a permit from the Town . 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.207) 
(2)  A building permit and/or a fence permit shall be required for all fences , walls , gates , pylons , and berms. All vehicular gates and entry features require review by the Architectural and Site Review Administrator.  
(B) - Residential Zoning Districts. 
The following regulations and design guidelines were created to preserve the beauty and rural quality of the Town and ensure the safety of all residents. Open fencing and gates are strongly encouraged to maintain the rural atmosphere of the Town . In all residential and open space zones the following regulations and design standards shall apply to all fences , walls , gates , pylons , and berms. 
(1)  Open fences , which meet all of the provisions of divisions (4) through (13) below, may be approved by the Planning Director , without review by the Architectural and Site Review Administrator. 
(2)  Fences and walls located greater than 50 feet (30 feet in the R-1 zone) from the right-of-way of adjacent roadways and which meet all of the provisions of divisions (4) through (13) below, may be approved by the Planning Director unless an adjacent property owner requests review by the Architectural and Site Review Administrator. At least ten days prior to the decision, notice of the pending decision shall be provided to any owner of property adjacent to the proposed fence , including lots located across an abutting public or private roadway. 
(3)  All other fences , walls , gates , and berms which meet the provisions of divisions (4) through (13) below may be approved by the Architectural and Site Review Administrator. Exceptions to the standards set forth in this section may be granted by the Architectural and Site Review Administrator upon a finding that such fence , wall , gate , pylon , or berm would be consistent with the rural character of Woodside and with the existing fencing of the subject lot and neighboring properties. No exception may be granted, however, which allows a fence , wall , or berm to exceed six feet in height . 
(4)  The design of all fences , walls , gates , pylons , and berms shall be rural in character and shall emphasize the use of natural materials and colors. Open fencing is highly preferred. Open gates are required. Unpainted or stained white, brown or gray wood; welded or woven wire and wood posts; natural stone and/or brick construction are preferred. Chain link fencing, except for athletic sport fencing, is not permitted within 50 feet of the right-of-way of an adjacent roadway, unless specifically approved by the Architectural and Site Review Administrator. 
(5)  (a)  All fences , walls , gates , and pylons shall meet the standards in the following chart. The maximum overall height limit for fencing and gates is six feet, except athletic court fencing, which may be 12 feet in height . Fences , walls , gates , and pylons may not be located in the public or private right-of-way or within any trail easement or other easement precluding their construction. 
TABLE L-2*: Required Setbacks for Fences, Walls, and Gates 
Fencing Style 	Minimum setback from edge of adjacent driving surface (public) 	Minimum setback from edge of adjacent driving surface (private) 
Open fences , less than 4 feet tall 	10 feet 	5 feet 
Open fences , between 4 feet and 6 feet tall 	20 feet 	10 feet 
Solid fences and walls , less than 4 feet tall 	10 feet 	5 feet 
Solid fences and walls , between 4 feet and 6 feet tall 	50 feet 
(30 feet in R-1 zoning) 	50 feet 
(30 feet in R-1 zoning) 
Vehicular gates 	25 feet, 
with gates in the open position 	25 feet, 
with gates in the open position 
Athletic court fencing, where allowed 	50 feet 	50 feet 
 
*See editor's note to Table L-1 in Section 153.211(A). 
(b)  Berms. Berms shall vary in height and width to create a natural appearance, consistent with surrounding natural contours, and must be planted with native drought tolerant plants. The top of the berm shall slope gradually to approximate natural slopes and to accommodate planting of vegetation. The slope of the berm must not exceed two feet horizontal to one foot vertical and fills in excess of three feet require certification of design by a civil engineer. 
(6)  Notwithstanding the standard set forth above, all fences , walls , gates , pylons or berms shall be located to accommodate existing equestrian trail usage such that a minimum of 15 feet of usable trail width remains, unless the Trails Committee concurs that a lesser width is adequate for safe equestrian movement. 
(7)  The vertical dimension of any fence or wall shall be measured from the average elevation of the finished grade on both sides of any such fence or wall . The maximum height at any point on a stepped fence shall not exceed the limitations contained in this section. 
(8)  Landscape screening required as a condition of approval for any fence or wall shall be maintained by the property owner in good condition. 
(9)  Corral and pasture fences shall not be less than four feet in height , unless other requirements are prescribed by Chapter 115 of this Code , relating to stables , or any other Town law applicable to the keeping of livestock , in which case such other height requirements shall prevail. 
(10)  No fence , wall , gate , pylon or berm shall be permitted where, in the opinion of the Town Engineer , the additional height would obstruct the sight distance or create a potential public safety hazard. Additionally, the Town Engineer may require that fences , walls , gates , pylons , or berms erected or planted prior to the effective date of this chapter be reduced in height or removed where the Town Engineer determines that a public safety hazard exists. 
(11)  No fence , wall , gate , pylon , or berm shall be constructed within a stream corridor , as defined in Section 153.442, unless the Town Engineer finds that such fencing will not impede drainage flow and the Planning Director finds that adequate provision is made for the passage of wildlife. 
(12)  (a)  Fences , gates , pylons , and berms shall not be constructed within any public right-of-way. Retaining walls may be constructed in a public right-of-way only if each of the following three conditions are met: 
1.  The wall is necessary for the construction and maintenance of the road , trails, paths, drainage, or public utilities, or the entire wall will be located below the driving surface of the adjacent road , or the wall is necessary for slope stability or to access a property; and 
2.  The Town Engineer finds that the wall will not negatively impact the safety and functionality of the right-of-way, recognizing that the purpose of the public right-of-way is for both travel and for utilities; and 
3.  Prior to issuance of a permit for the requested improvement, an encroachment agreement shall be recorded. The agreement shall contain language requiring the property owner benefiting from the improvement to indemnify and defend the Town from any claim that may arise in connection with the encroachment. The agreement shall also include language that authorizes the Town to require removal of the improvement at the benefiting property owner's sole cost and expense. 
(b)  Fences , walls and berms shall not be constructed within any private road right-of-way . Gates , pylons , and appurtenances, that run from such gates and pylons to the edge of private right-of-way , may be constructed in a Private right-of-way provided a use permit is granted by the Planning Commission according to Sections 153.921 through 153.930, and provided the following findings are made (in addition to the findings required by Section 153.927): 
1.  The private road right-of-way is not a through road ; 
2.  The private road right-of-way does not serve more than ten residential lots ; 
3.  An adequate turnaround will be provided; 
4.  The gate and/or gate appurtenances will not constitute a traffic safety hazard; 
5.  The private road right-of-way is privately owned by property owners adjacent to it; 
6.  All property owners who have the right to use the private road right-of-way have given their written consent to the use permit application; 
7.  Access will be provided for emergency vehicles; 
8.  The proposed gate and its appurtenances conform to applicable Town codes; 
9.  Maintenance of the gate and its appurtenances is provided for in a road maintenance agreement executed and recorded by all property owners who have joined in the use permit application; and 
10.  The gate apparatus will be operable from vehicles by handicapped persons. 
(13)  Notwithstanding other provisions of this chapter, replacement of existing fences or walls shall be permitted if the replacement is of a like material, no greater in height , and no closer to adjacent property lines than the existing fence or wall , or if replaced by an open fence meeting all of the provisions of this section, except that replacement with chain link fencing is subject to all provisions of this section. Repair of short sections (less than 100 feet, not to exceed 50 percent of that segment of fencing over a 12-month period) of existing fences and walls does not require a permit. Replacement of existing gates , pylons , and berms shall require a fence and/or building permit and are subject to all review provisions of this section, as are fences and walls which are replaced other than as specified above. Replacement of any of the above, however, shall be prohibited if the Town Engineer determines that a public safety hazard exists. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.208)  
(C) - Community Commercial District. 
In the CC District fences and walls exceeding six feet in height shall be regarded as structures and shall not be erected without first obtaining the approval of the Planning Director and the issuance of a building permit from the Town . 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.209) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1986-334, effective 5-8-86; Am. Ord. 1989-391, effective 9-14-89; Am. Ord. 1992-454, effective 3-13-92; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2006-530, effective 6-8-06; Am. Ord. 2012-554, effective 8-23-12; Am. Ord. 2015-569, effective 1-7-16; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
153.213 - OUTDOOR LIGHTING 
All outdoor lighting shall conform to the following regulations: 
(A)  All outdoor lighting fixtures shall be shielded or hooded and shall not shine or glare on adjacent public or private roads or properties. 
(B)  All outdoor lighting fixtures shall be the sharp cut-off type in order to minimize potential glare. 
(C)  No outdoor lighting lamps which produce impacts such as those produced by high pressure sodium or mercury vapor shall be permitted. 
(D)  Lighting patterns or illuminated areas shall be entirely contained within the boundaries of the property on which the outdoor lighting is located. 
(E)  Outdoor lighting for commercial and institutional building and parking areas ; commercial, institutional, or residential athletic or sport courts; and recreational facilities, including equestrian facilities, shall also conform to the following additional regulations: 
(1)  The maximum height of any outdoor fixture for outdoor, accessory recreation facilities and commercial and institutional parking areas shall be 14 feet. 
(2)  All such outdoor lighting shall be subject to review according to Section 153.912. The final review body may impose reasonable conditions on such approval, such as the installation of plant materials or the construction of screen walls or fences as may be necessary to mitigate the impact of such lighting on adjacent roads , properties, and significant vistas. 
(3)  As a condition precedent to recommending the approval of an outdoor lighting plan, the final review body shall make the following findings: 
(a)  That the outdoor lighting will not result in a hazard or public nuisance by directly shining or glaring on adjacent public or private roads or properties; 
(b)  That the resulting illuminated areas serve only minimum requirements for the intended use ; 
(c)  That the resulting illuminated areas have minimal impact on views from neighboring properties and from distant vistas; and 
(d)  That the outdoor lighting is in conformity with all other provisions of this section. 
(Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
153.220 - OFF-ROAD PARKING AND LOADING REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 153.221 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this subchapter is to reduce road congestion and traffic hazards and promote general convenience for the Town residents by: 
(A)  Ensuring that off-road parking and loading facilities are provided incidental to new land uses and enlargements or alterations of existing land uses in proportion to the need for such facilities created by new or modified uses ; and 
(B)  Ensuring that off-road parking and loading facilities are designed and constructed in a manner which will ensure maximum efficiency, protect the public safety, and minimize the impact on surrounding land uses . 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.401) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.222 - General application. 
In all zoning districts there shall be provided at the time of the occupancy of any building or structure , or at the time any building or structure is enlarged or increased in capacity, or at the time the use of any building or structure is increased or changed off-road parking spaces for automobiles in accordance with the schedule set forth in Section 153.223 of this subchapter. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.402) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.223 - Minimum number of required automobile parking spaces. 
(A)  The number of off-road parking spaces required shall be as set forth in the following table, except that additional parking spaces may be required as a condition of any conditional use permit when the Planning Commission finds that the characteristics of the particular use require additional parking: 
TABLE M: Minimum Number of Required Parking Spaces 
Use 	Parking Spaces Required 
Dwellings, main 	4 for each unit, minimum 
Accessory dwelling units 	1 for each accessory dwelling unit . (See § 153.211(A)(2) for exceptions.) 
Churches and other houses of worship 	2 for each 5 seats in the main worship unit. For fixed seating, each 20 horizontal inches shall be counted as one seat 
Elementary schools 	2 for each classroom, plus one for each 100 square feet in the auditorium or any space used for assembly 
Places of assembly without fixed seats 	1 for each 100 square feet of floor area used for assembly 
Places of assembly with fixed seats not otherwise provided for in this section 	1 for each 3 seats. Each 20 horizontal inches of such seating shall be counted as 1 seat 
Retail stores and consumer service establishments 	1 for each 150 square feet of floor area , plus one for every 3 employees 
Medical and dental clinics 	5 spaces for each doctor 
Banks and business and professional offices 	1 for each 200 square feet of floor area , plus 1 for every 3 employees 
Establishments for the sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages, food or refreshments 	1 for each 2½ seats, stools, or standing spaces 
 
(B)  For any use not specified in this section, the same number of off-road parking spaces shall be provided as are required for the most similar specified use as determined by the Planning Director . Where the computation of required parking spaces produces a fractional result, fractions of one-half or greater shall require the provision of one full parking space. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.403) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1984-321, effective 1-11-85; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2017-585, effective 4-27-17; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 153.999.  
Sec. 153.224 - General provisions for off-road parking facilities. 
(A)  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, parking spaces required in connection with the uses permitted in the residential districts shall be provided in private garages , carports , or spaces located on the same parcel as the main building. Parking spaces required for uses permitted in the CC District or for conditional uses permitted in the residential districts shall be provided in off-road parking areas located within 500 feet of the building such spaces are to serve. When the required off-road parking facilities are not situated on the same parcel as the use they are to serve, there shall be executed an appropriate legal instrument as approved by the Town Attorney to ensure the permanent use of such spaces. 
(B)  For the purposes of Section 153.223, "floor area," in the case of places of assembly, offices, merchandising, or service types of uses shall mean the gross floor area used, or intended to be used, for service to the public as customers, patrons, clients, patients, or tenants and shall include the area occupied by fixtures and equipment used for the display or sale of merchandise. "Floor area" shall not include areas used principally for nonpublic purposes, such as storage, incidental repairs, processing, and packaging of merchandise, for show windows, for offices incidental to the management or maintenance of stores or buildings, for toilets or rest rooms, for utilities, or for dressing, fitting, or alteration rooms. 
(C)  Where more than one use is included in one building or on a single parcel , the parking requirements shall be the aggregate of the requirements for all such uses , except as specified for joint uses . 
(D)  The parking space requirements prescribed in this subchapter may be satisfied by the permanent allocation of the required area or number of spaces for each permitted use in a common parking facility, cooperatively established and operated, either under private auspices or a public assessment district, provided the total of such off-road parking spaces allocated shall be not less than the aggregate of the individual requirements after allowing reductions for joint uses as set forth in division (E) below of this section. An appropriate legal instrument as approved by the Town Attorney shall be executed to ensure the permanent use of such spaces. 
(E)  The Planning Commission may authorize the joint use of parking facilities as follows: 
(1)  Up to 50 percent of the parking facilities required by this subchapter for a primarily daytime use may be provided by the parking facilities of a church or other house of worship, or any auditorium incidental to a public or parochial school, or the parking facilities of a primarily nighttime use ; and up to 50 percent of the parking facilities required by Section 153.223 for a primarily nighttime use may be provided by the parking facilities of a primarily daytime use ; provided, however, such reciprocal parking areas shall be subject to the conditions set forth in division (3) below of this section. 
(2)  Up to 100 percent of the parking facilities required by Section 153.223 for a church or for an auditorium incidental to a public or parochial school may be supplied by the parking facilities of a use not normally open, used, or operated during the principal operating hours of such church or school, subject to the conditions set forth in division (3) below. 
(3)  The following conditions shall be required for the joint use of parking facilities: 
(a)  The structure or use for which the application is made shall be located within 500 feet of such parking facility. 
(b)  There shall be no substantial conflict in the principal operating hours of buildings or uses for which the joint use of off-road parking facilities is proposed. 
(c)  If the building , structure , or improvement requiring parking space is in one ownership , and the required parking space provided is in another ownership, partially or wholly, a legal instrument shall be executed by the persons concerned for the joint use . Such instrument shall be approved as to form and manner of execution by the Town Attorney and filed with the Town . Such instrument shall warrant that the parking area under joint use , as approved by the Town , shall not be made subject to any other contract for use without the prior consent of the Planning Commission . 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.404) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.225 - Development and maintenance of parking areas. 
For all uses and parcels , parking area shall be developed and maintained as follows: 
(A)  Each off-road parking space shall be of rectangular shape at least nine feet by 20 feet for standard size cars and nine feet by 16 feet for compact cars. All parking spaces shall be clearly marked and delineated for all nonresidential uses . 
(B)  Each parking area shall be directly accessible from a public or private road . 
(C)  The location of entrances and exits to all parking areas shall be approved by the Town Engineer and Planning Director . 
(D)  If the parking area is illuminated, such illumination shall conform to the provisions of Section 153.213(A)—(D). 
(E)  Every nonresidential parking facility adjacent to residential property shall be screened from such property by a solid wall , planting structure , fence , raised landscaped mound, or plant materials or any combination of such treatments. All screening devices shall be a minimum of four feet in height for the first 25 feet of the required front setback , except where such devices occur within 20 feet of the edge of a road driving surface, in which case they shall be four feet in height . 
(F)  In the CC District, where a parking area adjoins a street or another site, a landscaped strip not less than five feet in depth shall be provided with permanently maintained plant materials the mature height of which shall not be less than five feet, except that within 50 feet of a street intersection, the height of the plant materials other than trees, shall not exceed three and one-half feet. 
(G)  Bicycle and horse hitching racks shall be provided in any parking area in the CC District. The design, capacity, and location shall be approved by the Town . 
(H)  In addition to any other landscaping requirements prescribed by this chapter, each off-road parking area containing ten or more spaces shall contain permanently maintained landscaped areas equivalent to at least ten percent of the parking area , including the circulation aisles. The location and design of all landscaped areas shall be subject to the approval of the Architectural and Site Review Board. 
(I)  Not more than 25 percent of the total number of required parking spaces for any use may be compact car spaces. 
(J)  Off-road parking facilities, excluding single-family residential facilities, shall be surfaced with a minimum of five inches of concrete or one and one-half inches of asphalt overlying four inches of base rock. Additional structural requirements may be imposed by the Town Engineer . 
(K)  Off-road parking facilities shall be so graded and drained as to dispose of all surface water. In no case shall such drainage crosswalk ways or trails or empty directly into streams or creeks. The maximum grade for parking areas shall not exceed five percent. 
(L)  The plan of any proposed parking area shall be submitted with the application for the building permit , conditional use permit , or zoning permit for the structure , building , or use to which the parking area is accessory. The plan shall clearly indicate the proposed development, including the location, size, shape, design, curbs, cuts, lighting, landscaping, off-road loading facilities, and other features and appurtenances of the proposed parking lot. All plans shall be reviewed by the Planning Director and Town Engineer prior to approval. 
(M)  All off-road parking spaces and areas required by this chapter shall be maintained for the duration of the use requiring such facilities and except for residential uses , no vehicle repair or servicing work shall be permitted within required parking areas , except for emergency service for stalled vehicles. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.405) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1985-324, effective 5-9-85; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 153.999.  
Sec. 153.226 - Off-road loading facilities. 
(A)  For every building, other than residential structures requiring the receipt or distribution by vehicles of material and merchandise, off-road loading areas shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of this section. 
(B)  Off-road loading spaces shall be required in accordance with the following table: 
TABLE N: 
Minimum Number of Required Loading Spaces 
Gross Floor Area 	Loading Spaces Required 
Less than 5,000 square feet 	0 
5,000 to 14,999 square feet 	1 
15,000 to 24,999 square feet 	2 
For each additional 25,000 square feet 	1 
 
(C)  Each loading space shall be not less than ten feet in width and 30 feet in length, with an overhead clearance of 14 feet. 
(D)  Loading spaces may occupy all or any part of a required setback , except the Front and exterior side setbacks , and shall not be located closer than 50 feet to any lot in a residential district. 
(E)  All off-road loading areas shall be screened from view from the adjacent property. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.406) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 153.999.  
153.230 - NONCONFORMING USES, LOTS, STRUCTURES AND BUILDINGS 
 
Sec. 153.231 - Purpose. 
The provisions of this subchapter are intended to implement the provisions of the General Plan by limiting the number of nonconforming structures , buildings , uses and lots and the extent of nonconformity thereof. Accordingly, the Town intends to: 
(A)  Regulate the enlargement; 
(B)  Regulate the reconstruction after destruction or abandonment; and 
(C)  Regulate the alteration , maintenance and repair of nonconforming structures , buildings , uses and lots . 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.1201) (Ord. 1991-441, effective 8-9-91; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2012-558, effective 1-10-13; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.232 - Continuation of nonconforming uses, lots, structures and buildings. 
A nonconforming use , nonconforming lot , nonconforming structure or nonconforming building may be continued in existence, except as otherwise provided in this subchapter. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.1203) (Ord. 1991-441, effective 8-9-91; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2012-558, effective 1-10-13; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.233 - Required conditional use permit. 
Any use , which was authorized at the time it was established, but which is no longer authorized, other than transmission poles and lines existing on September 11, 1980, which is listed as a conditional use in the district where located, for which a conditional use permit has not been granted by the Town , shall be and remain a nonconforming use until a use permit is obtained. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.1204) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2012-558, effective 1-10-13; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.234 - Maintenance. 
Maintenance may be performed on a nonconforming structure or building . 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.1205) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1991-441, effective 8-9-91; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2012-558, effective 1-10-13; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.235 - Limitations on modifications. 
(A)  Nonconforming uses. Notwithstanding any other provision of this subchapter, no nonconforming use shall be altered, increased, enlarged, or established. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.1206) 
(B)  Nonconforming lots. 
(1)  The boundaries of a nonconforming lot shall not be modified in any way that increases the nonconformity of such lot except as otherwise provided herein. 
(2)  Notwithstanding the provisions of division (B)(1) above, the nonconformity of a nonconforming lot may be increased by a lot line adjustment if the Planning Commission finds that: 
(a)  No additional lots or building sites would be created; 
(b)  The adjustment is consistent with the General Plan; 
(c)  The adjustment does not create nonconforming setbacks ; and 
(d)  No existing conforming lot shall be made nonconforming. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.1207) 
(C)  Nonconforming structures or buildings. 
(1)  Nonconforming structures or buildings shall not be altered in any way that would increase or create an additional nonconforming attribute, except as allowed by Section 153.236. 
(2)  In CC Zoning Districts nonconforming structures or buildings may be altered as provided in this subchapter to accommodate any permitted use , or conditional use allowed in that district. 
(3)  In R-1, SR, RR, all SCP and all OS Districts nonconforming structures or buildings may be altered as provided in this subchapter only if such alteration does not result in a change of use , other than ministerial conversion of nonconforming structures or buildings to accessory dwelling units and conversion between single-family residential and habitable accessory uses , of the nonconforming portion of the building or structure , unless it is determined by the Planning Commission that: 
(a)  The proposed new use will conform to the General Plan and Zoning Ordinance; 
(b)  The proposed new use will not create adverse impacts on adjacent properties or properties across a public or private roadway, including but not limited to, impacts related to privacy, noise, odors, parking and traffic; 
(c)  The proposed new use will not negatively impact development potential on adjacent properties by, including, but not limited to, encroaching into the required separation of structures ; or impacting the ability to house or maintain livestock , fowl and small animals; and, 
(d)  The Planning Director shall notify, by first class mail, all property owners within 300 feet of the subject property of the exception request, at least ten days prior to the Planning Commission meeting. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.1208) (Ord. 1991-441, effective 8-9-91; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2012-558, effective 1-10-13; Am. Ord. 2017-585, effective 4-27-17; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17; Am. Ord. 2018-594 , § 2, effective 5-24-18)  
Sec. 153.236 - Limitations applicable to alterations, additions, replacement, or paved area and surface coverage. 
(A)  Alterations. Alterations to a nonconforming structure , including the complete rebuilding of such structures are allowed, provided they do not increase or create additional nonconforming attributes and all of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  A building permit for the proposed alterations shall be obtained; 
(a)  Where alterations significantly modify the exterior of the structure , the architectural style and all other aspects of the structure shall be reviewed pursuant to Sections 153.911 through 153.918 and shall be approved in accordance with ordinances that would be applicable if the structure were to be constructed new or if the structure were conforming; 
(2)  The footprint and plate heights of the nonconforming portions of the structure shall not be increased; with the exception that the plate height of an accessory dwelling unit constructed above an existing, nonconforming garage , may be increased to a maximum of 11 feet. Additionally, the overall height of the nonconforming portions shall not be increased above a maximum height of 17 feet; 
(3)  An encroachment permit has been granted for any structure or building located within the Town's road right-of-way ; and 
(4)  If the structure is for human habitation , the structure shall not be located in: 
(a)  A flood hazard zone, 
(b)  An earthquake fault setback zone, or 
(c)  A landslide as defined on the Town's geologic map or an otherwise identified landslide, unless the location of such structures shall be permitted by the Town Engineer in his/her sole discretion. 
(5)  Notwithstanding the above, if the alteration involves the relocation of a building that is deemed to qualify for the California Register of Historical Resources, and the purpose of the relocation is for restoration consistent with the Secretary of the Interior Standards, the qualifying building may be placed on any lot despite exceeding the maximum size limitations, provided all other provisions of this chapter are met, and the building was originally built in and is currently located in Woodside. 
(B)  Additions. 
(1)  Additions to a nonconforming structure or building are prohibited unless such additions shall conform to the provisions of all applicable ordinances, including, but not limited to, those ordinances prescribing setbacks and height limits. 
(2)  Notwithstanding the provisions of division (B)(1) above, an exception to permit an addition to a nonconforming main residence to encroach into a setback may be granted by the Planning Director , provided all of the following are satisfied: 
(a)  The total floor area of the encroaching portion of the addition to the nonconforming main residence shall not exceed 10% of the maximum house size allowed for the lot on which the nonconforming main residence is located; 
(b)  The total area of the nonconforming main residence after the addition is made shall not exceed 95% of the maximum house size allowed for the lot on which the nonconforming main residence is located; 
(c)  No part of the proposed additions(s) shall encroach into the setback to a greater extent than the furthest encroachment of the nonconforming main residence prior to the addition , or so as to create a side setback of less than ten feet or a rear setback of less than 17 feet. 
(d)  The addition that extends into the setback shall not exceed a 17-foot overall height maximum as measured from natural or finished grade , whichever is lower; 
(e)  The addition shall conform to all applicable ordinances and regulations except those relating to setback ; 
(f)  The existing setback encroachment was not created through a variance granted by the Town ; 
(g)  In the R-1 zoning district, the new encroachments of the addition are limited to the front setback area; and 
(3)  Setback encroachments for additions to nonconforming building features listed in Municipal Code Section 153.207(C)(1) within residential zoning districts. Notwithstanding the provisions of division (B)(1) above, an exception to permit an addition to an existing nonconforming building feature listed in Section 153.207(C)(1) to encroach into a setback may be granted by the Planning Director , provided all of the following are satisfied: 
(a)  The existing building feature shall be attached to an existing building which currently exceeds the permitted setback encroachment in Section 153.207(C)(1); 
(b)  The addition(s) shall comply with any applicable ordinances and regulations, such as the maximum requirements for floor area , height , or paved area and surface coverage ; 
(c)  The addition(s) shall meet the minimum setbacks in the table below: 
TABLE O: Minimum Setbacks for Additions to Nonconforming Building Features 
Zones 	Minimum Setbacks 
	Front 	Rear 	Side 
R-1 	15 	12.5 	7.5 
SR 	25 	12.5 	10 
RR 	25 	25 	25 
SCP-5, 7.5, 10 	25 	25 	25 
 
(d)  The addition(s) that extends into the setback shall not exceed a 17-foot overall height maximum as measured from natural or finished grade , whichever is lower. For chimneys, the overall height measurement shall be to the adjacent building plate height . For decks , balconies, and stairways, the overall height shall be measured to the top of the walking surface, and; 
(e)  The addition(s) shall not exceed 250 square feet in a 12-month period starting at the date of passing a final inspection for an addition previously permitted by this subsection. 
(4)  Floor Area Relocation. Notwithstanding the provisions of division (B)(1) above, an exception to permit a relocation of portions of the footprint of a nonconforming main residence, which exceeds the maximum floor area, may be granted by the Planning Director provided all of the following are satisfied: 
(a)  The relocated portion shall not encroach into the setback to a greater extent than exists and shall meet all required height restrictions; 
(b)  A portion of the residence equal to or greater than the relocated portion beyond the current footprint shall be removed; 
(c)  The relocated portion of the residence shall be equal to or lower than the plate and building height of the portion to be removed; and 
(d)  The relocated portion shall be limited to 10% of the maximum allowable main residence size for the zoning district without an exception. 
(5)  The following shall be considered/performed when processing exceptions pursuant to divisions (B)(2) and (B)(4): 
(a)  The exception shall not cause significant adverse impacts on neighboring property owners. 
(b)  The Planning Director shall notify, by first class mail, all property owners within 300 feet of the subject property of the exception request, of any Planning Director approval. 
(c)  Decisions of the Planning Director concerning exceptions granted pursuant to divisions (B)(2) and (B)(4) may be appealed to the Planning Commission pursuant to Sections 153.971 through 153.973. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.1210; Am. Ord. 2018-593 , effective 4-26-18) 
(C)  Paved area and surface coverage. Properties that exceed the maximum permitted paved area and surface coverage for the zoning district shall be subject to the following: 
(1)  Paved area and surface coverage may be repaired or replaced in the same location. 
(2)  Paved area and surface coverage totaling no more than 250 square feet may be relocated within a 12 consecutive month period. The 12 consecutive month period shall begin on the date of receiving a final inspection of the relocated materials. 
(3)  Paved area and surface coverage totaling more than 250 square feet may be relocated if: 
(a)  The relocation will result in elimination of the nonconformity, or 
(b)  The relocation will result in a reduction of 25 percent or more of the paved area and surface coverage which exceeds the maximum permitted paved area and surface coverage . 
(c)  Exceptions. Paved area and surface coverage totaling more than 250 square feet may not be relocated if: 
1.  The Town has a survey on file that was associated with a permit issued after January 1, 2000, showing less paved area and surface coverage than is shown on the current application; and 
2.  The Town does not have any additional evidence that the paved and surface coverage areas presented as existing at the time of application were permitted by the Town after the survey was prepared. 
3.  If the records above do not exist, it shall be presumed that the paved area and surface coverage presented as existing at the time of application were installed in accordance with the Town's regulations. 
(Ord. 1991-444, effective 8-9-91; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2005-526, effective 5-12-05; Am. Ord. 2012-558, effective 1-10-13; Am. Ord. 2013-559, effective 3-14-13; Am. Ord. 2014-563, effective 2-13-14; Am. Ord. 2017-385, effective 4-27-17; Am. Ord. 2017-586, effective 6-8-17)  
Sec. 153.237 - Discontinuance due to cessation of use. 
(A)  Nonconforming use of buildings and structures. A nonconforming use shall be deemed to have ceased and shall not therefore be reestablished when it has been discontinued or abandoned, either temporarily or permanently, for a period of 24 consecutive months or more with or without the intention to abandon such use . 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.1215) 
(B)  Exceptions to Division (A). Where the nonconforming use of a structure or building which is presently nonconforming has been abandoned or discontinued for a period of 24 consecutive months or more, the nonconforming use of such structure or building shall not be reestablished, except for the following uses : 
(1)  Agricultural uses ; 
(2)  Barns ; 
(3)  Churches; 
(4)  Manufactured homes ; 
(5)  open space and conservation uses ; 
(6)  Residential care homes ; 
(7)  Single-family dwellings ; and 
(8)  All accessory uses listed in Section 153.107 Table A-3. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.1213) 
(C)  Nonconforming uses of land. Where the nonconforming use of land which involves no structures or buildings other than minor structures , such as the use of land for keeping of livestock , fences , signs , or buildings less than 400 square feet in floor area has been abandoned or discontinued for a period of 24 consecutive months or more with or without the intention to abandon such use , the nonconforming use of such land and structures shall not be reestablished. 
(Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1999-94, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 212-558, effective 1-10-13; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.238 - Termination of nonconforming uses. 
After a public hearing as provided for below in this section, the Planning Commission may terminate any nonconforming use which is determined to be detrimental to the public health or safety or has been determined to be a public nuisance. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.1216) 
(A)  Procedures. Any person or the Town may file a written request with the Planning Director for the termination of a nonconforming use on the grounds set forth above in this section. Upon the filing of any such request, the Planning Director shall investigate the facts set forth in such request and thereafter shall prepare a written report and submit it to the secretary of the Planning Commission . The secretary of the Planning Commission shall thereafter cause such matter to be set for a public hearing before the Planning Commission at its next available meeting. Notice of the time, place and purpose of such hearing shall be given by the secretary of the Planning Commission in the manner and form set forth in Section 153.963 of this chapter. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.1217) 
(B)  Hearings. At the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall receive all relevant evidence and hear all testimony concerning the establishment, operation, and maintenance of the nonconforming use . If, after the public hearing has been conducted, the Planning Commission finds that the nonconforming use is exercised, operated, or maintained in such a manner so as to be detrimental to the public health or safety, or so as to be a public nuisance, the Planning Commission may terminate the nonconforming use . The procedure set forth in this section is required to protect the public from nonconforming uses which are or have become hazards and/or nuisances and is separate and distinct from the procedure for the abatement of public nuisances which may be provided for by other Town ordinances. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.1218) (Ord. 1981-302, effective 1-7-82; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2012-558, effective 1-10-13; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.239 - Nonconforming uses of land and structures. 
Nonconforming signs advertising any product, service, or enterprise shall be removed not later than 25 years after the adoption of Ordinance No. 1959-80 (November 8, 1959). 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.1219) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-24-99; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
153.400 - DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE AREAS AND FEATURES 
 
Sec. 153.410 - Hillside Development Regulations.  
Sec. 153.411 - Purpose. 
The purposes of this subchapter are: 
(A)  To preserve and enhance the scenic quality and resources of the Town's hillside areas; 
(B)  To provide for high quality site development and promote imaginative design solutions for all future hillside developments by requiring the maximum retention of natural features such as drainage swales, streams, slopes, ridgelines, rock outcrops, vistas, trees and plant communities; 
(C)  To restrict the overall density and intensity of development in hillside areas, recognizing that as the overall slope of a hillside increases, the density of development should correspondingly decrease in order to provide for the maximum in public safety and enjoyment; 
(D)  To provide a safe means of ingress and egress for vehicular circulation to and within hillside areas while at the same time minimizing the scarring effects of hillside road and driveway construction; 
(E)  To prevent unnecessary grading and the scarring of hillside areas and building sites ; 
(F)  To reduce the potential for hillside erosion; and 
(G)  To limit the location of buildings, paved areas, circulation facilities, and septic tank drainfields to areas which are safe and consistent with the purposes set forth in this section. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.501) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.412 - Applicability. 
The regulations set forth in this subchapter shall apply: 
(A)  For the purpose of determining the minimum percent of each lot to remain in a natural state for the following: 
(1)  All undeveloped hillside lots, where the net average slope of the lot exceeds 12½ percent created under the subdivision provisions; and 
(2)  All developed lots with a net average slope of more than 12½ percent and which exceed one acre in size; and 
(B)  For the purpose of determining the maximum number of lots and lot size pursuant to the slope-density requirements for all undeveloped parcels and lots where the gross average slope of the lot or parcel exceeds 15 percent. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.502) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2012-553, effective 8-23-12; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.413 - Average ground slope. 
(A)  The average ground slope shall be determined according to the formula: 
S =   0.00229 I L  
  A 
Where, 
S = Average ground slope in percent 
I = Contour level in feet 
L = Combined length of the contour lines in feet; and 
A = The gross area in acres of the parcel or lot 
(B)  Measurements along contours shall be made at contour intervals not to exceed ten feet and a horizontal map scale not smaller than one inch equals 200 feet. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.503) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.414 - Lot yield; slope-density standards. 
Lot yield for all parcels , with the exception of those occurring in the OS District, and land divisions shall be determined by applying the slope-density standards to all parcels with a gross average slope in excess of 15 percent as follows: 
(A)  Where the parcel is to be subdivided, lot yield is represented by the formula below, and is always rounded down to the nearest whole number: 
LY = N*y 
Where, 
LY =  Lot yield in acres 
N = Net acreage of site when all areas with slopes in excess of 35% are removed 
y = Lot yield multiplier 
(B)  To calculate the lot yield multiplier (y), use the lot yield multiplier formula below for the parcel's zoning district: 
R-1 (20,000 sq. ft. min.) 
SR (1-acre min.)* 
When S 15%, 
Y = 1.0 
When S >15%, 
Y = (-.026)*S + 1.39 
  
RR (3-acre min.) 
When S 15%, 
y = 0.33 
When S > 15%, 
y = (-.0066)*S+0.43 
  
SCP-5 (5-acre min.) 
When S 15%, 
y = 0.2 
When S >15%, 
y = (-.0029)*S+0.24 
  
SCP-7.5 (7.5-acre min.) 
When S 15%, 
y = 0.13 
When S >15%, 
y = (-.004)*S+0.19 
  
SCP-10 (10-acre min.) 
When S 15%, 
y = 0.1 
When S >15%, 
y = (-.003)*S+0.15 
Subdivision is not allowed on sites with average slopes exceeding 35%. 
Where: 
y = Yield Factor 
S = Gross average slope in percent (calculated by previous formula) 
Exhibit A below illustrates the lot yield multiplier formulas above. 
 
 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.504) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2012-553, effective 8-23-12; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.415 - Development standards. 
(A)  That portion of a lot or parcel which has a ground slope in excess of 35 percent shall not be altered in any way by grading, the removal or alteration of natural features, such as streams, rock outcrops, ridgelines, drainage swales, the removal of natural vegetation, or any activity related to the preparation of the site for development purposes, except: 
(1)  As may be required in the interests of public safety, such as the provision of fire trails, the removal of poisonous or noxious plants, the controlled removal or thinning of vegetation as a part of a fire protection program approved by the Town Fire Marshal, the correction or stabilization of a geologic or seismic hazard, or for other public safety purposes as approved by the Planning Commission ; and 
(2)  The provision of trails or a portion of a trail comprising a component of the Town's trail system designated by the General Plan. 
(B)  Sites with at least 12.5 percent net average slope are required to maintain a portion of the lot in natural state. This calculation uses the net site acreage when all areas with slopes in excess of 35 percent are removed, defined below by the variable (N). Net average slope for this calculation is defined by the formula: 
S [N] = (0.00229*I*L)/N 
Where, 
S [N] = net average slope in percent 
I = Contour interval in feet 
L = Combined length of the contour lines in feet; and 
N = The net area in acres of the parcel or lot when all areas with slopes in excess of 35 percent are removed. The following table indicates the minimum percent of the ground surface which shall remain in a natural state with no grading, terrain alteration, keeping of livestock , or removal of natural vegetation, dependent on the net average slope of the property: 
TABLE P: Minimum Percent of Net Area Required to Remain in Natural State 
Net Average Slope 
in Percent (S [N] ) 	Minimum of Net 
Area (N) to Remain 
in Natural State 
12.5—14.9% 	32.5% 
15.0—17.4% 	40.0% 
17.5—19.9% 	47.5% 
20.0—22.4% 	55.0% 
22.5—24.9% 	62.5% 
25.0—27.4% 	70.0% 
27.5—29.9% 	77.5% 
30.0—32.4% 	85.0% 
32.5—34.9% 	92.5% 
35.0% and above 	100% 
 
(C)  New or replacement vegetation in areas exceeding 35 percent, including planting for erosion control or land stabilization, shall be native to the surrounding area. 
(D)  No building or structure , other than a fence , may be located on a natural ground slope exceeding 35 percent. 
(E)  No septic tank drainfield may be located on a natural ground slope exceeding 35 percent. 
(F)  If no portion of a lot or parcel contains slopes of less than 35 percent, and the site consists of a lot of record legally created in accordance with applicable regulations of the Town at the time of the creation of the lot , one dwelling unit and those accessory uses permitted in the zoning district may be permitted on such site provided the proposed method of building and site preparation conforms with recommendations acceptable to the Town contained in a geologic and/or soil investigation report by a qualified engineering geologist, and provided the other requirements of this chapter are met. 
(G)  No building shall be located on a ridge visible from a scenic highway or road where the building will be silhouetted against the sky, unless there is no other location on the site which can accommodate a building consistent with all other regulations and constraints applicable to the district in which the site is located, and a determination of such fact is made by the Architectural and Site Review Board. The Architectural and Site Review Board shall review the design of all buildings and structures on any ridge visible from a scenic highway or road . 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.505) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2012-553, effective 8-23-12; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
153.420 - GEOLOGICALLY HAZARDOUS AREAS 
 
Sec. 153.421 - Purposes. 
The purposes of this subchapter are: 
(A)  To establish detailed requirements and procedures for evaluating and reviewing building construction, site development, land divisions, and subdivisions to assure that geologic hazards are considered as a part of the approval of each building site in order that potential loss of life and property is minimized; and 
(B)  To comply with state statutes which require the Town to review and approve certain real estate developments, buildings , and structures within special seismic study zones established by the state. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.601) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.422 - Required approval. 
The Planning Director and the Town Engineer , or their designated representatives, shall review all applications in geologically hazardous areas for planning permits, subdivisions , land divisions, and building permits and all data submitted to determine that all applicable provisions of this subchapter are complied with. Such applications shall be referred to the Town Geologist for review and recommendation. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.602) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.423 - Building site review. 
(A)  Applications shall be reviewed by the Town Geologist to determine if the lot may be developed with reasonable safety from geologic hazards. The review shall include the evaluation of possible effects on the site and on nearby roads and properties. The Town Geologist , within 14 days after his/her receipt of the application, shall notify the applicant through the Planning Director of the results of his/her review and suggest areas of concern to be included in the forthcoming geologic reports to the applicant's geologist. 
(B)  Where geologic hazards are identified on or near the site, special measures shall be recommended by the landowner or applicant's soils engineer and geologist to mitigate the hazards. Such measures shall be approved by the Town Engineer and Town Geologist . 
(C)  Appeals of administrative decisions shall be filed in accordance with the procedures set forth in Section 153.970 of this chapter. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.603) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.424 - Seismic safety. 
(A)  Special building setback lines. Special building setback lines are established along fault traces to minimize the potential loss of life and property resulting from movement along fault traces. See Section 153.005 for definitions of known or inferred fault traces . 
(B)  Setback and building requirements. 
(1)  No building for human occupancy shall be constructed within 50 feet of a fault trace identified as a known fault trace . 
(2)  No building for human occupancy shall be constructed within 125 feet of an inferred fault trace . If a geological investigation demonstrates that no known fault trace exists within 50 feet of the building site , the Town Geologist may waive the setback requirements. 
(3)  The setback from a fault trace shall be measured from the outer edge of faulted ground at right angles from all points along the trace to the closest part of the building or structure to the trace. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.604) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2017-584, effective 4-13-17; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.425 - Procedures and permit issuance. 
The following procedures shall be followed by the Town staff in processing applications for development under this subchapter: 
(A)  The Town staff shall initially review all applications in relation to specific requirements and problems related to geologic hazards. 
(B)  If the lot meets acceptable standards and the Town requirements and poses no geologic hazard to development and use in accordance with applicable laws, ordinances, and policies the lot may be approved as having a building site , subject to all other applicable provisions of this chapter and code. 
(C)  If the lot does not meet applicable standards and requirements, and the Town Geologist finds that geologic hazards pose a problem to development, and if, in the opinion of the Town Engineer and Town Geologist, the corrective measures are not sufficient as recommended by the applicant's soils engineer and geologist, the staff shall not approve the development. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.605) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2017-584, effective 4-13-17; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.426 - Plans and reports. 
(A)  All geologic reports shall be prepared by a geologist and/or engineering geologist certified and/or registered in the state. All geotechnical engineering reports shall be prepared by a qualified geotechnical engineer registered as a civil engineer in the state. 
(B)  The geologist and/or engineering geologist who compiled the report shall certify on the final plans that the structure conforms with the recommendations made in the report. 
(C)  Geologic and soils reports shall include all calculations, data, and material supporting the recommendations in the report. 
(D)  Reports on geologic hazards shall be prepared in accordance with guidelines established by the Town . 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.606) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
153.430 - TREE PROTECTION 
 
Sec. 153.431 - Purpose. 
(A)  This subchapter is adopted to promote and enhance a superior community environment, to maintain the rural character, to maintain air quality and ecologic balance, to maintain property values, and to ensure the maximum preservation of the valuable natural features and scenic character as stated in the General Plan of the Town by establishing minimum standards and requirements relating to the protection of trees. 
(B)  It is intended that this subchapter be administered with the foregoing purposes in mind and specifically so as to: 
(1)  Ensure, insofar as practical in permitting development of land and minimizing fire hazard, the maximum retention of natural vegetation to aid in protection against erosion of top soil, preservation of natural scenic qualities and healthy ecosystems of the Town through good conservation practices, protection from flooding or landslides, noise absorption, and in providing habitat, shade and color; and 
(2)  Protect mature trees and significant stands of trees in order to retain as many as possible consistent with the purposes set forth herein and also consistent with reasonable economic enjoyment of private property. In this context, privately owned trees have an impact on the quality of life for the entire community. 
(Ord. 2006-534, effective 1-11-07)  
Sec. 153.432 - Applicability. 
The provisions of this section apply to those activities set forth in Section 153.434. 
(Ord. 2006-534, effective 1-11-07; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.433 - Emergencies. 
In case of emergency, when a significant tree is hazardous or dangerous to life or property, it may be trimmed or removed by order of the Town Manager or his/her designee. 
(Ord. 2006-534, effective 1-11-07; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.434 - Permit—Required. 
No person shall engage in tree destruction without first obtaining a permit. 
(Ord. 2006-534, effective 1-11-07; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.435 - Permit—Application. 
(A)  Each application for a tree destruction permit shall be made by the owner of the property or by the owner's authorized agent to the Town's Planning and Building Department on the form furnished for that purpose. Such application shall be accompanied by the following items: 
(1)  A sketch of the site depicting the location of the significant trees included in the permit application, including relative proximity to structures , property lines, easements, other trees and other relevant features; 
(2)  Description of the significant trees , including species, size, health, and general condition; and 
(3)  Photograph of existing site with the significant trees clearly marked with orange ribbon that will remain on the tree throughout the permitting process. 
(B)  The Planning Director may require an arborist report to be submitted if the information submitted by the applicant is insufficient to determine the health of the significant trees or any danger the significant trees may pose. In such cases, the Planning Director shall, within ten days, send a letter to the applicant listing the specific application deficiencies that led to the requirement of an arborist report. 
(Ord. 2006-534, effective 1-11-07; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.436 - Permit—Application review. 
(A)  The Planning Director shall review the application according to the following criteria and grant the permit if any of these following criteria apply to the significant trees . 
(1)  They are significantly diseased and at risk of dying, transmitting disease to other trees, or falling down; 
(2)  They are a potential hazard to people or structures for other reasons, including but not limited to weak root structure, leaning, and decay; 
(3)  Significant trees may be removed as may be required to permit construction authorized by a valid building or grading permit which specifies such removal; 
(4)  Thinning (removal of select significant trees ) is recommended by a certified arborist for the health of the remaining trees or by the Woodside Fire Protection District for fire protection; or 
(5)  They are Eucalyptus, Acacia or Monterey Pine, and are not designated as a landmark . 
(B)  Factors in addition to the above that may be considered in support of a denial include, but are not limited to, size of the significant trees , number of trees remaining on the lot , number of same species trees in close proximity whose removal would significantly impact the surrounding ecosystem, timing of the cut, and potential for excessive and unnecessary scarring of the natural landscape through removal of vegetation. The Planning Director may issue a permit but require that the removal be delayed for reasons including, but not limited to, habitat preservation and avoiding damage to other trees. The Planning Director may also require tree replacement, as provided in Section 153.438. 
(C)  The Planning Director may refer the matter to the Town's Conservation and Environmental Health Committee or the Town's Architectural and Site Review Board (ASRB) for a recommendation. In such cases, the Planning Director shall, within ten days, send a letter to the applicant listing the circumstances that led to the referral. If the Planning Director refers the matter to the ASRB, all neighbors with properties adjacent to the property on which the significant trees are located shall be notified in writing in advance of the meeting. 
(Ord. 2006-534, effective 1-11-07; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.437 - Protection of significant trees during site development and construction. 
(A)  The following provisions shall be adhered to during site development and construction. 
(1)  Precautions during site development and construction, including at least the following: 
(a)  A fence shall be placed around the drip line of the significant trees insofar as is practical prior to any work, and no construction activities shall be carried out within the drip line except as allowed by the permit; 
(b)  Permits for construction within a drip line of any significant trees shall include: provisions for hand trenching within the drip line ; construction of approved tree wells to protect against fill; prohibition of grading, cuts, and fills within four feet of a tree base; review of any cutting or trimming, or those provisions recommended by a certified arborist; and 
(c)  Appropriate signage must be posted on the fence protecting the significant trees during construction. The sign shall clearly state the purpose of the fence and that machinery and materials are not to be stored within the fenced areas, and work is to occur in the fenced areas only under the supervision of a certified arborist. 
(2)  Measures to effect erosion control, soil and water retention and limitation of adverse environmental effects. 
(B)  The above protective measures are minimum requirements, and the Planning Director may require additional protection measures if the conditions of the site, development, or construction so dictate to protect significant trees . 
(Ord. 2006-534, effective 1-11-07; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.438 - Replacement of significant trees. 
When tree replacement is required by the Planning Director , the replacement trees shall be a California native tree species and be planted as near as possible to the original location, unless practical reasons preclude this option. Replacement trees will be of at least a 36-inch box or other minimum size as specified by the Planning Director . Replacement trees shall be planted within one year of removal or, in the case of removal to accommodate construction, prior to final inspection. 
(Ord. 2006-534, effective 1-11-07)  
Sec. 153.439 - Violations—Penalty. 
(A)  Any person or property owner violating provisions of this subchapter with respect to the protection of significant trees that is not fully cured within 20 days shall be required to: 
(1)  Replace all affected significant trees in accordance with the provisions of Section 153.438. 
(2)  Pay the following fines: 
(a)  $5,000.00 for the first significant tree ; 
(b)  $7,500.00 for the second significant tree ; and 
(c)  $10,000.00 for each additional significant tree . 
(B)  The amounts and conditions for these fines may be changed from time to time by the Town Council by resolution. 
(C)  The penalties identified in this subsection are in addition to those identified in Chapter 10 of the Woodside Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 2006-534, effective 1-11-07; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
153.440 - STREAM CORRIDOR PROTECTION 
 
Sec. 153.441 - Purposes. 
The purposes of this subchapter are: 
(A)  To retain major stream corridors in their natural state consistent with the objectives of the General Plan; 
(B)  To retain the scenic aspects of the corridor from streamside and adjacent properties; 
(C)  To protect fish, riparian vegetation, and wildlife habitat; 
(D)  To minimize landslides, erosion, siltation, and sedimentation; 
(E)  To provide for natural drainage; 
(F)  To protect water quality and stream ecosystems; and 
(G)  To eliminate or minimize potential flood damages. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.801) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.442 - Application. 
The provisions of this subchapter are intended to apply to those areas designated as stream corridors on the General Plan diagram and other streams, creeks, and waterways as may be designated from time to time by the Planning Commission . For the purposes of this chapter, a stream or creek bank is defined as the point at which the break in slope occurs, and a stream corridor is defined as a horizontal distance of 50 feet, measured from each side of the center line of the stream, or a horizontal distance of 25 feet, measured from the top of the stream or creek bank , whichever is greater. The Planning Commission may establish greater horizontal measurements for specific stream corridors . 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.802) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.443 - Uses permitted. 
The following uses shall be permitted in the stream corridors designated on the General Plan and other streams, creeks, and waterways as may be designated by the Planning Commission : 
(A)  Trails; and 
(B)  Emergency flood control measures, subject to the approval of the Town Engineer . 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.803) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.444 - Conditional uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted if consistent with the stated purposes of this chapter and subject to the approval of a use permit by the Planning Commission : 
(A)  Crop and tree farming; 
(B)  Nurseries; 
(C)  Bridges and roads ; 
(D)  Utility transmission lines; 
(E)  Pastures ; and 
(F)  Other uses as determined by the Planning Commission to be of the same general character as those set forth in this section and which will not alter the natural upstream or downstream regimen or impair the current or potential uses of adjacent properties. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.804) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.445 - General limitations. 
The following limitations shall apply to all uses in stream corridors : 
(A)  No removal of riparian vegetation shall be permitted under this chapter within the stream corridor , except that required for the Permitted and conditional uses . 
(B)  No filling of the natural stream corridors or dumping of slash, debris, residue from parking or recreation areas, fertilizers, pesticides, herbicides, or liquid or solid waste shall be permitted. 
(C)  All agricultural wastes, including manure, shall be kept out of the stream corridor and disposed of in a manner which will prevent drainage from such wastes into the stream corridor . 
(D)  No channelization or damming of streams or creeks shall be permitted, unless required or allowed by the Planning Commission . 
(E)  Any alteration of, or work in, the stream corridor shall be subject to the approval of the Planning Commission except the work set forth in division (A) of this section or the removal of material which obstructs the normal flow of water within the stream channel. 
(F)  No structure , including a fence , shall be permitted within the stream corridor . The cross fencing of the stream corridor shall be permitted subject to the issuance of a permit from the Town Engineer . 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.805) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
153.500 - SIGNS 
 
Sec. 153.501 - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this subchapter to place limitations on the display of identification, directional, and advertising signs to assure the following objectives: 
(A)  To protect the public health, safety and welfare; 
(B)  To preserve the natural beauty and resources of the Town and to maintain its essentially rural residential character; 
(C)  To maintain the attractive aesthetic quality of the Town by encouraging signs which are: 
(1)  Well designed, clearly legible, and visually pleasing; and 
(2)  Adequate but not excessive in size or design for their intended purpose; 
(D)  To protect the scenic amenities and corridors adjacent to the Town's roads by prohibiting the erection or construction of outdoor advertising signs or displays on either public or private property, except as provided for in this chapter; 
(E)  To protect office and commercial uses from the loss of visual identity resulting from poorly designed or excessive signs on nearby sites; and 
(F)  To identify businesses in a manner which is harmonious with an aesthetic and functional Town commercial center. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.301) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.502 - Signs permitted in all districts. 
The following signs shall be permitted in all zoning districts: 
(A)  Personal nameplates not exceeding 1½ square feet in area; 
(B)  Announcement signs or bulletin boards for public, charitable, or religious institutions provided such signs or bulletin boards shall be located on the premises of such institution and shall not exceed 12 square feet in area; 
(C)  Signs advertising nonconforming businesses and industries provided such signs do not exceed 12 square feet in area; are attached flat against the wall of the building in which such nonconforming business or industry is located; and have been approved by the Architectural and Site Review Board as being in conformance with the goals of the General Plan and within the other applicable limitations of this chapter; 
(D)  Warning signs and signals. Such signs may be illuminated by other than reflected light when required for the public safety or convenience, subject to the approval of the Planning Director ; 
(E)  Highway and traffic markers, road name signs , and such signs and markers as public utility companies by law may be required to display; 
(F)  Commemorative symbols, memorial plaques, and historical tablets when placed by organizations or historical societies and when approved by the Planning Director ; 
(G)  Signs designating entrances, trespass, exits, or conditions of use of parking areas ; providing, however, no single sign shall exceed eight square feet in area, and its location shall have been approved by the Planning Director ; 
(H)  Directional signs for public or quasi-public uses , such as those indicating the location of rest rooms, telephones, and underground utilities; provided, however, no individual sign shall exceed two square feet in area; 
(I)  Signs indicating business hours, emergency telephone numbers, and credit cards and service station signs indicating gas prices; provided, however, no individual sign shall exceed 1½ feet in area, and the total area of all such signs , at any single establishment, shall not exceed four square feet in area; 
(J)  Bulletin or announcement boards attached to commercial and institutional buildings for posting personal or public notices not exceeding the size limitations established for the CC District; and 
(K)  Flags of the United States and the State of California. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.302) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.503 - Temporary signs. 
The following temporary signs and displays shall be permitted in all zoning districts subject to the following requirements: 
(A)  Holiday lighting and displays not advertising any product or sale provided they are erected no earlier than 31 days prior to the holiday and are removed no later than 14 days after the holiday; 
(B)  Temporary roadside and on-site signs and window posters no larger than six square feet advertising the benefit activities of local, nonprofit community organizations provided a permit for such signs shall be secured from the Planning Director . All such signs may not be posted more than 30 days before the advertised activity and shall be removed by the sponsoring organization within two days following the close of the event; 
(C)  Signs advertising the sale or lease of property may be displayed only on the property for sale or lease and shall not exceed six square feet in area for each lot or parcel advertised. Signs advertising the sale or lease of more than one lot or parcel shall not exceed an aggregate of 50 square feet in area. However, no individual sign shall be larger than 12 square feet. A renewable permit valid for six months, with a maximum of a six-month extension, shall be secured from the Planning Director prior to placement; and 
(D)  One sign not exceeding six square feet in area may be placed on each commercial, institutional, or residential construction project authorized by a valid building permit . Such signs shall be removed upon the completion of the project, and responsibility for the maintenance and removal thereof shall be that of the property owner. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.303) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.504 - Sign permits and design review. 
All signs in the CC District shall require the issuance of a sign permit. The design and placement of signs permitted in the CC District, and signs advertising permitted nonconforming uses in the residential districts, shall be reviewed in accordance with Sections 153.911 through 153.918 of this chapter prior to the issuance of a permit for the installation, construction, or erection of any such sign . 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.304) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2015-569, effective 1-7-16; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.505 - Signs permitted in the community commercial district. 
The following signs shall be permitted in the Community Commercial District: 
(A)  A maximum of two permanent identification signs pertaining to a use conducted on the site. The total aggregate sign area permitted for any individual site shall be calculated as follows: 
(1)  One and one-half square feet of sign area for each linear foot of building frontage, not to exceed a maximum area of 32 square feet; or 
(2)  A maximum of 13 percent of the total area of the front building elevation, not to exceed 32 square feet in area; and 
(B)  Any sign permitted by Section 153.502. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.305) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.506 - General requirements. 
The following regulations shall apply to all signs : 
(A)  Signs , except personal nameplates, house numbers, and all signs permitted under Section 153.502, shall be attached to a building wall suspended from the eaves or soffit or from the ceiling of a covered walkway. Such signs shall not project more than three feet from the face of the building and shall not be less than seven feet above the ground level. 
(B)  Signs shall not extend laterally beyond the building wall to which they are mounted, except when the Planning Commission determines that the sign is an integral part or feature of the building structure or design. 
(C)  Signs shall not project beyond any property line. 
(D)  Floodlights, flags, banners, and objects which rotate or move by wind action shall not be permitted, except for national or state flags flown with the flag of the United States of America. 
(E)  No sign , with the exception of barber poles, shall contain visibly moving parts or simulate movement by means of fluttering, spinning, or reflecting devices. 
(F)  No sign shall have blinking or flashing lights or any other illuminating device which has a changing or alternating light intensity, brightness, or color. 
(G)  Signs may be illuminated only by a light source reflecting off the sign . The intensity of the light source shall be approved by the Planning Director . 
(H)  No sign shall be erected or maintained which is designed or illuminated so that it resembles or may be mistaken for a traffic light or signal. 
(I)  Freestanding facility identification signs outside of the Community Commercial District for open space, institutional, and quasi-public uses shall not exceed 12 square feet, and no more than two signs are permitted. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.306) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17; Am. Ord. 2017-591, effective 12-14-17)  
Sec. 153.507 - Political signs. 
(A)  Purpose. 
(1)  Section 153.002 of this Code provides that the purpose of the zoning code is to: 
(a)  Provide and protect the public health, safety, peace and general welfare. 
(b)  Protect the established rural and suburban character of the Town consistent with the general plan. 
(c)  Preserve the beauty of the Town's setting. 
(2)  From time to time elections are held and political signs are caused to be erected or maintained involving candidates and/or issues on the ballot. 
(3)  The Town desires to balance its general plan policy with basic First Amendment rights of persons to use political signs as an exercise of free speech, and to impose minimal restraints on the time, place and manner of erecting and maintaining political signs . 
(B)  Definitions. 
ELECTION. Any local, state or federal election. 
POLITICAL SIGNS. Signs erected and/or maintained regarding a candidate, issue, ballot measure, political statement or expression in any election . 
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. For purposes of this section, includes the paved and unpaved surface of the right-of-way area. 
(C)  Permitted signs. Political signs may be erected and/or maintained without Planning Director approval subject to the provisions of this section. 
(D)  Size of political signs. 
(1)  To maintain public safety, minimize debris from displacement of signs by wind or other action, and to maintain the rural character and high aesthetic standards of the Town , political signs shall not exceed four square feet in area per printed side. 
(2)  An exception to the size of political signs may be granted by the Planning Commission provided it finds that: 
(a)  The sign will not materially conflict with the character of the area or neighborhood in which it will be displayed; 
(b)  The sign will not adversely affect the value of property in the area or neighborhood; and 
(c)  The property upon which the sign is to be displayed is unique in its size or location and an increase in sign area is necessary to allow the sign to be seen. 
(E)  Time for removal of political signs. Political signs relating to candidates or issues in an election shall be removed no later than ten calendar days following the date of an election by the person, candidate, group, entity or organization that erected or caused the political sign to be erected. 
(F)  Erection and maintenance of political signs. All political signs shall comply with the following placement standards to assure public health and safety: 
(1)  Political signs may be freestanding or attached to a building , structure or fence . 
(2)  No political sign shall be placed or affixed on, or extend over public property or in the public right-of-way , or be affixed to any traffic signal, street light, utility pole , utility pole guide-wire, mail box or traffic sign . 
(3)  Political signs shall not be lighted directly, and shall not be indirectly illuminated unless placed on or near a structure already providing said illumination. 
(4)  No political sign shall be placed where it will obstruct or impede traffic visibility. 
(5)  Political signs shall not be erected to exceed an overall height from finished grade of eight feet. 
(6)  Political signs shall not be affixed to any tree. 
(7)  Political signs placed on private property must have the express consent of the property owner. 
(G)  Violations. 
(1)  No political sign shall be posted in violation of this section, and any violation is a misdemeanor. 
(2)  The Town Manager or designee shall have the right to immediately remove any political sign posted in violation of this section on public property or the public right-of-way . 
(Ord. 2002-516, effective 12-26-02; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17) 
Cross reference— Penalty, § 153.999.  
153.600 - WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES 
 
Sec. 153.601 - Purpose. 
(A)  The purpose of this section is to reasonably regulate, to the extent permitted under California and federal law, the installations, operations, collocations , modifications, replacements and removals of various wireless communications facilities ("WCFs") in the Town recognizing the benefits of wireless communications while reasonably respecting other important Town needs, including the protection of public health, safety, and welfare, aesthetics and local values. 
(B)  The overarching intent of this section is to make wireless communications reasonably available while preserving the essential rural character of the Town . This will be realized by: 
(1)  Minimizing the visual and physical effects of WCFs through appropriate design, siting, screening techniques and location standards; 
(2)  Encouraging the installation of WCFs at locations where other such Facilities already exist; and 
(3)  Encouraging the installation of such facilities where and in a manner such that potential adverse impacts to the Town are minimized. 
(C)  To allow the Town to better preserve the established rural character of the Town , it is the intent to limit the duration of WCF permits, in most cases, to terms of ten years, and to reevaluate existing WCFs at the end of each term. 
(D)  It is not the purpose or intent of this section to: 
(1)  Prohibit or to have the effect of prohibiting wireless communications services; or 
(2)  Unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent wireless communications services; or 
(3)  Regulate the placement, construction or modification of WCFs on the basis of the environmental effects of radio frequency ("RF") emissions where it is demonstrated that the WCF does or will comply with the applicable FCC regulations; or 
(4)  Prohibit or effectively prohibit collocations or modifications that the Town must approve under state or federal law. 
(E)  The provisions in this section shall apply to all permit applications to install, operate or change, including, without limitation, to collocate, modify, replace or remove, any new or existing wireless tower or base station within the Town . This section does not apply to WCFs owned by or exclusively operated for government agencies, amateur radio stations, satellite dish or other television antennas or other OTARD antennas , or towers as defined and governed by Chapter 153, except to the extent that such towers may be used to support WCFs. 
(F)  Nothing in this section is intended to allow the Town to preempt any state or federal law or regulation applicable to a WCF. 
(G)  The provisions of this section are in addition to, and do not replace, any obligations a WCF permit holder may have under any franchises, licenses, or other permits issued by the Town . 
(Ord. 2001-510, effective 6-7-01; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.602 - Definitions and acronyms. 
For the purposes of this section, certain terms shall have meanings as follows: 
ANTENNA. A device used to transmit and/or receive radio or electromagnetic waves such as but not limited to panel antennas , reflecting discs, panels, microwave dishes, whip antennas , directional and non-directional antennas consisting of one or more elements, multiple antenna configurations, or other similar devices and configurations. 
ANTENNA ARRAY. Two or more antennas having elements extending in one or more directions, and directional antennas mounted upon and rotated through a vertical mast or tower interconnecting the beam and antenna support, all of which are elements deemed to be part of the antenna . 
APPLICANT. The owner(s) or the owner's agent of property upon which wireless communications facilities are proposed to be located. In instances where wireless communication facilities are proposed to be located on public right-of-way, the applicant is the carrier or entity which will operate the facility or the newly added components of the Facility upon its completion. 
BASE STATION. The transmission equipment and non-tower support structure at a fixed location that enable FCC-licensed or authorized wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network. A "non-tower support structure " means 
any structure (whether built for wireless purposes or not) that supports wireless transmission equipment under a valid permit at the time the applicant submits its application. 
CAMOUFLAGED or CONCEALED WCF. A wireless communications facility that (i) is integrated as an architectural feature of an existing structure such as (but not limited to) a cupola, or (ii) is integrated in an outdoor fixture such as (but not limited to) a flagpole; or (iii) uses a design and paint which mimics and is consistent with nearby natural, or architectural features, or is incorporated into or replaces existing permitted facilities (including but not limited to stop signs or other traffic signs or freestanding light standards) so that the presence of the WCF is not readily apparent due to its design and/or color. 
CARRIER. A wireless communications service provider licensed by the FCC and/or by the California Public Utilities Commission. 
CODE. The Woodside Municipal Code. 
COLLOCATION. The placement or installation of transmission equipment on an existing wireless tower or base station for the purpose of transmitting or receiving radio frequency signals for communications purposes. 
CPUC. The California Public Utilities Commission. 
DISTRIBUTED ANTENNA SYSTEM or DAS. A network of one or more antennas and related fiber optic nodes typically mounted to streetlight poles, or utility poles, which provide access and signal transfer for wireless service providers. A DAS also includes the equipment location, sometimes called a "hub" or "hotel" where the DAS network is interconnected with one or more wireless service provider's facilities to provide the signal transfer services. 
FCC. The Federal Communications Commission. 
LATTICE TOWER. An open framework structure used to support one or more antennas , typically with three or four support legs. 
MINOR WCF. A new WCF of a type or in an area approved by the Town Council for streamlined processing (a) where granting the application would not violate any of the terms or conditions of an existing permit and (b) where: 
(1)  Granting the application would not create a safety hazard, whether from wind loading, stress on the support structure or wireless tower , or in any other manner; 
(2)  Granting the application would not intrude upon or additionally burden any environmentally sensitive area, or incommode the public in its use of any rights-of-way; 
(3)  The application would not alter the visible size of any structure or outdoor fixture to which the transmission equipment is attached; 
(4)  The application would not result in any visible transmission equipment from any publicly accessible spaces; and 
(5)  The application would not result in an alteration of a structure or support structure otherwise inconsistent with the code. 
MONOPOLE. A single freestanding pole used to act as or support an externally mounted antenna or antenna arrays . 
OTARD ANTENNAS. Antennas covered by the "over-the-air reception devices" rule in 47 C.F.R., sections 1.4000 et seq., as may be amended or replaced from time to time. 
OUTDOOR FIXTURE. Any wall ( Excluding any retaining wall 18 inches or less in height), utility box , fence, gate, column, pillar, post, flag pole, light post or similar lighting fixture (excluding any standard mail box, as defined in this section), either freestanding or incorporated into a fence or wall . 
PLANNING DIRECTOR. The Director of the Planning Department of the Town of Woodside, California, or the designee of the Director. 
PUBLIC PROPERTY. Property owned or under the control of the Town and specifically excludes the Town's rights-of-way . By way of example and not limitation, public property includes structures and outdoor fixtures owned by the Town . 
PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR. The Director of Public Works of the Town of Woodside, California, or his or her designee. 
RADOME. A visually-opaque, radio frequency transparent enclosure which may contain transmission equipment . 
RF or RF EMISSIONS. Radio frequency emissions. 
RIGHT(S)-OF-WAY. The public streets and rights-of-way . 
SECTION 6409(A). Section 6409(a) of the Middle Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of 2012, codified as 47 U.S.C. section 1455(a), as may be amended or interpreted in judicial or administrative decisions. 
SECTION 6409(A) MODIFICATION. A collocation or modification of transmission equipment at an existing wireless tower or base station that does not result in a substantial change in the physical dimensions of the existing wireless tower or base station . For the purposes of a Section 6409(a) Modification, the term "substantial change" means: 
(1)  For wireless towers outside the public right-of-way : 
(a)  The proposed collocation or modification increases the overall height more than ten percent or the height of one additional antenna array more than twenty feet (whichever is greater); 
(b)  The proposed collocation or modification increases the width more than twenty feet from the edge of the wireless tower or the width of the wireless tower at the level of the appurtenance (whichever is greater); or 
(c)  The proposed collocation or modification involves excavation outside the current boundaries of the leased or owned property surrounding the wireless tower , including any access or utility easements currently related to the site. 
(2)  For wireless towers within the public right-of-way and for all base stations : 
(a)  The proposed collocation or modification increases the overall height more than ten percent or ten feet (whichever is greater); 
(b)  The proposed collocation or modification increases the width more than six feet from the edge of the wireless tower or base station ; or 
(c)  The proposed collocation or modification involves excavation outside the area in proximity to the structure and other transmission equipment already deployed on the ground. 
(3)  For all proposed collocations and modifications: 
(a)  The proposed collocation or modification involves more than the standard number of new equipment cabinets for the technology involved, but not to exceed four equipment cabinets; 
(b)  The proposed collocation or modification would defeat the concealment elements of the support structure ; or 
(c)  The proposed collocation or modification violates a prior condition of approval, provided however that the collocation need not comply with any prior condition of approval that is inconsistent with the thresholds for a substantial change described in this section. 
(d)  The proposed collocation or modification involves excavation outside of the existing leased or licensed area upon which the existing WCF sits, and/or excavation outside of the existing pad upon which ground mounted equipment is affixed. The thresholds and conditions for a "substantial change" described in this section are disjunctive—the violation of any individual threshold or condition results in a substantial change. The height and width thresholds for a substantial change described in this section are cumulative for each individual wireless tower or base station . The cumulative limit is measured from the physical dimensions of the original structure for base stations and all sites in the public rights-of-way , and from the smallest physical dimensions that existed on or after February 22, 2012, for wireless towers on private property. 
STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected that requires location on the ground or attached to something having location on the ground, but not including outdoor fixtures or hardscape. Examples of a structure include, but are not necessarily limited to, any dwelling , building , accessory dwelling unit , garage , carport , tool house, green house, pool house, satellite dish antenna , solar collector panel, tree house or other play structure , swimming pool , tennis court, play court, and deck . For purposes of this section, the definition of "structure" does not include utility poles or any other pole or structure otherwise defined within this Section 153.602. 
SUPPORT EQUIPMENT. The physical, electrical and/or electronic equipment included within a wireless communications facility used to house, power, and/or process signals from or to the antenna or antennas but specifically excluding the base station . 
SUPPORT STRUCTURE(S). A structure , outdoor fixture , tower, or utility pole capable of safely supporting a WCF, but does not necessarily include a wireless tower or base station . 
TOWN. The Town of Woodside, California. 
TOWN COUNCIL. The Town Council of the Town of Woodside, California. 
TOWN MANAGER. The Town Manager of the Town of Woodside, California, or his or her designee. 
TRANSMISSION EQUIPMENT. Any equipment that facilitates transmission for any FCC-licensed or authorized wireless communication service, including, but not limited to, radio transceivers, antennas and other relevant equipment associated with and necessary to their operation, including coaxial or fiber-optic cable and associated conduit housing, and regular and backup power supply. 
UNIPOLE. A uniform width pole with one or more antennas and associated equipment and cables contained within the interior of the pole, and with a radome at the top of the pole being the same width as the pole. 
UTILITY BOX. Any transformer, switch box, telephone, cable television box, service panel, meter or similar device, either ground-mounted or mounted to a support structure . 
UTILITY POLE. A steel or wood pole or structure located in the rights-of-way and dedicated to use by multiple utilities and providers of communications franchised by the state or Town . 
WHIP ANTENNA. An omni-directional antenna . 
WIRELESS. Any FCC licensed or authorized communication service transmitted over frequencies in the electromagnetic spectrum. 
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY or WCF. A facility used to "provide personal wireless services" as defined at 47 U.S.C. section 332(c)(7)(C); or wireless information services provided to the public or to such classes of users as to be effectively available directly to the public via licensed or unlicensed frequencies; or wireless utility monitoring and control services; or any other FCC licensed or authorized service. A WCF does not include a facility entirely enclosed within a permitted building outside of the rights-of-way where the installation does not require a modification of the exterior of the building; nor does it include a device attached to a building, used for serving that building only and that is otherwise permitted under other provisions of the code. A WCF consists of an antenna or antennas , including, but not limited to, directional, omni-directional and parabolic antennas , base station , support equipment, and (if applicable) a wireless tower . It does not include the support structure to which the WCF or its components is attached. The term does not include mobile transmitting devices used by wireless service subscribers, such as vehicle or hand held radios/telephones and their associated transmitting antennas , nor does it include other facilities specifically excluded from the coverage of this section. 
WIRELESS TOWER. Any structure built for the sole or primary purpose of supporting FCC-licensed antennas and their associated facilities. This does not include structures that were installed to replace or collocate upon existing power poles, light poles, energy transmission towers, or buildings. A support structure , which is modified or replaced to allow for the installation of transmission equipment , retains its prior use as its primary use, and the wireless use is only a secondary use thereof, even if the transmission equipment is the only attachment to the support structure . 
(Ord. 2001-510, effective 6-7-01; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17; Am. Ord. 2018-596 , § 2(Exh. A, § I), effective 10-26-18)  
Sec. 153.603 - Permitted use. 
Subject to compliance with this section and other applicable provisions of this Code and other law, WCFs are a permitted use in all zoning districts, as defined in Section 153.101 of this Code . 
(Ord. 2001-510, effective 6-7-01; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.604 - Permit required; permitting fees. 
(A)  A WCF may not be installed, collocated or modified without a permit, except as provided herein. Complete removal of a WCF does not require a permit under this section, but removal must be performed in strict compliance with this section. 
(B)  A permit shall not be issued: 
(1)  Unless the applicant shows that it has the necessary permission to place the WCF as proposed on private property or public property that it proposes to occupy (including the authority to make modifications to any support structure or wireless tower associated with the installation or modification); and 
(2)  In the case of a WCF in the rights-of-way unless the applicant holds a franchise, license or similar authorization from the Town or the state that entitles it to occupy the rights-of-way to install or modify a WCF. 
(C)  A permit shall not be effective and shall not authorize installation, collocation or modification of any WCF or installation or modification of a support structure or wireless tower unless the conditions of this paragraph are satisfied. A permit may be revoked prior to its effective date. 
(1)  Applicant must obtain all other required permits, authorizations, approvals or declarations that may be required for installation or modification of the WCF or for installation or modification of the support structure under federal, state or local law, including but not limited to building permits, CEQA declarations, or FCC approvals. A WCF permit is not in lieu of any other permit required under the code, except as specifically provided herein, nor is it a franchise, license or other authorization to occupy the rights-of-way , or a license, lease or agreement authorizing occupancy of any other private or public property . It does not create a vested right in occupying any particular location, and a permittee may be required to move and remove facilities at its expense consistent with other provisions of applicable law. 
(2)  Applicant must provide proof to the Town that it has obtained all insurance and/or security required by the code, and must pay any fees owed to the Town . 
(D)  A permit issued in error, based on incomplete or false information submitted by an applicant or that conflicts with the provisions of this section is not valid. 
(E)  The applicant shall pay all applicable fees as enacted by the Town Council prior to the issuance of a permit. 
(Ord. 2001-510, effective 6-7-01; Am. Ord. 2014-564, effective 12-1-14; Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.605 - Application required; contents of permit application. 
(A)  In all cases an applicant for a WCF permit shall utilize the form of application required by the Town . The Planning Director is authorized to prepare application forms and submittal checklists, and may develop application forms that distinguish between different types of installations and modifications in order to streamline processing of applications, and to comply with legal requirements. These generally applicable requirements shall be available for review in the Town's Planning Department during normal business hours and shall be provided to an applicant upon request. The Planning Director may also from time to time require additional application materials and/or information in any publicly-stated format. An application will not be considered complete until the applicant has submitted all forms and supporting documents or items as required by the Planning Director . 
(B)  Where a WCF is part of a network of WCFs that will be installed contemporaneously or sequentially, such as a distributed antenna system or DAS, the applications for each of the facilities in the proposed network shall be submitted simultaneously. 
(C)  In addition to the requirements of this Section 153.600 et seq., applications to construct, modify, upgrade, or otherwise alter a WCF in a public right-of-way require an encroachment permit subject to the provisions of Title IX, Chapter 95 of this Code . 
(Ord. 2001-510, effective 6-7-01; Am. Ord. 2017-589, passed 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.606 - Review of permit application; noticing. 
(A)  The Planning Director shall review all WCF permit applications for completeness and compliance with the provisions of this section and other applicable laws and regulations. 
(B)  If the application submitted by the applicant is incomplete, the Planning Director or shall notify the applicant in writing within 30 days and include a list of items missing from the application and the Municipal Code section(s) which require the items in order to deem an application complete. 
(C)  When an application is deemed incomplete, the applicant may submit additional materials to complete the application. An applicant may only submit a revised application or supplemental materials to a previously deemed incomplete application by appointment. The Planning Director shall schedule an applicant's appointment for resubmission within five business days of the applicant's request. 
(D)  When an applicant resubmits an application with the additional required materials, the Planning Director will determine whether the resubmitted application is complete within ten days of submission. If the resubmitted application is not complete, the Planning Director will provide notice to the applicant within ten days and include a list of items missing from the application and the Municipal Code section(s) which require the items in order to deem an application complete. 
(E)  Once the WCF permit application has been deemed complete, notice of the proposed WCF shall be provided by the Town to all owners of real property any part of which is located within three hundred feet of the real property, or if the WCF is to be located in the Town's rights-of-way within three hundred feet of the proposed WCF location. 
(F)  Notwithstanding the above, for a minor WCF , a Section 6409(a) Modification, or for modifications of facilities in the rights-of-way , notice shall be provided to all owners of real property any part of which is located adjacent to the real property upon which the WCF is located, or if the WCF is to be located in the Town's rights-of-way to owners of real property any part of which is located adjacent to the WCF location, including lots located across an abutting public or private street. 
(Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.607 - Design standards. 
(A)  The purpose of this section is to identify preferences and requirements for the location and design of WCFs, to provide guidance to prospective applicants as they seek appropriate WCF locations within the Town , and to provide guidance to the Planning Commission in determining whether to grant, grant with conditions, or to deny a WCF application. 
(B)  This section applies to all new WCFs and to all collocations and modifications to existing WCFs, except collocations and modifications to existing WCFs that qualify as a Section 6409(a) Modification. 
(C)  Siting preferences. The location for a WCF should take into consideration the following preference order (with (1) being the highest preference): 
(1)  Town owned properties; 
(2)  Cañada College; 
(3)  Other public or quasi-public facilities, such as fire stations, schools or churches; 
(4)  Poles in the public right-of-way; and 
(5)  Commercially zoned properties. 
(D)  Siting on residential parcels. Wireless communications facilities shall not be permitted on properties zoned and used for residential purposes or undeveloped parcels intended for residential use, unless the residential property owner provides written consent and: 
(1)  The applicant demonstrates that all alternative non-residential sites (including collocation ) have been explored and the proposed site is the least intrusive method of curing a significant coverage gap; and 
(2)  No significant visual impacts would result from the proposed facility. 
(E)  Visual impact. WCFs should be collocated with existing WCFs, if within one thousand five hundred feet of an existing visible WCF, unless the Town determines that the particular design proposed would not create excessive visual clutter or would otherwise create harms the Town may ameliorate. 
(F)  A WCF located in the rights-of-way: 
(1)  Shall, with respect to its pole-mounted components, be located on an existing utility pole serving another utility; 
(2)  Shall be located in a concealed WCF and/or shall be painted to be consistent with other existing natural or manmade features in the rights-of-way near the location where the WCF is to be located; or 
(3)  Shall, with respect to its pole-mounted components, be located on a new utility pole where other telephone distribution lines are aerial, if there are no reasonable alternatives, and the applicant is authorized to construct new utility poles . 
(G)  Pole-mounted components. The pole-mounted components of a WCF on a utility pole , shall whether in or outside of the rights-of-way : 
(1)  Comply with CPUC General Order 95 and General Order 128 as they may be amended or replaced; 
(2)  Be consistent with the size and shape of pole-mounted equipment installed by communications companies on utility poles near the WCF. 
(H)  Ground-mounted components. The ground-mounted components of a WCF, including but not limited to utility boxes , shall, whether in or outside of the rights-of-way : 
(1)  Shall be located flush to grade where necessary to avoid incommoding the public, or creating a hazard; 
(2)  To the extent permitted aboveground, shall otherwise be appropriately screened, landscaped and camouflaged to blend in with the surroundings, and non-reflective paints shall be used. 
(I)  Height restrictions. Notwithstanding any other height restriction or allowance under this Code , the following height restrictions shall apply to all WCF towers and support structures . Unless it is determined that there is no less intrusive alternative available to close a significant gap in the service provided by a WCF; or it is determined that the Town is legally required to approve an application, the Planning Commission shall only approve an application for a WCF whose highest point would be equal to or less than forty feet above surrounding ground level except as follows: 
(1)  The support structure or wireless tower to which the WCF would be attached is an existing support structure or wireless tower , was taller than thirty-five feet above the immediate surrounding ground level on January 1, 2014, and the WCF will not be higher than ten feet above the highest point of the support structure or wireless tower and attachments thereto in existence on January 1, 2014; or 
(2)  The WCF will be a concealed WCF and/or will be painted to be consistent with the surrounding area, and whose height and design is consistent with the surrounding features it mimics. 
(J)  Extensions from support structures. Unless it is determined by the Town that there is no less intrusive alternative available to close a significant gap in the service provided by a WCF; or it is determined that the Town is legally required to approve an application, the Planning Commission shall only approve an application for a WCF where the application proposes a design that would require extensions from any support structure consistent in size with the extensions otherwise permitted under the code. 
(K)  Maintenance of Town character. A WCF shall be designed and located to minimize the impact on the surrounding neighborhood, and to maintain the character and appearance of the Town , consistent with other provisions of the Code . To that end, WCFs should: 
(1)  Employ the least intrusive design for the proposed location in terms of size, mass, visual and physical impact, and effects on properties from which the WCF is visible; and 
(2)  Accommodate collocation consistent with the other design requirements of this section. 
(3)  Be consistent with the General Plan. 
(L)  Camouflage of a WCF. Without limiting the foregoing, all portions of a WCF affixed to a support structure shall be designed to blend in or be screened from view in a manner consistent with the support structure's architectural style, color and materials, when viewed from any part of the Town . WCFs shall be painted and textured or otherwise camouflaged to match the color and texture of the support structure on which they are mounted. Where the support structure is a building, the WCF, including without limitation base station cabinets, remote transmitters and receivers, and antenna amplifiers, shall be placed within the building or mounted behind a parapet screened from public view unless that is not feasible. If the Planning Director determines that such in-building placement is not feasible, the equipment shall be roof-mounted in an enclosure or otherwise screened from public view as approved by the Planning Commission or Planning Director . 
(M)  Lighting. WCFs shall not be lighted except in one of the following instances and when the lowest feasible intensity lighting is used: 
(1)  For proximity-triggered and/or timer-controlled security lighting; 
(2)  To comply with regulations for the illumination of the any flag attached to a WCF; or 
(3)  Where such lighting is required by the Planning Director to protect public health or welfare, or as part of the camouflage for a particular design. 
(N)  Signage. No advertising signage shall be displayed on any WCF except for government required signs shown in the WCF permit application. Additionally site identification, address, warning and similar information plates may be permitted where approved by the Planning Commission or Planning Director . 
(O)  Americans With Disabilities Act. The WCF shall comply with all requirements of the Americans With Disabilities Act of 1990 ("ADA") as may be amended or replaced. 
(P)  Obstructions. The WCF shall not incommode the public (including without limitation, persons with disabilities) in its use of any structure , or any portion of the rights-of-way . 
(Q)  Camouflage of wireless towers and base stations. All wireless towers and base stations shall be concealed. The installation of an uncamouflaged wireless tower or base station is prohibited. 
(Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.608 - Required findings for approval. 
(A)  It is the applicant's burden to show that a permit should be granted. In reviewing an application, the Planning Commission may consider the WCF as proposed, and as it may be modified as a matter of right should the application be granted. When considering an application, the Planning Commission may consider any matter it is entitled to or required to consider as a matter of law. To approve an application, the Planning Commission must make the following findings: 
(1)  The application was deemed complete by the Planning Director and proper notice has been provided pursuant to Section 153.606; 
(2)  The application is consistent with the design Standards set forth in Section 153.607, above; 
(3)  The WCF and support structure additions and modifications proposed are consistent with the general plan and will not adversely affect the policies and goals set forth therein or alter the rural character of the community; 
(4)  Except where the Town is prohibited from considering it by law, the applicant has shown that the proposed WCF is necessary to close a significant gap in coverage and has further shown that its proposal is the least intrusive means of closing that significant gap; 
(5)  The WCF and support structure modifications and additions proposed, comply with the design standards herein, and other applicable provisions of the code; 
(6)  The WCF and support structure modifications and additions proposed comply with applicable safety codes and laws (including without limitation the ADA); 
(7)  The WCF and support structure modifications and additions do not interfere with the public's use of rights-of-way , or create undue risks to persons or property; 
(8)  The applicant has made the required affirmation regarding compliance with the FCC's RF regulations, as the same may be amended; 
(9)  The applicant was authorized to file the application; 
(10)  The applicant has or will have necessary local, state or federal regulatory approvals required in connection with the WCF (including but not limited to necessary CEQA approvals, if any; and approvals for structures on private property); and 
(11)  Alternative designs or locations were considered the proposed design is more consistent with the general plan and otherwise minimizes the impact of the WCF and support structure modifications and additions to the greatest extent possible. 
(B)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section to the contrary, the Planning Director may recommend to the Planning Commission that, notwithstanding the evidence supporting denial, an application be approved if he or she makes a finding that the applicant has demonstrated that the refusal to grant such an exception and approve the application would prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless services within the meaning of 47 U.S.C. section 332(c)(7), or finds that the Town authority to deny the application is otherwise preempted or prohibited by state or federal law. If a recommendation is made under this provision, the Planning Commission shall have the discretion and ability to approve, or approve with conditions, the application despite any inconsistencies with this Code . 
(C)  A WCF located on private property shall also be subject to any design review provisions of this Code to the extent that it involves a modification to a support structure which is subject to separate review under this Code . 
(D)  Except in instances where the Town has entered into a tolling agreement with the applicant , the Planning Commission shall act to approve, approve with conditions, or deny all applications for new WCF within 150 days of the application date, or if the application was originally deemed incomplete, within 150 days of the date a complete application was submitted. For applications for collocations not subject to Section 6409(a), the Planning Commission will act to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application within 90 days of the submission of a complete application. 
(Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.609 - Section 6409(a) Modification Applications. 
(A)  Applications designated by the applicant as a Section 6409(a) Modification, or if determined by the Planning Director that the applicant is proposing a Section 6409(a) Modification, the review process and approval, approval with conditions, or denial of the application shall be made by the Planning Director . 
(B)  Pursuant to 47 U.S.C. section 1455(a), the Planning Director shall approve a Section 6409(a) Modification except when: 
(1)  The collocation or modification would result in a substantial change (as defined in Section 153.602 above) to the exiting wireless tower or base station ; 
(2)  The collocation or modification would violate any applicable building code, electrical code, structural code, fire code or any other law, regulation, rule or prior condition of approval based on objective factors and reasonably related to public health and safety; 
(3)  The collocation or modification involves the replacement of the wireless tower or other support structure ; or 
(4)  47 U.S.C. Section 1455(a) does not apply to the collocation or modification for any lawful reason. 
(C)  Any denial of a Section 6409(a) Modification shall be without prejudice. Subject to Section 153.608(D), the applicant may submit the same or substantially the same permit application, together with all required fees and deposits, for either a WCF permit or a Section 6409(a) Modification permit. 
(D)  The Town shall be entitled to recover the reasonable costs for its review of any Section 6409(a) Modification permit application, whether approved, deemed-granted or denied without prejudice. In the event that the Planning Director denies a Section 6409(a) Modification permit, the Town shall return any unused deposit fees within sixty days after a written request from the applicant . If the fees in the deposit account do not cover the reasonable cost for the Town's review, an applicant shall not be allowed to submit an application for the same or substantially the same change unless all fees for the prior-denied permit application are paid in full. 
(E)  Except in instances where the Town has entered into a tolling agreement with the applicant , the Planning Director shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny all Section 6409(a) Modification applications within 60 days of the application date, or if the application was originally deemed incomplete, within 60 days of the date a complete application was submitted. 
(Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.610 - Appeal to Town Council. 
Appeals of decisions made under this section shall be made pursuant to Section 153.970 et seq., of this Code . 
(Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.611 - Compliance report. 
(A)  Within thirty days after installation of a WCF, the applicant shall deliver to the Town a written report that demonstrates that its WCF as constructed and normally-operating fully complies with the conditions of the permit, including height restrictions, and applicable safety codes, including structural engineering codes. The demonstration shall be provided in writing to the Planning Director containing all technical details to demonstrate such compliance, and certified as true and accurate by qualified professional engineers, or, in the case of height or size restrictions, by qualified surveyors. This report shall be prepared by the applicant and reviewed by the Town at the sole expense of the applicant , which shall promptly reimburse the Town for its review expenses. The Planning Director may require additional proofs of RF emission compliance as part of the application process and on an ongoing basis to the extent the Town may do so consistent with federal law. 
(B)  If the initial report required by this section shows that the WCF does not so comply, the permit shall be deemed suspended, and all rights there under of no force and effect, until the applicant demonstrates to the Town's satisfaction that the WCF is compliant. Applicant shall promptly reimburse the Town for its compliance review expenses. 
(C)  If the initial report required by this section is not submitted within the time required, the Planning Director or his or her selected and qualified professionals may, but is not required to, undertake such investigations as are necessary to prepare the report described in paragraph A. Applicant shall within five days after receiving written notice from the Town that the Town is undertaking the review, shall deposit such additional funds with the Town to cover the estimated cost of the Town obtaining the report. Once said report is obtained by the Town , the Town shall then timely refund any unexpended portion of the applicant's deposit. The report shall be provided to the applicant . If the report shows that the applicant is non-compliant, the Town may suspend the permit until the applicant demonstrates to the Town's satisfaction that the WCF is compliant. During the suspension period, the applicant shall be allowed to activate the WCF for short periods, not to exceed one hundred twenty minutes during any twenty-four hour period for the purpose of testing and adjusting the site to come into compliance. 
(D)  If the WCF is not brought into compliance promptly, and in no case within 60 days, the Town may revoke the permit and require removal of the WCF. 
(Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.612 - Standard conditions. 
(A)  Any validly-issued WCF permit granted hereunder shall be effective for a period of exactly ten years from the date of issuance, except where a shorter term is authorized by Cal. Gov. Code Section 65964(b) as may be amended or replaced. Any renewal application must be tendered to the Town between three hundred sixty-five days and one hundred eighty days prior to the expiration of the current WCF permit, and shall be accompanied by all required application materials, fees and deposits for a new WCF application as then in effect. 
(B)  As a condition of every permit issued pursuant to this Chapter 153, Section 153.600 et seq., the Town may establish a reasonable construction build-out period for a WCF. 
(C)  The WCF permit holder shall also comply with all other applicable requirements of this Code , including but not limited to building codes and provisions related to work in rights-of-way . 
(D)  The WCF permit holder shall obtain and maintain all other applicable permits, approvals, and agreements necessary to install and operate the WCF in conformance with federal, state, and local laws, rules and regulations. 
(E)  The Town may inspect permitted facilities and property and may enter onto a site to inspect facilities upon reasonable notice to the WCF permit holder. In case of an emergency or risk of imminent harm to persons or property within the vicinity of permitted facilities, the Town reserves the right to enter upon the site of the WCF and to support, disable, or remove those elements of the WCF posing an immediate threat to public health and safety. 
(F)  The WCF permit holder shall maintain on file with the Town and onsite at the WCF contact information of all parties responsible for maintenance of the WCF, including without limitation contact information for a representative of the facility operator, representatives of all wireless carriers utilizing the WCF, and representatives of all contractors and subcontractors responsible for maintaining the WCF. 
(G)  The WCF permit holder and, if applicable, the private property owner shall defend, indemnify and hold harmless the Town of Woodside, its agents, officers, officials, and employees (i) from any and all damages, liabilities, injuries, losses, costs and expenses and from any and all claims, demands, lawsuits, writs of mandamus, and other actions or proceedings brought against the Town or its agents, officers, officials, or employees to challenge, attack, seek to modify, set aside, void or annul the Town's approval of the WCF permit, and (ii) from any and all damages, liabilities, injuries, losses, costs and expenses and any and all claims, demands, law suits, or causes of action and other actions or proceedings of any kind or form, whether for personal injury, death or property damage, arising out of or in connection with the activities or performance of the WCF permit holder or, if applicable, the private property owner or any of each one's agents, employees, licensees, contractors, subcontractors, or independent contractors ((i) and (ii) collectively are "actions"). Further, WCF permit holders shall be strictly liable for interference caused by their WCFs with the Town's communications systems. The WCF permit holder shall be responsible for costs of determining the source of the interference, all costs associated with eliminating the interference, and all costs arising from third party claims against the Town attributable to the interference ("claims"). In the event the Town becomes aware of any such actions or claims the Town shall promptly notify the WCF permit holder and the private property owner and shall reasonably cooperate in the defense. It is expressly agreed that the Town shall have the right to approve, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld, the legal counsel providing the Town's defense, and the property owner and/or WCF permit holder (as applicable) shall reimburse Town for any costs and expenses directly and necessarily incurred by the Town in the course of the defense. 
(H)  A permit may be terminated if the Town determines that the permit was granted based on false, misleading or incomplete information; if a material provision of the permit is no longer enforceable; or if the permit holder violates a condition of the permit, or modifies the WCF or support structures without permission. 
(I)  The WCF permit holder shall make a good faith effort to minimize project-related disruptions to adjacent properties. Site improvement and construction work, including set-up, loading or unloading of materials or equipment, performed as part of this project is subject to the provisions of Section 151.55. Emergency maintenance and repairs are exempt from the restricted hours. Violation of this condition may result in issuance of a stop work order or administrative citations. 
(J)  In addition to all other standard conditions of approval required under this Section 153.411, and to all conditions of approval permitted under state and federal law that the Planning Commission or Planning Director may deem appropriate for a specific WCF, all Section 6409(a) Modifications, whether granted by the Planning Director under the federal directive in 47 U.S.C. section 1455(a) or deemed granted by the operation of law, shall automatically include all the conditions of approval as follows: 
(1)  Grant, deemed-grant or acceptance of a Section 6409(a) Modification permit shall not renew or extend the permit term for the underlying WCF; 
(2)  In the event that a court of competent jurisdiction invalidates or limits, in part or in whole, 47 U.S.C. section 1455(a), such that such statute would not mandate approval for the collocation or modification granted or deemed granted under a Section 6409(a) Modification permit, such permit shall automatically expire twelve months from the date of that opinion; 
(3)  Grant, deemed-grant or acceptance of Section 6409(a) Modification permit shall not waive and shall not be construed or deemed to waive the Town's standing in a court of competent jurisdiction to challenge 47 U.S.C. section 1455(a) or any Section 6409(a) Modification permit issued pursuant to 47 U.S.C. section 1455(a) or this Code . 
(Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.613 - Operational regulations. 
(A)  All WCFs within the Town shall be designed, maintained, and shall be operated at all times to comply with the provisions of this section and the following other requirements: 
(1)  Conditions in any permit or license issued by a local, state, or federal agency, which has jurisdiction over the WCF; 
(2)  Rules, regulations, and standards of the state and federal governments and the Town , including without limitation the FCC, the CPUC, and this Code ; 
(3)  Easements, covenants, conditions, and/or restrictions on or applicable to the underlying real property; 
(4)  Rules, regulations, and standards of the Town governing underground utilities; 
(5)  All other laws, Codes , and regulations applicable to a WCF, including the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). 
(B)  Without limiting the foregoing, all WCFs shall be maintained in good working condition and to the visual standards established at the time of approval over the life of the WCF permit. The WCF and surrounding area shall remain free from trash, debris, litter, graffiti, and other forms of vandalism. Any damage shall be repaired as soon as is practicable, and in no instance more than ten calendar days from the time of notification by the Town or after discovery by the WCF permit holder. If landscaping was required, the landscaping must be maintained by the permittee. 
(Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.614 - Modification of a WCF permit. 
(A)  The Town may modify a permit before its termination date where necessary to protect public health and safety, or where the permit as issued is no longer enforceable in accordance with its terms. 
(B)  A permit holder may modify a permit by seeking either a Section 6409(a) Modification or other modification. Modifications other than Section 6409(a) Modifications shall be treated the same as requests for a new WCF and require Planning Commission approval. 
(C)  Requests for modifications will be reviewed in accordance with the provisions of the Code at the time modification is sought, and not at the time the permit initially issued. 
(Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.615 - Revocation of a WCF permit. 
(A)  A WCF permit may be revoked if permittee is not in compliance with permit conditions, if the permit conditions are not enforceable, or for a failure to comply with any provision of the Code relating to the permit, or relating to the WCF associated with the permit ("default event"). By way of example and not limitation, a refusal to timely remove facilities located in the rights-of-way where required in connection with a public works project would be a default event. 
(B)  The Town may revoke a WCF permit only after: 
(1)  Written notice of the default event has been provided to the WCF permit holder; and, 
(2)  The WCF permit holder has been afforded at least 30 days to cure and comply with its permit, or demonstrate that no default event occurred. 
(C)  If the WCF permit holder fails to cure, the Town Council or the Town Council through a designee shall conduct a noticed public hearing where the WCF permit holder shall be afforded an opportunity to speak and be heard and to provide written material prior to the hearing. If the Town Council , after the public hearing, finds that the WCF or the WCF permit holder has violated any law regulating the WCF or has failed to comply with the requirements of this section, the WCF permit, any applicable agreement or any condition of approval the Town Council may revoke the permit. 
(D)  Upon revocation, the Town Council may require the removal of the WCF or take any other legally permissible action or combination of actions necessary to protect the health and welfare of the Town . 
(Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.616 - Abandonment, removal or relocation of facilities. 
(A)  Any WCF permit holder who abandons or discontinues use of a WCF for a continuous period of ninety days shall so notify the Town by certified mail within thirty days after the ninety day period. 
(B)  If the Town believes a WCF has been abandoned or discontinued for a continuous period of ninety days, the Town shall send a notice of abandonment or discontinuation to the WCF permit holder stating why the Town believes the WCF to be abandoned or discontinued. Failure of the WCF permit holder to reply to the Town in writing within thirty days after receiving, rejecting, or returning the Town's certified letter shall entitle the Town to make a determination that the WCF is, in fact, abandoned or discontinued. 
(C)  Upon declaration of the Town that a WCF located on public property or in the public right-of-way is abandoned or discontinued, the Town may remove the WCF and any supporting structures installed solely in connection with the WCF, and restore the site to be consistent with the then-existing surrounding area. The Town shall not be required to, but may at its discretion store any removed equipment. The cost of this removal and restoration work and storage, if applicable, shall be paid by the permit holder, who shall be provided with an invoice by the Town . Until the cost of removal, repair, restoration and storage is paid in full, a lien shall be placed on any related real or personal property owned by the permit holder, including but not limited to the removed equipment. The Town Clerk shall cause the lien to be recorded with the San Mateo County recorder. No person or entity may apply for a new or renewed permit under this chapter if he/she/it owes any amounts invoiced by the Town under this section. 
(D)  Upon declaration of the Town that a WCF located on private property is abandoned or discontinued, the WCF permit holder or owner of the affected real property shall have ninety days from the date of the declaration or a further reasonable time as may be approved by the Planning Director , within which to complete one of the following actions: 
(1)  Reactivate use of the WCF; 
(2)  Transfer the rights to use the WCF to another entity (who shall be subject to all the provisions of this section) and the entity immediately commences use of the WCF; or 
(3)  Remove the WCF and any supporting structures installed solely in connection with the WCF, and restore the site to be consistent with the then-existing surrounding area. 
(E)  If after the ninety day time period set forth in subsection (C) of this section, none of the required actions in subsections (D)(1) through (D)(3) of this Subsection has occurred, the Town Council at a noticed public hearing may declare that the WCF is deemed abandoned. The Town shall provide notice of such finding to the WCF permit holder and to the telecom carrier last known to use the WCF and, if applicable, to the owner of the affected private real property, providing thirty days from the date of the notice within which to complete one of the following actions: 
(1)  Reactivate use of the WCF, subject to the terms and conditions of the applicable WCF permit; 
(2)  Transfer the rights to use the WCF to another operator (who shall be subject to all the provisions of this section); or 
(3)  Remove the WCF and any supporting structures installed solely in connection with the WCF, and restore the site to be consistent with the then-existing surrounding area. 
(F)  Until the cost of removal, repair, restoration and storage is paid in full, a lien shall be placed on the WCF and any related personal property and any private real property on which the WCF was located for the full amount of the cost of removal, repair, restoration and storage. The Town Clerk shall cause the lien to be recorded with the San Mateo County recorder. 
(G)  After adequate written notice to the WCF permit holder, the Town Council may require the relocation, at the WCF permit holder's expense and according to the then-existing standards for WCFs, of any WCF located in the rights-of-way , as necessary for maintenance or reconfiguration of the Town's rights-of-way or for other public projects, or take any other action or combination of actions necessary to protect the health and welfare of the Town . 
(H)  If an existing utility pole that hosts a WCF must be replaced, the WCF permit holder shall within thirty days after the installation of the replacement pole either relocate its WCF in the same configuration on the replacement pole, or remove the prior-existing WCF rather than relocate it, and notify the Town of the removal, and surrender its WCF permit for cancellation by the Town . 
(I)  If the WCF permit holder fails to relocate or remove the WCF as required by this subsection, the Town may elect to treat the WCF as a nuisance to be abated. 
(Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.617 - Transfer of an interest. 
A WCF permit holder shall not assign or transfer any interest in its permits for WCFs without advance written notice to the Town . The notice shall specify the identity of the assignee or transferee of the permit, as well as the assignee or transferee's address, telephone number, name of primary contact person(s), and other applicable contact information, such as an e-mail address or facsimile number. The new assignee or transferee shall comply with all of the WCF's terms and conditions of approval, and shall submit to the Town a written acceptance of the WCF permit's terms and conditions and a written assumption of the obligations thereafter accruing under such permit prior to the date that such assignment or transfer is intended to take effect. 
(Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.618 - Exemption for municipal facilities. 
WCFs installed or operated at the direction of the Town for the sole use of the Town , regardless of where located in the Town , shall be exempt from this section, but as a matter of policy, shall be designed and located consistent with the design requirements of this section. 
(Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.619 - Violations are infractions. 
It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of this Chapter 153, Section 153.600 et seq. Any person, firm, partnership, or corporation violating any provision herein or failing to comply with any of these requirements will be deemed guilty of an infraction and upon conviction thereof will be punished by fine not exceeding one thousand dollars. Each such person, firm, partnership, or corporation will be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or any portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this section is committed, continued or permitted by such person, firm, partnership, or corporation, and will be deemed punishable therefore as provided in this Chapter 153, Section 153.600 et seq. 
(Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.620 - Controlling provisions. 
In the event of any inconsistency between the provisions of this Chapter 153, Section 153.600 et seq., and any other provision of the Code , the more specific provision shall control. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, WCFs shall be governed by the procedures set forth herein and not by the procedures set forth in Chapter 151, except as provided herein. 
(Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
153.700 - SATELLITE ANTENNAS 
 
Sec. 153.701 - Purpose. 
The purposes of this subchapter are as follows: 
(A)  Regulate the installation of satellite antennas through the Planning Department and building permit process; 
(B)  Protect the environment and the health, safety and welfare of the public; 
(C)  Protect the public's right to receive information. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.1601) (Ord. 1990-438, effective 10-11-90; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.702 - Findings. 
The regulation of the installation of satellite antennas in the Town is necessary aesthetically to protect views, and to preserve the natural rural setting, consistent with the Woodside General Plan. Further, such regulation contributes to promoting the public health and safety by setting standards and procedures to assure safe installation given the potential for high winds and earthquakes in the Town . 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.1602) (Ord. 1987-342, effective 2-12-87; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.703 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
ANTENNA. A structure which, together with its support, is constructed for the purpose of receiving television and/or radio signals. 
SATELLITE ANTENNA. A signal receiving "dish-shaped" antenna , together with its support, the purpose of which is to receive television communications and related signals directly from satellites. Satellite antennas with a diameter of less than one meter or 39 inches are exempt from these regulations. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.1603) (Ord. 1987-342, effective 2-12-87; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.704 - Compliance required. 
No satellite antenna or support thereof shall be erected, installed, or placed upon real property or any structure thereon unless in accordance with the rules and regulations of this subchapter. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.1604) (Ord. 1987-342, effective 2-12-87; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.705 - Architectural and Site Review Board reviews. 
(A)  The installation of all satellite dishes and antennas shall require the submittal of an application for review and approval by the Planning Director before issuance of a building permit . 
(B)  If the application does not comply with all of the standards listed in Section 153.706, or the applicant seeks an exception as described in Section 153.707, then the application shall be submitted to the Architectural and Site Review Board for review and recommendations to the Planning Director . 
(C)  The fee for processing an application shall be set by Council resolution. The application shall be in a form required by the Planning Director . 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.1605) (Ord. 1990-438, effective 10-11-90; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.706 - Design standards. 
Satellite antennas shall be installed so as to minimize their visual impact on surrounding properties and public streets, and all public rights-of-way , and shall be screened through the use of architectural features and landscaping to harmonize with the characteristics of their property location. The antenna materials used shall not produce a reflective glare. The following criteria shall apply: 
(A)  Rooftops. Satellite antennas on rooftops shall be specifically prohibited. 
(B)  Visual screening. All satellite antennas shall be reasonably screened from the public view and surrounding property. 
(C)  Height. A satellite antenna shall not exceed 11 feet in height from the grade . 
(D)  Size. Satellite antennas shall not exceed ten feet in diameter. 
(E)  Location. Satellite antennas shall be located only in the rear or side setbacks of a property and within the required setback standards for buildings and structures . The actual placement shall be in the location which best serves the purposes of this chapter. 
(F)  Safety. Satellite antennas shall be constructed and installed in a secure and safe manner to promote the health and safety of the public and property. 
(G)  Color. Satellite antennas shall be colored earthen tones or black, and no white or metallic antennas will be allowed. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.1606) (Ord. 1987-342, effective 2-12-87; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 153.999.  
Sec. 153.707 - Exceptions. 
An exception shall be granted by the Town Planner where the strict adherence to the standards of this subchapter would either: 
(A)  Substantially impair or prevent the reception of television signals by satellite antenna from satellites; or 
(B)  Unreasonably interfere with the use and enjoyment of property. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.1607) (Ord. 1987-342, effective 2-12-87; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
153.900 - PROCEDURES 
 
Sec. 153.909 - Story poles. 
Upon the determination that an application requiring a public hearing is complete, the applicant shall install story poles that reasonably indicate the building footprint , plate heights, roof ridges, and setbacks of each proposed structure or addition . Story poles are not required for Architectural and Site Review Board Conceptual Design Review hearings, pursuant to Section 153.913(A). 
(A)  Construction. Story poles shall be constructed using poles or wood and brightly colored ribbon, netting, or flags that are at least six inches wide. All story poles shall be erected to withstand weather and remain standing through the scheduled meeting date, any subsequent public hearings, and the associated appeal period. 
(B)  Applicability. Story poles shall be installed for all proposed structures and additions . Pools, vehicle gates , new driveway cuts, and minor structures , such as a freestanding trellis , shall be represented using stakes and brightly colored ribbons. Story poles shall not be required for wireless communication facilities , described in Section 153.600. 
(C)  Timing. All story poles and staking shall be installed ten days prior to the public hearing in which the application is reviewed. Story poles shall be maintained through the scheduled meeting date, any subsequent public hearings, and the associated appeal period. Story poles shall be removed no later than 14 days after the appeal period ends. 
(D)  Exceptions. Exceptions to this section may be granted by the Planning Director , when he or she determines that story poles would pose a potentially pervasive safety risk to the general public (e.g., story poles at an active fire station). 
(Am. Ord. 2018-596 , § 2(Exh. A, III), effective 10-26-18)  
Sec. 153.910 - Architectural and Site Review.  
Sec. 153.911 - Evaluation criteria. 
The evaluation criteria for design review of proposed development, plans for buildings and other structures , and landscape plans are as follows: 
SECTION 1: COMMUNITY CHARACTER. 
1.  Rural Character and Community Aesthetics. Whether the property is developed in a manner that is in keeping with the rural character and aesthetics of the Town . 
2.  Scenic Corridors and Vistas. Whether the property is developed in a manner which respects the character of scenic corridors and vistas. 
3.  Natural Environment. Whether the property is developed in a manner that preserves natural features. 
4.  Equestrian Lifestyle. Whether the property is developed in a manner which preserves and supports equestrian facilities and the Woodside trails network. 
SECTION 2: SITE PLANNING. 
1.  Site Constraints and Features. Whether the building location and site improvements are based on a clear understanding of the property's natural features, regulatory constraints, and relationships to adjacent properties. 
2.  Natural Feature Conservation. Whether the site development conserves the property's open space, natural features, vegetation, and wildlife by subordinating development to the site's natural conditions. 
3.  Site Usage andBuildingSiting. Whether the residential and accessory uses are located to respect and preserve Woodside's rural residential character, and maintain the visual continuity of natural landforms. 
4.  Site Circulation. Whether the driveways , garages , parking areas , trails, and pathways are located and designed to be safe, minimally visible from the roadway, and subordinate to the site's natural features. 
5.  Neighborhood and Community Compatibility. Whether the location, scale, and orientation of site improvements complement and are consistent with neighborhood and community development patterns. 
6.  Fire Safe Design. Whether the site planning considers the relationship between buildings and high fuel load vegetation. 
7.  Sustainability. Whether the site planning incorporates sustainable strategies to conserve and minimize energy consumption in the construction and use of structures . 
SECTION 3: BUILDING DESIGN. 
1.  Setting and Architectural Style. Whether the architectural design is tailored to lot size, terrain, vegetation, and other natural and neighborhood conditions. 
2.  Building Form. Whether the building form is architecturally cohesive and understated. 
3.  Materials, Color, and Details. Whether the materials, color, and details enhance the architectural style in a well-composed, understated manner. 
4.  Fire Safety. Whether the project adheres to fire safety regulations, while maintaining the rural character of Woodside. 
5.  Sustainability. Whether sustainable building practices are considered in project design. 
SECTION 4: LANDSCAPE ELEMENTS. 
1.  Grading, Drainage, and Hardscape. Whether the landscape design minimizes grading, allows for appropriate drainage, minimizes paving, and preserves the natural and scenic character of Woodside. 
2.  Planting Design. Whether the planting design respects and maintains existing native and mature vegetation, is informal in design, and is in keeping with the rural character of Woodside. 
3.  Fences. Whether the fencing is open in design and compatible with the rural character of Woodside. 
4.  Entry Features. Whether the design of entry features is simple, modest, and understated. 
5.  Lighting. Whether the lighting on private property, especially if visible offsite, is minimized to maintain the rural experience. 
6.  Fire SafeDesign. Whether the landscape design includes fire resistant plantings and the development of a defensible space around structures by elimination of overgrown plant materials with high fuel content while preserving the natural environment. 
7.  Sustainability. Whether the landscape design incorporates sustainable strategies to maximize water efficiency and preserve open space. 
SECTION 5: NON-RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT. 
1.  In addition to Sections 1-4 above, non-residential development shall be further reviewed, to determine: 
a.  Whether the design promotes harmonious transition in scale and character in areas between different designated land uses; 
b.  Whether the project expresses an appropriate sense of identity with its function; and, 
c.  Whether the design and placement of sign(s) and/or graphics are consistent with Sections 153.501 through 153.506. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.901) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2012-554, effective 8-23-12; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17; Am. Ord. 2018-596 , § 2(Exh. A, § II), effective 10-26-18)  
Sec. 153.912 - Required review. 
(A)  Definitions. 
(1)  SCENIC CORRIDORS. Scenic corridors in Woodside include: 
(a)  Lands visible (if currently visible, or if visible if existing vegetation was removed) from the driving surface of the following state-designated scenic highways: 
•  Skyline Boulevard (Hwy. 35); and, 
•  Interstate 280. 
(b)  Lands visible (if currently visible, or if visible if existing vegetation was removed) from the driving surface of the following locally-designated scenic roads : 
•  Kings Mountain Road; 
•  Mountain Home Road; 
•  Woodside Road (Hwy. 84); 
•  Whiskey Hill Road; 
•  La Honda Road; 
•  Portola Road; 
•  Cañada Road; and, 
•  Sand Hill Road. 
(2)  WESTERN HILLS. All lands west of Kings Mountain Road, Woodside Road (Highway 84), and Portola Road. 
(3)  All buildings located on ridge lines visible from the scenic highways and roads set forth in this section. 
(B)  No building or other permit shall be issued by the Town for buildings , structures , or uses until approval from the required reviewing bodies is obtained in accordance with Sections 153.911 and 153.915(C) pursuant to the table below. 
(C)  When a project includes multiple components and levels of review, the highest review required shall be the final decision-making body for the project. 
(D)  Project size and scope shall be considered cumulatively for architectural and site review when building permits are open, except for accessory dwelling units . 
(E)  The square footage of proposed accessory dwelling units shall not be included in the square footage review threshold in the table below. 
TABLE Q: Required Reviewing Bodies 
	Staff 	Architectural 
and 
Site Review Administrator 	Architectural and 
Site Review Board 	Planning 
Commission 
			Conceptual 	Formal 	
Within scenic corridors and Western Hills: 
 Less than or equal to 300 square feet, if no Planning Commission entitlement is required 	X 				
 More than 300 square feet and less than or equal to 1,000 square feet, if no Planning Commission entitlement is required 		X 			
 More than 300 square feet and less than or equal to 1,000 square feet, if a Planning Commission entitlement is required 		X 			X 
 Greater than 1,000 square feet, if no Planning Commission entitlement is required 	X 		X 	X 	
 Greater than 1,000 square feet, if a Planning Commission entitlement is required 	X 		X 	X 	X 
 All building locations located on ridge lines visible from the highways and roads set forth in division (A) above of this section, if no Planning Commission entitlement is required 	X 		X 	X 	
 All building locations located on ridge lines visible from the highways and roads set forth in division (A) above of this section, if a Planning Commission entitlement is required 	X 		X 	X 	X 
Outside of scenic corridors and Western Hills: 
 Less than 2,000 square feet and less than 30% maximum TFA, and consistent with the Residential Design Guidelines, if no Planning Commission entitlement is required 	X 				
 Less than 2,000 square feet and less than 30% maximum TFA, and consistent with the Residential Design Guidelines, if a Planning Commission entitlement is required 	X 				X 
 Greater than 2,000 square feet or greater than 30% maximum TFA, if no Planning Commission entitlement is required 	X 		X 	X 	
 Greater than 2,000 square feet or greater than 30% maximum TFA, if a Planning Commission entitlement is required 	X 		X 	X 	X 
Other: 
  Accessory dwelling unit , if no Planning Commission entitlement is required (§ 153.107) 	X 				
  Accessory dwelling unit , if a Planning Commission entitlement is required 	X 				X 
 All single-family residences and manufactured housing ( mobile homes ) within the OS District, but limited to: 
 (a) Roof overhangs; 
 (b) Roofing materials; and 
 (c) Siding materials, if no Planning Commission entitlement is required. In reviewing structures within the OS District, the prevailing architectural character of the surrounding community shall be considered 	X 		X 	X 	
 All single-family residences and manufactured housing ( mobile homes ) within the OS District, but limited to: 
 (a) Roof overhangs; 
 (b) Roofing materials; and 
 (c) Siding materials, if a Planning Commission entitlement is required. In reviewing structures within the OS District, the prevailing architectural character of the surrounding community shall be considered 	X 		X 	X 	X 
 All building locations within proposed subdivisions , pursuant to Chapter 152, Subdivisions 	X 			X 	X 
  Gates and entry features (§ 153.212), if no Planning Commission entitlement is required 		X 			
  Gates and entry features (§ 153.212), if a Planning Commission entitlement is required 		X 			X 
  Fences , not exempted by § 153.212, if no Planning Commission entitlement is required 		X 			
  Fences , not exempted by § 153.212, if a Planning Commission entitlement is required 		X 			X 
 Outdoor Lighting, pursuant to § 153.213(E), if no Planning Commission entitlement is required 		X 			
 Outdoor Lighting, pursuant to § 153.213(E), if a Planning Commission entitlement is required 		X 			X 
 Any project in the CC District, if no Planning Commission entitlement is required 	X 		X 	X 	
 Any project in the CC District, if a Planning Commission entitlement is required 	X 		X 	X 	X 
 All public and semipublic buildings , including churches in all areas of the Town 	X 		X 	X 	
  Signs in the CC District, if no Planning Commission entitlement is required 
Note: Does not apply to signs permitted as specified in WMC §§ 153.502 and 153.503 		X 			
  Signs in the CC District, if a Planning Commission entitlement is required 
Note: Does not apply to signs permitted as specified in WMC §§ 153.502 and 153.503 		X 			X 
  Signs advertising permitted nonconforming uses in the residential districts, pursuant to WMC § 153.502(C), if no Planning Commission entitlement is required 				X 	
  Signs advertising permitted nonconforming uses in the residential districts, pursuant to WMC § 153.502(C), if a Planning Commission entitlement is required 				X 	X 
 Delegation of Authority: All other areas, uses , and structures upon referral by the Council, Planning Commission , or Planning Director when, in their judgment, the project may have a significant effect upon the aesthetic or functional character of the Town or surrounding properties. The level of review shall be determined by the referring body. 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 
 MFRD alterations /improvements deemed to be minor by the Planning Director and not visible from a scenic corridor in the Cañada College Residential Overlay Zone, if no Planning Commission entitlement is required 	X 				
 All MFRD development, other than alterations /improvements deemed to be minor by the Planning Director and not visible from a scenic corridor in the Cañada College Residential Overlay Zone 	X 		X 	X 	X 
 Any professional stable application that includes the construction of new structures , pursuant to § 115.17(B)(13) 			X 	X 	X 
 Projects not exempt from CEQA (Architectural and Site Review Administrator or ASRB review shall be determined based on scope of project) 					X 
 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.902) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2012-554, effective 8-23-12; Am. Ord. 2015-565, effective 2-26-15; Am. Ord. 2015-569, effective 1-7-16; Am. Ord. 2017-585, effective 4-27-17; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17; Am. Ord. 2017-591, effective 12-14-17; Am. Ord. 2018-596 , § 2(Exh. A, § II), effective 10-26-18)  
Sec. 153.913 - Design review. 
(A)  Conceptual Design Review. For the purpose of securing the early evaluation by the Architectural and Site Review Board prior to making applications for formal action or permit issuance, an application shall be made for a Conceptual Design Review. Most projects requiring Architectural and Site Review Board and/or Planning Commission review require Conceptual Design Review. Plans or drawings submitted for Conceptual Design Review shall be sufficiently definitive to adequately describe the proposed architectural character and concept. The submittals should include conceptual information, such as a site plan including the existing and proposed grades, building outlines, adjacent property improvements, exterior elevations, circulation, parking, and major landscaping features. Additionally, during Conceptual Design Review, the Architectural and Site Review Board may recommend that the Planning Director or Planning Commission complete Formal Design Review approval, with recommended Conditions of Approval, for any project that the Board deems to be in significant compliance with the review criteria contained in Woodside Municipal Code Section 153.911. The Architectural and Site Review Board shall not refer a project from Conceptual Review to staff without story poles being erected unless the project is exempt from Formal Review pursuant to Section 153.912(B). 
(B)  Formal Design Review. After Conceptual Design Review approval, an application shall be made for Formal Design Review by the Architectural and Site Review Board, and the Planning Commission , if required. 
(C)  Architectural and Site Review Administrator Review. All projects requiring Architectural and Site Review Administrator review shall follow the submittal requirements on file with Planning Department. 
(D)  Staff Review. All projects requiring design review by staff, only, shall follow the submittal requirements on file with Planning Department. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.906) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1981-300, effective 10-8-81; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2012-554, effective 8-23-12; Am. Ord. 2015-569, effective 1-7-16; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17; Am. Ord. 2018-596 , § 2(Exh. A, § II), effective 10-26-18)  
Sec. 153.914 - Applications and fees. 
(A)  Applications and the accompanying fee(s) for Conceptual Design Review and/or Formal Design Review shall be filed with the Planning Director who, after checking the application for clarity and completeness, shall certify the application complete and place it on the agenda of the Architectural and Site Review Board. 
(B)  The application shall consist of documents, plans, and fees specified by the Town's Conceptual Design Review Submittal Requirements and Formal Design Review Submittal Requirements on file with the Planning Department. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.907) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1988-362, effective 4-29-88; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2012-554, effective 8-23-12; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.915 - Actions on design review. 
(A)  Conceptual Design Review. The Architectural and Site Review Board shall review projects during conceptual design review, and may make recommendations on, or suggest modifications to, the design proposal. If after receipt of a recommendation from the Architectural and Site Review Board, the Planning Director cannot recommend that the project as it stands or as modified proceed to formal design review, the applicant shall return to staff to work further on the proposal. 
(B)  Formal Design Review. The Architectural and Site Review Board, staff or Planning Commission , if applicable, shall review projects for formal design review. The Architectural and Site Review Board or staff shall recommend the approval or disapproval of a design proposal to the Planning Director , or the Planning Commission , if applicable. The decision making authority shall approve or deny a design proposal, as submitted or suggest modifications or impose conditions, all in accordance with the standards contained in this subchapter and such additional standards as may be adopted from time to time. If after receipt of a recommendation from the Architectural and Site Review Board or staff, the Planning Director or Planning Commission , if applicable, can find significant conformance with the evaluation criteria in division (D) of this section, the project can be approved with conditions of approval. 
(C)  Architectural and Site Review Administrator Review. The Architectural and Site Administrator shall review projects, pursuant to WMC Section 153.912, Table Q. The Architectural and Site Review Administrator shall approve or deny a design proposal, as submitted or suggest modifications or impose conditions, all in accordance with the standards contained in this subchapter and such additional standards as may be adopted from time to time. 
(D)  Evaluation Criteria. 
(1)  Community character. That the project is designed in a manner that is in keeping with and contributes to the rural character and aesthetics of the Town , respects the character of scenic corridors and vistas, and supports equestrian facilities where applicable. 
(2)  Site planning. That the site plan is designed in a manner which preserves natural features, respects and preserves the Town's rural residential character, considers safe circulation, neighborhood compatibility, fire safety, and sustainability. 
(3)  Building design. That the architectural design is consistent with the Town's rural character and development patterns; is architecturally cohesive and understated; that the materials, color, and details are well-composed and understated; and that the architectural design is fire safe and sustainable. 
(4)  Landscape elements. That the landscape design minimizes grading , preserves natural and scenic features; that the planting design respects existing native and mature vegetation and is informal in design; that the fencing and entry features are open and rural in design; that exterior lighting is minimized; and that the landscape design is fire safe and sustainable. 
(5)  Non-residential development. That, in addition to Subsections (D)(1)—(4) of this section, the non-residential development promotes harmonious transition in scale and character in areas between different designated land uses ; expresses an appropriate sense of identity with its function; and, that the design and placement of signs and/or graphics are consistent with Sections 153.501 through 153.506. 
(E)  Timing. The Board shall act upon each application within three meetings or 60 days from the initial date of consideration, whichever occurs first, unless the applicant consents to a further continuance. Failure of the Board to act within such period will be deemed a design approval of the application. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.908) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2012-554, effective 8-23-12; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17; Am. Ord. 2018-596 , § 2(Exh. A, § II), effective 10-26-18)  
Sec. 153.916 - Inactive planning applications. 
Any planning application which has been incomplete for six or more months, or a completed Conceptual Design Review application for which a Formal Design Review application is required and has not been received for six months or more, shall be considered inactive. The six month clock for existing incomplete planning application shall start on the day this section is effective. The Planning Director shall notify applicants of such status by letter and provide 60 days to bring the application to complete status. If the application has not achieved complete status to the satisfaction of the Planning Director within this 60 day period, the applicant shall be refunded fees as specified by the Town's fee schedule and the application shall be closed. 
(Ord. 2014-564, effective 12-1-14; Am. Ord. 2015-569, effective 1-7-16; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.917 - Lapse of approvals. 
(A)  Any approval by the Planning Director , Architectural and Site Review Administrator, or Planning Commission , given pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter 153 shall lapse and shall become null and void two years following the date on which the approval became effective, unless, prior to the expiration of two years, the approval has been acted upon (i.e., a building permit has been issued or the use has commenced). Approvals may be extended for an additional period of one year provided that, prior to the expiration of the initial two year approval period, an application for the renewal of the approval is filed with the Planning Director . The Planning Director may grant an extension for a period not exceeding one year where no change in conditions or requirements has occurred, but an application involving a change deemed to be significant by the Planning Director shall be treated as a new application, subject to all the provisions of this chapter. 
(B)  Exception. A use permit (excluding those issued under Section 153.444) shall lapse and become null and void one year following the date on which the use permit became effective, unless, prior to the expiration of one year, the use has commenced; a building permit has been issued; a certificate of occupancy has been issued; or the use permit has been renewed for as additional period not to exceed one year by the Planning Commission upon the filing of a written request by the applicant. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.916 
(Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1981-300, effective 10-8-81; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2012-554, effective 8-23-12; Am. Ord. 2014-564, effective 12-1-14; Am. Ord. 2015-569, effective 1-7-16; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.918 - New applications. 
Following the denial or revocation of a design review, site plan, or sign application, no application for the same or substantially the same design, site plan, or sign shall be filed within one year after the date of the denial, unless the denial is made without prejudice. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.910) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
153.920 - CONDITIONAL USES 
 
Sec. 153.921 - Purposes and authorization. 
In order to give the use regulations the flexibility necessary to achieve the objectives of this title, and to account for the widely varying needs of some uses, in each district certain conditional uses are permitted subject to the granting of a use permit. Conditional uses include various types of community facilities and institutions, public buildings and grounds, public utility structures and installations, and other uses which do not precisely fit into the zoning district classifications. Because of their unusual characteristics, conditional uses require special consideration so that they may be located with respect to the objectives of this chapter and the General Plan and with respect to their effects on surrounding properties. In order to achieve such objectives, the Planning Commission is empowered to grant or to deny applications for use permits for such conditional uses and to impose reasonable conditions upon the granting of use permits. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.1001) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.922 - Applications and fees. 
(A)  Applications for use permits shall be filed with the Planning Director on the prescribed form and shall include the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant; 
(2)  A statement that the applicant is the owner or the authorized agent of the owner of the property on which the use is proposed to be located, except that a public utility subject to regulation by the Public Utilities Commission of the state need not comply with this requirement; 
(3)  The address or description of the property; 
(4)  A statement indicating the precise manner of compliance with each of the applicable provisions of this chapter, together with any other data pertinent to the findings prerequisite to the granting of a use permit; 
(5)  An accurate site plan, at an appropriate scale to the site, including any affected property within 300 feet of the property which is the subject of the application, indicating the following: contours at intervals not to exceed five feet; station elevations or the source of information; existing and proposed buildings and structures , walks, trails, roads , driveways , parking, loading facilities and other paved areas, existing and proposed easements, sign locations, landscaping, trees, streams and other natural features, drainage, and sewage facilities; 
(6)  Accurate floor plans and exterior elevations of buildings and structures which are the subject of the application at a scale of not less than ?-inch equals one foot; and 
(7)  Any other data the Planning Director may require for a complete and adequate review by the Planning Commission . The Planning Director may waive any of the requirements set forth in this section when, in his/her opinion, they would not assist the staff or Planning Commission in evaluating the application. 
(B)  The application shall be accompanied by the required fee. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.1002) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.923 - Action of the planning director. 
The Planning Director , after determining that the application is complete, shall make an investigation of the application and shall prepare a written report which shall be submitted to the Planning Commission and made available to the applicant prior to the public hearing. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.1003) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.924 - Referrals. 
The Planning Director may refer the application to the Architectural and Site Review Board or other boards, committees, or Town officers for review and comment. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.1004) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.925 - Public hearings. 
The Planning Commission shall hold at least one public hearing on each application for the approval, revocation, or modification for a use permit. The hearing shall be set and notice given as prescribed in Section 153.963 of this chapter. At the public hearing the Planning Commission shall review the application and the drawings and other documents submitted and shall receive pertinent evidence concerning the proposed use and the proposed conditions under which it would be operated or maintained, particularly with respect to the findings prescribed in Section 153.927 of this subchapter. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.1005) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.926 - Planning Commission action. 
The Planning Commission may approve an application for a use permit as it was applied for or may approve the application with modifications if, on the basis of the application and evidence submitted, the Planning Commission makes all of the findings prescribed in Section 153.927 of this subchapter. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.1006) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.927 - Findings for use permits. 
(A)  After a public hearing, the Planning Commission may authorize a conditional use in any zoning district in which such use is permitted by the provisions of this chapter provided the facts presented at the public hearing allow the Planning Commission to make all of the following findings: 
(1)  That the proposed use at such location is necessary or desirable to provide a facility or service which will contribute to the general well-being of the neighborhood or community or which needs to be located where proposed due to the operating requirements of a public utility or service; 
(2)  That the proposed use at the particular location will be consistent with the intent, purpose, and objectives of this chapter and the General Plan; 
(3)  That the proposed use in such location will not be detrimental to the health, safety, or general welfare of persons residing or working in the vicinity of such use or be injurious to property or improvements in the vicinity; 
(4)  That the site for the proposed use is adequate in size, shape, and topography to accommodate the proposed use; 
(5)  That the site for the proposed use can be served by roads of adequate width and design to accommodate the quantity and type of traffic generated by such use; and 
(6)  That adequate utilities and other services required for such use exist or can be provided. 
(B)  If the facts do not establish that the proposed use meets the findings and qualifications set forth in this section, the Planning Commission shall deny the application for a conditional use . 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.1007) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.928 - Conditions required. 
(A)  When authorizing any use permit, the Planning Commission shall prescribe such conditions, in addition to those specifically required by this chapter, as are, in the opinion of the Planning Commission , necessary to secure the objectives of this chapter and the General Plan. Special conditions which may be required shall include, but not be limited to, the provision of special setbacks and open spaces, the provision of landscaping and fencing, the surfacing of parking areas , the dedication of easements, and the regulation of signs , noise, odors, hours of operation, and other appropriate elements. 
(B)  The Planning Commission may also require the applicant or the property owner to provide such guarantees as the Planning Commission deems necessary to ensure compliance with the conditions imposed. 
(C)  The Planning Commission may also impose a time limitation and/or periodic review requirement for any use permit. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.1008) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.929 - Revocation of use permits. 
The Planning Commission , after giving notice in the same manner and to the same persons as required by Section 153.963 of this chapter, on its own initiative or upon the request of the Planning Director , may conduct a public hearing in which the Planning Commission may revoke a use permit for any of the following reasons: 
(A)  That the approval of the permit was based on false information submitted by the applicant; or 
(B)  That the permit is being exercised contrary to the terms or conditions of approval or in violation of the provisions of this chapter and/or the policies of the General Plan. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.1010) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.930 - New applications. 
Following the denial of a use permit application or the revocation of a use permit, no application for a use permit for the same or substantially the same conditional use on the same or substantially the same site shall be filed within one year after the date of the denial or revocation of the use permit, unless the denial or revocation is made without prejudice. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.1011) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
153.940 - VARIANCES 
 
Sec. 153.941 - Purposes. 
(A)  In order to prevent or lessen such practical difficulties or unnecessary physical hardships which would result from the strict interpretation and enforcement of this chapter, the Planning Commission is empowered to grant relief in the form of variances. Such procedure is intended to resolve practical difficulties and unnecessary physical hardships which may result from the exceptional size, shape, topography, location of existing structures or other physical site conditions, or the use or development of property in the immediate vicinity. 
(B)  The mere existence of a unique or peculiar situation which will result in a hardship to an applicant shall not require the Planning Commission to grant a variance. Economic hardships or costs to the applicant resulting from the literal interpretation of this chapter may be given consideration but shall not be either a primary or sole reason for granting a variance. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.1101) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.942 - General provisions. 
In no case shall a variance be granted to permit a use other than a use permitted in the district in which the subject property is situated. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.1102) 
(Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.943 - Applications and fees. 
(A)  Applications for variances shall be filed with the Planning Director on the prescribed form and shall include the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant; 
(2)  A statement that the applicant is the owner of the property or is the authorized agent of the owner, except that a public utility subject to regulation by the Public Utilities Commission of the State need not comply with this requirement; 
(3)  The address or description of the property; 
(4)  A statement of the precise nature of the variance requested and the practical difficulty or unnecessary physical hardship which would result from a strict or literal interpretation and enforcement of a specified regulation, together with any other data pertinent to the findings prerequisite to the granting of a variance prescribed in Section 153.949 of this subchapter; and 
(5)  An accurate drawing at an appropriate scale of the lot and any adjacent property affected showing, when pertinent, the contours at intervals of not more than five feet and all existing and proposed locations of roads , property lines, uses , structures , driveways , pedestrian walks, trails, off-road parking and paved areas, off-road loading facilities, sewage facilities, sign locations, trees, streams, and other pertinent natural features, existing easements, and buildings on neighboring parcels within 100 feet of the boundaries of the subject parcel . The Planning Director may require additional information, plans, drawings, or other documents if they are needed to enable a determination as to whether the circumstances prescribed for the granting of a variance exist or to assist in making the findings prescribed in Section 153.949 of this subchapter. The Planning Director may authorize the omission of any of the plans, drawings, or other documents required by this chapter if they are determined not to be necessary. 
(B)  The application shall be accompanied by the required fee. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.1101) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.944 - Action of the Planning Director. 
The Planning Director , after determining that the application is complete, shall make an investigation of the application and shall prepare a written report which shall be submitted to the Planning Commission and made available to the applicant prior to the public hearing. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.1104) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.945 - Referrals. 
The Planning Director , when required, or at his/her discretion, shall refer the application to the Architectural and Site Review Board or other boards, committees, or Town officers for review and comment prior to the preparation of his/her written report. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.1105) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.946 - Public hearings. 
(A)  The Planning Commission shall conduct a public hearing on each application for a variance or for the revocation of a variance granted subject to a condition or conditions. The hearing shall be set and notice given as prescribed in Section 153.963 of this chapter. 
(B)  At the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall review the application and the drawings and other documents submitted and shall receive pertinent evidence concerning the variance, particularly with respect to the findings prescribed in Section 153.948 of this subchapter. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.1106) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.947 - Planning Commission action. 
The Planning Commission may grant a variance as it was applied for or may modify the request if, on the basis of the application and the evidence submitted, the Planning Commission makes all of the findings prescribed in Section 153.948 of this subchapter. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.1107) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.948 - Findings for variances. 
(A)  The Planning Commission shall make the following findings when granting variances: 
(1)  That because of special circumstances applicable to the property, including size, shape, topography, location, or surroundings, the strict application of this chapter will deprive the applicant of privileges enjoyed by other properties in the vicinity and under the identical district classification; 
(2)  That the variance or adjustment will not constitute a grant of special privilege, is consistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and under the identical district classification, and is consistent with the objectives of this chapter: 
(3)  That the strict application of this chapter would result in practical difficulty or unnecessary physical hardship which is not of the applicant's own making; 
(4)  That the granting of the variance or adjustment will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property in the vicinity in which the property is situated; and 
(5)  That the granting of the variance will be consistent with the general purposes and objectives of this chapter and of the General Plan. 
(B)  The Planning Commission shall deny a variance application if any one of such findings is negative. The Planning Commission may grant a modified variance if necessary to make all of such findings. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.1108) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.949 - Decisions of the Planning Commission. 
(A)  The Planning Commission shall make its findings and determination within 50 days after the date of the acceptance of the application as complete for filing, unless the Planning Commission and the applicant mutually agree to extend such time limit. If, for any reason, the public hearing is continued, the presiding officer shall publicly announce the time and place to which the hearing will be continued, and no further notice shall be required. 
(B)  The action of the Planning Commission shall be by majority vote. The decision of the Planning Commission in granting or denying a variance shall be final upon the twenty-first day following its rendering. In granting a variance, the Planning Commission shall specify its findings and any terms and conditions upon which the granting of such variance is conditioned. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.1109) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.950 - Conditions of variances. 
In granting any variance, the Planning Commission may prescribe such reasonable conditions and safeguards as are, in its opinion, necessary to secure the objectives of this chapter and the General Plan. Once any privilege is exercised in accordance with the variance, any and all other provisions shall become immediately operative and shall be complied with. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.1110) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.951 - Revocation of variances. 
The Planning Commission , after giving notice in the same manner and to the same persons as required by Section 153.963 of this chapter, on its own initiative or upon the request of the Planning Director , may hold a public hearing in which the Planning Commission may revoke or modify any variance issued for any one of the following reasons: 
(A)  That the original approval was based on false information submitted by the applicant; or 
(B)  That the terms, conditions, and safeguards prescribed by the Planning Commission in granting the variance are not being fulfilled by the responsible party. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.1111) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.952 - Violations of conditions. 
The violation of any of the conditions imposed by the Planning Commission in granting any variance in whole or in part shall constitute a violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the same penalties as any other violation of this chapter. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.1112) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.953 - New applications. 
Following the denial or revocation of a variance, no application for a similar variance on the same site shall be filed within one year after the date of the denial or revocation of the variance, unless the denial or revocation is made without prejudice. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.1113) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
153.960 - AMENDMENTS 
 
Sec. 153.961 - General provisions. 
Whenever the public convenience or general welfare require, the Council, by ordinance, after considering a report by the Planning Commission and subject to the procedures provided in this subchapter, may amend, supplement, or change the regulations, district boundaries, or classifications of property now or hereafter established. An amendment, supplement, reclassification, or change may be initiated by a resolution of intention by the Planning Commission , the Council, or interested property owners or their agents. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.1301) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.962 - Applications and fees. 
(A)  Applications for changes in zoning district boundaries or for reclassifications of property, as shown on the zoning map, shall be filed with the Planning Director upon forms prescribed for such purpose. 
(B)  Such applications for amendments shall be accompanied by the maps, drawings, and data necessary to demonstrate that the proposed amendment is in general conformance with the General Plan and that the public necessity, convenience and general welfare require the adoption of the proposed amendment. An accurate legal description and map of the land, specifying structures and buildings , shall be submitted with the application. The maps shall include the following information: 
(1)  Each lot or parcel of land, any part of which is closer than 300 feet from any part of the property proposed to be rezoned; 
(2)  The full names and addresses of the record owners of each parcel described in division (B)(1) of this section; 
(3)  The existing roads shown on an officially adopted plan of the Town ; 
(4)  The existing zoning of all land within 1,000 feet of the property proposed to be rezoned; and, 
(5)  Contours in the range of a ten-foot interval to a one foot interval to produce a contour at least every 50 feet. 
(C)  Each application shall be verified by at least one of the interested property owners or such owner's authorized agent. Such verification shall attest to the truth and correctness of all the facts and information presented with the application. The application shall be accompanied by the required fee. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.1302) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.963 - Public hearings. 
Upon filing an application for an amendment, or the adoption of a resolution of intention to amend initiated by the Planning Commission or Council, the matter shall be set for a hearing by the Planning Commission . Notice of the time, place, and purpose of such hearing shall be given by the secretary of the Planning Commission as follows: 
(A)  When the hearing involves amending, supplementing, or changing the text of this chapter, by publication pursuant to the provisions of the Cal. Gov't Code not less than ten days prior to the date of the hearing; and 
(B)  When the hearing involves a proposed change of a zoning district boundary or a proposed reclassification of property, the notice shall be given as follows: 
(1)  By publication of the notice as provided in division (A) of this section; and 
(2)  By mailing the notice to the owners of all property within the area proposed for reclassification and to the owners of all property within 300 feet of such area not less than ten days prior to the date of the public hearing. For this purpose notice shall be given to the last-known names of such owners as shown upon the records of the County Assessor. Where all property within the 300 foot radius is under the same ownership as the property proposed for reclassification, the owners of all property facing directly across a road or adjoining that property which is owned by the applicant shall also be notified in the same manner. Failure to send notice by mail to any property owner where the address of the owner is not a matter of public record shall not invalidate any proceeding in connection with any amendment. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.1303) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.964 - Planning Commission and Council Action. 
If, from the facts presented, the Planning Commission finds at the hearing that the public convenience or general welfare require the proposed amendment or reclassification, the Planning Commission , by a vote of two-thirds of its total voting members, shall so resolve and thereby recommend the amendment. Otherwise the Planning Commission shall disapprove the application for the amendment or reclassification. The Planning Commission shall make its findings and determination within 90 days after the date of the filing and certification of the completeness of any application and shall transmit a copy of its decision to the applicant. If approved, the application, together with the resolution and findings of the Planning Commission , shall be presented to the Council which shall hold a public hearing and may approve the change by a majority vote of all members present if there is a quorum. If disapproved, the action of the Planning Commission shall be final, and no hearing before the Council shall be required, unless an appeal shall be taken to the Council. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.1304) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.965 - New applications. 
Following the denial of an application for a change of zone or an amendment to district boundaries, no application for the same or substantially similar change shall be filed within one year after the date of denial, unless the denial is made without prejudice. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.1305) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
153.970 - APPEALS 
 
Sec. 153.971 - Appeals on decisions. 
(A)  An appeal may be made to the Planning Commission by the applicant or any other interested person on any administrative determination or interpretation made by the Planning Director or any Town officer under this chapter. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.1401) 
(B)  An appeal may be made to the Council by the applicant or any other interested party on any decision of the Planning Commission under this chapter. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.1402) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.972 - Filing appeals. 
(A)  Appeals on the decision of the Planning Director or any Town officer or official who renders a decision or interpretation on the provisions of this chapter shall be made to the Planning Commission through the Planning Director . 
(B)  Appeals on the decision of the Planning Commission in taking any action authorized by this chapter shall be made to the Council through the Town Clerk . 
(C)  All applications for appeals shall be accompanied by the required fee. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.1403) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.973 - Procedure for appeals. 
(A)  All appeals shall be made in writing and shall state the nature of the application and the basis upon which the decision of the official or body is considered to be in error. 
(B)  All applications for appeals shall be received by the Planning Director or Town Clerk pursuant to Section 153.972 of this subchapter not later than ten calendar days following the date of the action on which such appeal is being taken. 
(C)  During the time within which an appeal may be filed and during the pendency of an appeal from a decision of the Planning Director , or the Planning Commission , under this chapter, no building permit shall be issued for construction on the real property that is the subject of the appeal. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.1404) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.974 - Town Council hearing of an appeal. 
(A)  The Planning Director shall transmit all documents, including minutes, that constitute the record of the action taken by the Planning Commission to the Town Council . 
(B)  The Town Council shall hear the matter "de novo" at a public hearing noticed in accordance with California Government Code requirements for the matter being heard. 
(C)  The applicant and appellant shall be entitled to make a full presentation. New evidence, including new public testimony, shall be allowed. 
(D)  The Town Council shall make appropriate findings, if required, and shall either approve or disapprove the application. The Town Council's decision shall be final and conclusive of the matter. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.1406) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1987-343, effective 2-12-87; Am. Ord. 1990-434, effective 6-8-90; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2003-520, effective 10-23-03; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
153.990 - ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 153.991 - Authority and enforcement. 
All officials and public employees of the Town vested with the duty or authority to issue permits shall conform to the provisions of this chapter, and shall issue no permit, certificate, or license for structures , buildings , or uses in conflict with the provisions of this chapter. Any such permit, certificate, or license issued in conflict with the provisions of this chapter, intentionally or otherwise, shall be null and void. It shall be the duty of the Planning Director to enforce the provisions of this chapter pertaining to the erection, construction, reconstruction, moving, conversion, alteration , or addition to any structure or building or the use of any land, structure , building or premises. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.1501) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.992 - Violations a public nuisance. 
Any use , structure , or building set up, erected, constructed, altered, enlarged, converted, moved, or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The Town Attorney , upon an order of the Council, shall immediately commence an action or proceedings for the abatement, removal, and enjoinment of such use , structure , or building in the manner provided by law. The remedies provided for in this chapter shall be cumulative and not exclusive. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.1502) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99; Am. Ord. 2017-589, effective 8-24-17)  
Sec. 153.993 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-595 , § 1, adopted June 26, 2018, repealed § 153.993, which pertained to nonmedical marijuana: regulating cultivation; prohibiting manufacture, processing, laboratory testing, labeling, storing, wholesale, and retail distribution and derived from Ord. 2016-578, adopted Oct. 25, 2016; Am. Ord. 2017-589, adopted Aug. 24, 2017; Am. Ord. 2017-590, adopted Sept. 12, 2017.  
Sec. 153.999 - Penalty. 
Any person, firm, or corporation, whether as principal, agent, employee, or otherwise, violating or causing the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Such person, firm, or corporation shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during and portion of which any violation of any provision of this chapter is committed or continued by such person, firm, or corporation and shall be punishable as prescribed by this chapter. 
(1975 Code, § 9-2.1503) (Ord. 1980-291, effective 9-11-80; Am. Ord. 1984-321, effective 1-11-85; Am. Ord. 1999-494, effective 3-25-99) 
