WHITTIER, CALIFORNIA - MUNICIPAL CODE 
____________ 
A Codification of the General Ordinances of 
the City of Whittier, California 
____________ 
Beginning with Supplement 3-09, 
Supplemented by Municipal Code Corporation 
____________ 
  
PREFACE 
The Whittier, California Municipal Code, originally published by Book Publishing Company in 1984, has been kept current by regular supplementation by Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., its successor in interest. 
Beginning with Supplement 3-09 Municipal Code Corporation will be keeping this code current by regular supplementation. 
During original codification, the ordinances were compiled, edited and indexed by the editorial staff of Book Publishing Company under the direction of Robert Flandrick, city attorney. 
The code is organized by subject matter under an expandable three-factor decimal numbering system which is designed to facilitate supplementation without disturbing the numbering of existing provisions. Each section number designates, in sequence, the numbers of the Title, chapter, and section. Thus, Section 2.12.040 is Section .040, located in Chapter 2.12 of Title 2. In most instances, sections are numbered by tens (.010, .020, .030, etc.), leaving nine vacant positions between original sections to accommodate future provisions. Similarly, chapters and titles are numbered to provide for internal expansion. 
In parentheses following each section is a legislative history identifying the specific sources for the provisions of that section. This legislative history is complemented by an ordinance disposition table, following the text of the code, listing by number all ordinances, their subjects, and where they appear in the codification; and beginning with Supplement 3-09, legislation can be tracked using the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
A subject-matter index, with complete cross-referencing, locates specific code provisions by individual section numbers. 
This supplement brings the Code up to date through Ordinance No. 3103 , passed June 11, 2019. 
Municipal Code Corporation 
1700 Capital Circle SW 
Tallahassee, FL 32310 
800-262-2633 
HOW TO USE YOUR CODE 
This code is organized to make the laws of the city as accessible as possible to city officials, city employees and private citizens. Please take a moment to familiarize yourself with some of the important elements of this code. 
Numbering System. 
The numbering system is the backbone of a Code of Ordinances; Municipal Code Corporation uses a unique and versatile numbering structure that allows for easy expansion and amendment of this code. It is based on three tiers, beginning with title, then chapter, and ending with section. Each part is represented in the code section number. For example, Section 2.04.010 is Section .010, in Chapter 2.04 of Title 2. 
Title. 
A title is a broad category under which ordinances on a related subject are compiled. This code contains about 15 to 20 titles. For example, the first title is Title 1, General Provisions, which may contain ordinances about the general penalty, code adoption and definitions. The titles in this code are separated by tabbed divider pages for quick reference. Some titles are Reserved for later use. 
Chapter. 
Chapters deal with more specific subjects, and are often derived from one ordinance. All of the chapters on a related subject are grouped in one title. The chapters are numbered so that new chapters which should logically be placed near certain existing chapters can be added at a later time without renumbering existing material. For example, Chapter 2.06, City Manager, can be added between 2.04, City Council, and Chapter 2.08, City Attorney. 
Section. 
Each section of the code contains substantive ordinance material. The sections are numbered by "tens" to allow for expansion of the code without renumbering. 
Tables of Contents. 
There are many tables of contents in this code to assist in locating specific information. At the beginning of the code is the main table of contents listing each title. In addition, each title and chapter has its own table of contents listing the chapters and sections, respectively. 
Ordinance History Note. 
At the end of each code section, you will find an "ordinance history note," which lists the underlying ordinances for that section. The ordinances are listed by number, section (if applicable) and year. (Example: (Ord. 272 § 1, 1992).) 
Beginning with Supplement 3-09 a secondary ordinance history note will be appended to affected sections. Ordinance history notes will be amended with the most recent ordinance added to the end. These history notes can be cross-referenced to the code comparative table and disposition list appearing at the back of the volume preceding the index. 
Statutory References. 
The statutory references direct the code user to those portions of the state statutes that are applicable to the laws of the municipality. As the statutes are revised, these references will be updated. 
Cross-Reference Table. 
When a code is based on an earlier codification, the cross-reference table will help users find older or "prior" code references in the new code. The cross-reference table is located near the end of the code, under the tabbed divider "Tables." This table lists the prior code section in the column labeled "Prior Code Section" and the new code section in the column labeled "Herein." 
As of Supplement 3-09, this table will no longer be updated. 
Ordinance List and Disposition Table. 
To find a specific ordinance in the code, turn to the section called "Tables" for the Ordinance List and Disposition Table. This very useful table tells you the status of every ordinance reviewed for inclusion in the code. The table is organized by ordinance number and provides a brief description and the disposition of the ordinance. If the ordinance is codified, the chapter (or chapters) will be indicated. (Example: (2.04, 6.12, 9.04).) If the ordinance is of a temporary nature or deals with subjects not normally codified, such as budgets, taxes, annexations or rezones, the disposition will be "(Special)." If the ordinance is for some reason omitted from the code, usually at the direction of the municipality, the disposition will be "(Not codified)." Other dispositions sometimes used are "(Tabled)," "(Pending)," "(Number Not Used)" or "(Missing)." 
Beginning with Supplement 3-09 this table will be replaced with the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
Code Comparative Table and Disposition List. 
Beginning with Supplement 3-09, a Code Comparative Table and Disposition List has been added for use in tracking legislative history. Located in the back of this volume, this table is a chronological listing of each ordinance considered for codification. The Code Comparative Table and Disposition List specifies the ordinance number, adoption date, description of the ordinance and the disposition within the code of each ordinance. By use of the Code Comparative Table and Disposition List, the reader can locate any section of the code as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
Index. 
If you are not certain where to look for a particular subject in this code, start with the index. This is an alphabetical multi-tier subject index which uses section numbers as the reference, and cross-references where necessary. Look for the main heading of the subject you need, then the appropriate subheadings: 
BUSINESS LICENSE 
See also BUSINESS TAX 
Fee 5.04.030 
Required when 5.04.010 
The index will be updated as necessary when the code text is amended. 
Instruction Sheet. 
Each supplement to the new code will be accompanied by an Instruction Sheet. The Instruction Sheet will tell the code user the date of the most recent supplement and the last ordinance contained in that supplement. It will then list the pages that must be pulled from the code and the new pages that must be inserted. Following these instructions carefully will assure that the code is kept accurate and current. Removed pages should be kept for future reference. 
Page Numbers. 
When originally published, the pages of this code were consecutively numbered. As of Supplement 3-09, when new pages are inserted with amendments, the pages will follow a "Point Numbering System." (Example: 32, 32.1, 32.2, 32.2.1, 32.2.2, 33). Backs of pages that are blank (in codes that are printed double-sided) are left unnumbered but the number is "reserved" for later use. 
Electronic Submission. 
In the interests of accuracy and speed, we encourage you to submit your ordinances electronically if at all possible. We can accept most any file format, including Word, WordPerfect or text files. If you have a choice, we prefer Word, any version. You can send files to us as an e-mail attachment, by FTP, on a diskette or CD-ROM. Electronic files enable us not only to get you your code more quickly but also ensure that it is error-free. Our e-mail address is: ords@municode.com . 
For hard copy, send two copies of all ordinances passed to: 
Municipal Code Corporation 
P.O. Box 2235 
Tallahassee, FL 32316 
Customer Service. 
If you have any questions about this code or our services, please contact Municipal Code Corporation at 1-800-262-2633 or: 
Municipal Code Corporation 
1700 Capital Circle SW 
Tallahassee, FL 32310  
Title 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Chapters:  
Chapter 1.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 
 
1.04.020 - Distribution of code. 
Not less than three bound copies of this code shall be filed for use and examination by the public in the office of the city clerk-treasurer. At least three copies permanently bound and duly certified to by the city clerk-treasurer shall be maintained on file in his office. Additional copies shall be prepared in looseleaf form and shall be mounted to withstand heavy usage in such binders as the city clerk-treasurer may prescribe. Copies of the code and material printed for use therewith shall be distributed one to each officer and department or bureau head of the city, one to each assistant or other employee in each office, department or bureau of the city as the head thereof may designate, one to the city public library and one to each branch thereof, and one to each municipal association or municipal legal organization as may be designated by the city attorney. The mayor, the city manager and the city clerk-treasurer shall have power to reciprocate courtesies of other cities by presenting to each copies of this code and printed matter, bound in such manner as to him may seem suitable. In addition, copies of the code and printed matter, with or without a binder or maintenance service, shall be sold to the general public at a price fixed by the city clerk-treasurer. The purchaser shall have the option of ordering the code and printed matter with or without the binder or maintenance service. Distribution and sale of the code and printed matter shall be made by the city clerk-treasurer. The city clerk-treasurer shall keep a record of the distributees and purchasers. Various portions of the code and printed matter may also be printed separate and apart from the whole thereof, and sold, either with or without a binder and with or without maintenance service, as directed by the city clerk-treasurer and at prices to be fixed by him. 
(Amended during 1984 codification; prior code § 1110)  
1.04.030 - Maintenance of code. 
A.  Whenever the council adopts an amendment or adds to this code or repeals any of its provisions, or whenever the Charter is amended, or whenever the table of contents or the index is amended, the city clerk-treasurer shall cause the looseleaf pages of the code or printed matter in which changes have been made to be reprinted, showing the changes and a notation as to the ordinance, if any, and the date of adoption thereof, by which the changes are adopted, shall be made by the city clerk-treasurer in the bound volumes of the code on file in his office including the number of the ordinance pursuant to which the action is taken. Duly certified copies of every ordinance making changes in the code shall be filed in the office of the city clerk-treasurer in books for such purpose, duly indexed for ready reference. The city clerk-treasurer shall cause copies of each and every reprint to be distributed to each distributee and to every purchaser of the code who has ordered and paid for maintenance service. 
B.  At least twice yearly the city clerk-treasurer shall cause the looseleaf pages of the code in which changes have been made to be reprinted, including the notation as to the ordinance number pursuant to which the change is adopted, in order that at least twice yearly the looseleaf copies of the code prepared for the use and convenience of the officers and employees of the city and the general public may be brought up to date. 
(Amended during 1984 codification; prior code § 1111)  
1.04.040 - Title. 
This code shall be known as the "Whittier Municipal Code," and it shall be sufficient to refer to the code as the "Whittier Municipal Code" in any prosecution for the violation of any provisions of this code. It shall also be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, or repealing the code, or portions thereof, as an addition or amendment to, or repeal of, the "Whittier Municipal Code" or a portion thereof. 
(Prior code § 1100)  
1.04.050 - Effect on past actions and obligations. 
Neither the adoption of this code, nor the repeal hereby of any ordinance of this city, shall in any manner affect the prosecution for violations of ordinances, which violations were committed prior to the effective date of this code, nor be construed as a waiver of any license or penalty at the effective date due and unpaid under such ordinances, nor be construed as affecting any of the provisions of such ordinances relating to the collection of any such license or penalty or the penal provisions applicable to any violation thereof, nor to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit in lieu thereof, required to be posted, filed or deposited pursuant to any ordinance, and all rights and obligations thereunder appertaining shall continue in full force and effect. 
(Prior code § 1103)  
1.04.060 - Continuity of provisions. 
The provisions of this code, insofar as they are substantially the same as ordinance provisions previously adopted by the city relating to the same subject matter, shall be construed as restatements and continuations, and not as new enactments. 
(Prior code § 1104)  
1.04.070 - Reference to specific ordinances. 
The provisions of this code shall not in any manner affect deposits or other matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with ordinances which are therein specifically designated by number, or otherwise, and which are included within this code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this code. 
(Prior code § 1105)  
1.04.080 - Validity of code. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this code is for any reason held to be invalid, or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, the decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. The council declares that it would have adopted this code and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, phrases, or portions be declared invalid or unconstitutional. If for any reason this code or any part thereof should be declared invalid or unconstitutional, then the original ordinance, or ordinances, which this code, or part thereof, supersedes, shall be in full force and effect. 
(Prior code § 1106)  
1.04.090 - Initiative ordinances. 
To coordinate all related provisions of the law, initiative ordinances are inserted in this code and given code section numbers. In each such case, the character of the ordinance as an initiative ordinance is noted in parenthesis in the heading of the article or at the end of the section. This coordination of initiative ordinances with the code does not alter their character as such. Any violation of the provisions of an initiative ordinance is punishable as provided therein, rather than under the general penal clause of this code. 
(Prior code § 1107)  
1.04.100 - Construction. 
Unless the provisions of the context otherwise require, these general provisions, rules of construction and definitions shall govern the construction of this code. The provisions of this code and all proceedings under it are to be construed with a view to effect its objects and to promote justice. 
(Prior code § 1300)  
1.04.110 - Headings. 
The headings of titles, articles, chapters, divisions, sections and subsections contained in this code shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any title, article, chapter, division, section or subsection. 
(Prior code § 1301)  
1.04.120 - Territorial jurisdiction. 
This code refers only to the omission or commission of acts within the territorial limits of the city and to that territory outside of the city over which the city has jurisdiction or control by virtue of the Constitution, or any law. 
(Prior code § 1302)  
1.04.130 - Reference to ordinances or charter. 
Any reference to an ordinance or a Charter in this code means the ordinance or Charter of the city of Whittier unless otherwise specifically provided. 
(Prior code § 1303)  
1.04.140 - Reference includes amendments and penalty section. 
Any reference in this code to an ordinance or provision of this code means the ordinance or provision as now, or hereafter, amended. Reference to any section of this code shall be understood to refer to and include the penalty section relating thereto unless otherwise expressly provided. In case of the amendment of any section of this code containing provisions for which a penalty is provided in another section, the penalty so provided in the other section shall be held to relate to the section so amended whether reenacted in the amendatory ordinance or not, unless the penalty is specifically repealed therein. 
(Prior code § 1304)  
1.04.150 - Prohibited acts include causing or permitting. 
Whenever in this code any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall include causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering or concealing the act or omission. 
(Prior code § 1305)  
1.04.160 - Acts by deputies. 
Whenever a power is granted to, or a duty is imposed upon a public officer, or employee, the power may be exercised, or the duty may be performed by a deputy of the officer or employee or by a person otherwise duly authorized pursuant to law or ordinance, unless this code expressly provides otherwise. 
(Prior code § 1306)  
1.04.170 - Writing defined. 
"Writing" includes any form of recorded message capable of comprehension by ordinary visual means. Whenever any notice, report, statement, application or record required or authorized by this code is made it shall be made in writing in the English language unless it is expressly provided otherwise. 
(Prior code § 1307)  
1.04.180 - Reference includes amendments. 
Whenever a reference is made to any portion of this code, or to any ordinance of this city, the reference applies to all amendments and additions now or hereafter made. 
(Prior code § 1308)  
1.04.190 - Designation of holidays. 
The city council shall, by resolution, designate holidays for city officers, employees and offices. 
(Prior code § 1309)  
1.04.200 - Service of notice. 
Whenever a notice is required to be given under this code, unless different provisions are otherwise specifically made, the notice may be given either by personal delivery thereof to the person to be notified or by deposit in the United States Postal Service, in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid, addressed to the person to be notified, at his last known business or residence address as it appears in the public records of the city or other records pertaining to the matter to which the notice is directed. Service shall be deemed complete upon the date of personal service, or, in the case of use of the Postal Service, two days following the deposit of the same in the custody of the Postal Service. 
(Amended during 1984 codification; prior code § 1310)  
1.04.210 - Proof of notice service. 
Proof of giving any notice may be made by the certificate of any officer or employee of this city or by affidavit of any person over the age of eighteen years which shows service in conformity with this code or other provisions of law applicable to the subject matter concerned. 
(Prior code § 1311)  
1.04.220 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this code, shall be construed as defined in this section unless from the context a different meaning is specifically defined and more particularly directed to the use of such words or phrases: 
1.  "Business" includes businesses, professions, trades and occupations, and all and every kind of calling. 
2.  "City" means the city of Whittier or the area within the territorial city limits of the city of Whittier and such territory ouside of this city over which the city has jurisdiction or control by virtue of any constitutional or Charter provision or any law. 
3.  "City assessor" or "assessor" means the city assessor of this city or such person as hereafter may, by law, be authorized to perform for the city the duties ordinarily incident to a tax assessor. 
4.  "City attorney" or "attorney" means the city attorney of this city or such other official as hereafter may, by law, be designated as the official legal advisor of this city. 
5.  "City auditor" or "auditor" means the city auditor of this city or such person as hereafter may, by law, be authorized to perform for the city the duties ordinarily incident to the office of an official auditor. 
6.  "City clerk-treasurer" or "clerk-treasurer" means the city clerk-treasurer of this city or such person as hereafter may, by law, be authorized to perform the duties now being performed by that official. 
7.  "City controller" or "controller" means city controller of this city. 
8.  "City manager" or "manager" means the city manager of this city or his successor as chief executive officer of the city. 
9.  "City tax collector" or "tax collector" means the city tax collector of this city or such person as hereafter may, by law, be authorized to perform for the city the duties ordinarily incident to the office of an official collector of taxes and licenses. 
10.  "Council" means the city council of this city. 
11.  "County" is the county of Los Angeles. 
12.  "Engage in" includes commence, engage in, carry on, conduct, maintain, manage and operate. 
13.  "Fiscal year" means the year commencing with July 1st and ending the following June 30th. 
14.  "Goods" includes wares or merchandise. 
15.  "License fee" includes any charge imposed for a license, whether the object is regulation or revenue, or both regulation and revenue. 
16.  "May" is permissive. 
17.  "Oath" includes affirmation. 
18.  "Office." The use of the title of any officer, employee or office means the officer, employee or officer of the city unless otherwise specifically designated. 
19.  "Operate" includes carry on, keep, conduct or maintain. 
20.  "Owner," applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant, tenant in common, or joint tenant, of the whole or a part of the building or land. 
21.  "Person" means any natural person, firm, association, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, organization, club, company, corporation, business trust or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee or any of them except as otherwise provided in this code, or where the context clearly requires a definite meaning. 
22.  "Sale" includes any sale, exchange, barter or offer for sale. 
23.  "Shall" and "must" each are mandatory. 
24.  "State" is the state of California. 
25.  "Street" includes all streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts, places, squares, sidewalks, parkways, curbs, or other public ways in this city which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property so designated in any law of this state. 
26.  "Tenant" or "occupant" applied to a building or land incudes any person who occupies the whole or part of the building or land, whether alone or with others. 
27.  "Vote, approval or consent." Except as may be otherwise provided in connection therewith, the phrase "vote, approval or consent of the council or other body" means the affirmative vote of a majority of those members present at a meeting having a quorum in attendance. Whenever the phrase refers to the members of the council or other body rather than to the council or body as such, the vote required shall be in relation to the total membership rather than to those members present at the meeting. 
(Amended during 1984 codification; prior code § 1400)  
1.04.230 - Constitutionality. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. The city council declares that it would have passed this code, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases had been declared invalid or unconstitutional, and if for any reason this code should be declared invalid or unconstitutional, then the original ordinance or ordinances shall be in full force and effect. 
(Added during 1984 codification)  
Chapter 1.08 - GENERAL PENALTY 
Sections: 
 
1.08.010 - Penalty for violations. 
A.  Any person, firm, corporation, or other responsible entity who violates any provision, restriction, or requirement of this Code or any code adopted herein by reference, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor unless: 
1.  Such requirement can only be charged as an infraction as provided in this Code; 
2.  The prosecuting attorney files a complaint charging the offense as an infraction; or 
3.  After filing of a misdemeanor complaint, the court, solely upon motion of the People, reduces the charge to an infraction. 
B.  Except in cases where a different punishment is prescribed by any ordinance of the city, any person convicted of a misdemeanor for violation of an ordinance of the city is punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars, or by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
C.  Any person convicted of an infraction for violation of an ordinance of the city is punishable by: 
1.  A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for a first violation; 
2.  A fine not exceeding two hundred dollars for a second violation of the same ordinance within one year; 
3.  A fine of five hundred dollars for each additional violation of the same ordinance within one year. 
D.  Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of the ordinances of the city is committed, continued or permitted by any such person, and he/she shall be punishable accordingly. 
(Ord. 2869 § 1, 2006; Ord. 2703 § 2 (part), 1997: Ord. 2577 § 1, 1992; Ord. 2427 § 1, 1988; Ord. 2415 § 1, 1987; amended during 1984 codification; prior code § 1200) 
( Ord. No. 3057, § 1 , 10-8-16)  
1.08.015 - Enforcement as misdemeanor or infraction. 
A.  In addition to those violations of this code that are deemed infractions, violations of the following enumerated sections of this code may be deemed to be an infraction and may be punished as such, notwithstanding the fact that, at the discretion of the city attorney, the violation of any section contained in this subsection may be filed as a misdemeanor. The complaint charging such violation shall specify whether the violation is a misdemeanor or an infraction. 
1.  Section 5.04.180, conducting a business without a license; 
2.  Section 8.12.070, failure to pay refuse collection charges; 
3.  Section 8.12.170, accumulations of trash and debris; 
4.  Section 9.08.010, discharge of offensive material in public places; 
5.  Section 12.24.070, obstruction of public right-of-way; 
6.  Section 18.10.030(A)(2), front yard parking; 
7.  Section 18.10.030(A)(3), auto dismantling; 
8.  Section 18.10.030(B), storage of boat and/or trailer, and/or vehicles; 
9.  Section 18.76.040(B), temporary signs; 
10.  Section 18.70.100, portable signs; 
11.  Section 18.10.020(G), garage sales; 
12.  Section 8.08.024(A) through (H), substandard property conditions; 
13.  Section 8.32.030, general noise regulations; 
14.  Section 8.12.135(A) through (G), infractions; 
15.  Section 8.32.060(B), exterior noise limits; 
16.  Section 8.32.070, interior noise standards; 
17.  Section 8.32.080, noise disturbance, subsections (A), (B), (C), (D), (F), (H), (I), (J), (K), (L), and (M); 
17.  Section 8.32.090, residential air conditioning; 
18.  Section 18.76.019, Uptown Whittier Specific Plan. Only the signs permitted in the Uptown Whittier Specific Plan adopted by Resolution 5910, as amended from time to time, shall be permitted on lots within the Uptown Whittier Specific Plan. 
19.  Section 10.64.040, improper use of benches, public structures and landscaped areas. 
B.  Except as set forth in subsection C, of this section, the fine schedule for the above violations of this code is established as follows: 
1.  A fine of twenty-five dollars for a first violation; 
2.  A fine of fifty dollars for a second violation of the same ordinance within one year; or 
3.  A fine of one hundred dollars for each additional violation of the same ordinance within one year. 
C.  The fine schedule for violations of Sections 8.32.060, 8.32.080(E), 8.32.080(F), 8.32.080(G), 8.32.080(I), 8.32.080 and 8.32.080(E), of this code is established as follows: 
1.  A fine of two-hundred and fifty dollars for a first violation; 
2.  A fine of five-hundred dollars for a second violation of the same ordinance within one year; or 
3.  A fine of one thousand dollars for each additional violation of the same ordinance within one year. 
(Ord. 2869 §§ 2—4, 2006: Ord. 2758 § 16, 1999; Ord. 2754 § 4, 1999; Ord. 2747 §§ 3—5, 1999; Ord. 2703 § 2 (part), 1997) 
( Ord. No. 3007, § 2, 8-13-13 )  
1.08.020 - Working prisoners. 
A.  Performing Labor on Public Works. Persons confined in the city jail under a final judgment of imprisonment rendered in a criminal action or proceeding may be required to perform labor on the public streets or other public property or works within the city under the direction of the chief of police. The phrase "streets or other public property or works within the city" as used in this section includes, among other things, clerical and menial labor in the city jail for labor thereat as directed by the chief of police. 
B.  Escape. Any prisoner performing labor as directed in subsection A of this section who escapes while so laboring or while going to or returning from such labor shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 2703 § 2 (part), 1997: prior code § 1201)  
1.08.030 - Citation procedure. 
A.  Any officer arresting a person for a violation of any provision of this code who does not immediately take such person before a magistrate as prescribed in the Penal Code of the state shall prepare in duplicate a written notice to appear in court. The notice shall contain, among other things, the following: 
1.  The name and address of the person arrested; 
2.  The offense charged and the time and place of the alleged violation; 
3.  When and where the arrested person shall appear in court. 
The time specified in the notice to appear must be at least ten days after the arrest. The place specified in the notice to appear shall be in conformity with Section 853.1 of the California Penal Code. 
B.  The arresting officer shall deliver one copy of the notice to appear to the alleged violator and the alleged violator, in order to secure his release, must give his written promise to so appear in court at the time and place indicated on the notice to appear, by signing the duplicate notice which shall be retained by the arresting officer. Thereafter, the arresting officer shall forthwith release from custody the person so arrested. The duplicate copy of the notice to appear shall be filed in the manner prescribed in Section 853.6 of the California Penal Code. 
C.  Any person who willfully violates his written promise to appear in court by failing to so appear at the time and place stated shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor regardless of the disposition of the charge upon which he was originally arrested. 
D.  When a person signs a written promise to appear at the time and place specified therein, as provided in this section, and has not posted bail as provided in Section 853.6 of the California Penal Code, the magistrate shall issue and have delivered for execution a warrant for his arrest within twenty days after the person has failed to appear as promised; or, if the arrested person promises to appear before an officer authorized to accept bail, other than a magistrate, and fails to do so on or before the date on which he promised to appear, then within twenty days after the delivery of the written promise to appear by the officer to the magistrate having jurisdiction over the offense, the magistrate shall issue and have delivered for execution a warrant for his arrest. When the person violates his promise to appear before an officer authorized to receive bail, other than a magistrate, the officer shall immediately deliver to the magistrate having jurisdiction over the offense charged the written promise to appear and the complaint, if any, filed by the arresting officer. 
E.  A warrant shall not issue on the charge for the arrest of a person pursuant to the provisions of this section who has given such written promise to appear in court, unless and until the person has violated the promise, or who has failed to deposit bail, to appear for arraignment, trial or a judgment. 
(Ord. 2703 § 2 (part), 1997: Ord. 2577 §§ 2—4, 1992; prior code § 1202)  
1.08.040 - Infraction procedure. 
City personnel as designated by the city manager shall have the authority to issue citations for violations of this code as to which the city council has declared to be infractions. 
(Ord. 2703 § 2 (part), 1997: Ord. 2426 § 1, 1988)  
Chapter 1.09 - ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS 
Sections: 
 
1.09.010 - Purpose and intent. 
The city council of the city finds and declares that: 
A.  There is a need for an alternative method of enforcement for violations of the Whittier Municipal Code, state codes, conditions on entitlements, and land use approvals. The city council further finds that an appropriate method of enforcement is the imposition of administrative fines or penalties as authorized by Government Code Section 53069.4. 
B.  The issuance of an administrative citation under this chapter is solely at the city's discretion and is one option the city has to address violations of this code. By adopting this chapter, the city does not intend to limit its discretion to utilize any other remedy, civil or criminal, to address such violations. 
C.  Enforcement of the Whittier Municipal Code, other ordinances adopted by the city, conditions on entitlements, and state codes are matters of local concern and serve to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city, and a method for such enforcement is a valid exercise of the police power. 
D.  Issuing administrative citations, pursuant to this chapter, encourages voluntary and complete compliance with the provisions of this code, state codes, and conditions on entitlements, in a timely and cost efficient manner, for the protection and benefit of the entire community. 
(Ord. 2780 § 1 (part), 2001)  
1.09.020 - Definitions. 
A.  "Enforcement officer" means any officer or employee acting on behalf of the city with the authority to enforce the Whittier Municipal Code or applicable state codes in accordance with the provisions of this code. 
B.  "Hearing officer" means the person appointed by the city manager, in compliance with any and all applicable legal requirements, to serve as the hearing officer for administrative citation hearings. 
C.  "Land use approval" means any approval required for a particular use of land, including but not limited to permits, licenses, conditional use permits, variances or subdivision maps. 
D.  "Owner" means the record owner of a parcel according to the county's latest equalized property tax assessment roll. 
E.  "Person" means and includes a natural person or legal entity, and the owners, majority stockholders, corporate officers, trustee and general partners of a legal entity. 
F.  "Responsible person" means any individual who is the owner or occupant of real property, owner or authorized agent of any business, company, or entity, or the parent or the legal guardian of any person under the age of eighteen years, who causes or maintains a violation of the Whittier Municipal Code or applicable state codes. For the purposes of this chapter, there may be more than one responsible person for any violation. 
(Ord. 2780 § 1 (part), 2001)  
1.09.030 - Issuance. 
A.  Notwithstanding the provisions set forth in Chapter 1.08 of the Whittier Municipal Code, any person violating any provision of the Whittier Municipal Code or applicable state codes, may, in the city's discretion, be issued an administrative citation by an enforcement officer as provided in this chapter. The enforcement officer shall allow a reasonable period of time, which shall be included in the citation, but no more than twenty-one days unless the enforcement officer determines that some longer period of time is reasonably warranted and/or necessary under the circumstances, for a responsible person to correct or otherwise remedy a continuing violation prior to the imposition of administrative fines or penalties, when such continuing violation pertains to building, plumbing, electrical or other similar structural or zoning issues that do not create an immediate danger to health and safety. 
B.  Every person who applies for and receives any type of land use approval or entitlement shall comply with all conditions imposed upon the issuance of said land use approval or entitlement. Violation of any condition of such land use approval or entitlement may be subject to administrative fines or penalties in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
C.  Each and every day a violation of this code exists shall be a separate and distinct violation and may be subject to a separate fine or penalty. An administrative citation may charge a violation for one or more days on which a violation exists, and for violation of one or more code sections. 
D.  An administrative citation shall be on a form approved by the city manager and shall contain the following information: 
1.  Name of the responsible person; 
2.  Date, time and address, or definite description, of the location where the violation(s) was observed; 
3.  The code section(s) or condition(s) violated and a description of the violation(s); 
4.  A description of the action required to correct the violation(s) or condition(s); 
5.  An order prohibiting the continuation or repeated occurrence of the violation(s) described in the administrative citation; 
6.  The amount of the fine for the violation(s); 
7.  An explanation of how the fine shall be paid and the time period by which it shall be paid, including the time period, determined by the enforcement officer, of the reasonable time within which the responsible person may correct the violation without being subject to a fine, pursuant to subsection A of this section; 
8.  Notification of the right to appeal, including the time within which the administrative citation may be contested and the place to obtain a request for hearing form to contest the administrative citation; 
9.  The name and signature of the enforcement officer; and 
10.  Date the citation was issued. 
(Ord. 2780 § 1 (part), 2001)  
1.09.040 - Service procedures for administrative citations. 
An administrative citation may be issued in accordance with Section 1.09.030 in any of the following manners, as specified: 
A.  Personal Service. The enforcement officer shall make a reasonable attempt to locate and personally serve the responsible person with the administrative citation and the enforcement officer shall also make a reasonable attempt to obtain the signature of the responsible person on the administrative citation. If the responsible person refuses to sign the administrative citation, the failure or refusal to sign shall not affect the validity of the administrative citation or of subsequent proceedings. 
B.  Service of Citation by Mail. If the enforcement officer is unable to serve the responsible person by personal service, the enforcement officer shall mail the administrative citation to the responsible person by certified mail, return receipt requested and by regular, first class mail. Service by mail shall be deemed effective as of the date of deposit in the U.S. Mail. 
C.  Service of Citation by Posting Notice. If the enforcement officer does not succeed in personally serving the responsible person, or in serving the responsible person by certified or regular mail, the enforcement officer shall post the administrative citation on any real property within the city, in which the enforcement officer has reasonably verified that the responsible person has a legal interest, and such service by posting shall be deemed effective as of the date of posting. 
(Ord. 2780 § 1 (part), 2001)  
1.09.050 - Amount of administrative citation fines. 
The amount of fine for a violation imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be established by separate resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 2780 § 1 (part), 2001)  
1.09.060 - Payment of administrative citation fines. 
A.  The fine shall be paid to the city within thirty days from the date of service of the administrative citation. 
B.  A late payment fee shall be charged in an amount to be established by separate resolution of the city council, if the fine in any administrative citation is not paid within the time prescribed herein. 
C.  Any administrative citation fine paid pursuant to Section 1.09.060 shall be refunded in accordance with Section 1.09.090 if it is determined, after a hearing, that the person charged in the administrative citation was not responsible for the violation or that there was no violation as charged in the administrative citation. 
D.  Payment of a fine under this chapter shall not excuse or discharge any continuation or repeated occurrence of any violation that is the subject of the administrative citation, nor shall it bar further enforcement action by the city. 
E.  The city may use all available legal and equitable remedies to collect any past due fines and other related costs. 
(Ord. 2780 § 1 (part), 2001)  
1.09.070 - Request for administrative hearing. 
A.  Any recipient of an administrative citation may contest the citation by completing a request for hearing form, to be obtained from and returned to the police department within fifteen days from the date of service of the administrative citation, together with an advanced deposit of the fine. 
B.  A hearing before the hearing officer shall be set for a date that is not less than fifteen nor more that sixty days from the date the request for hearing is filed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The person requesting the hearing shall be notified of the time and place set for the hearing at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(Ord. 2780 § 1 (part), 2001)  
1.09.080 - Administrative hearing procedure. 
A.  No hearing to contest an administrative citation before a hearing officer shall be held unless and until a request for hearing form has been completed and filed and the fine has been deposited. 
B.  The hearing officer shall only consider evidence that is relevant to whether the violation(s) occurred and whether the responsible person caused and/or maintained the violation(s) specified in the administrative citation. 
C.  At least ten days prior to the hearing, the recipient of an administrative citation shall be provided with copies of any and all citations, reports, and other documents submitted or relied upon by the enforcement officer. No other discovery shall be permitted. The formal rules of evidence shall not apply. 
D.  The administrative citation and any additional documents submitted by the enforcement officer shall constitute prima facie evidence of the respective facts contained in those documents. 
E.  The responsible person contesting the administrative citation shall be given the opportunity to testify and present witnesses and relevant evidence concerning the violation(s) charged in the administrative citation. 
F.  The failure of any recipient of an administrative citation to appear at the administrative citation hearing shall constitute a forfeiture of the fine and a failure to exhaust his or her administrative remedies. 
G.  The administrative citation and any additional documents submitted by the enforcement officer shall constitute prima facie evidence of the respective facts contained in those documents. 
H.  Neither the enforcement officer nor any other representative of the city shall be required to attend the hearing, nor be required to submit to the hearing officer any evidence other than the citation and any additional reports or documents in the public records of the city on the violation(s); however, any such appearance and/or submission may be made at the discretion of the enforcement officer or any city employee or agent. 
I.  The hearing officer may continue the hearing and request additional information from the enforcement officer or the recipient of the administrative citation prior to issuing a written decision. 
(Ord. 2780 § 1 (part), 2001)  
1.09.090 - Hearing officers decision. 
A.  After considering all of the testimony and evidence submitted at the hearing, the hearing officer shall issue a written decision to uphold, modify or revoke the administrative citation and shall list in the decision the reasons for that decision. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final. 
B.  If the hearing officer determines that the administrative citation should be upheld, the amount of the fine on deposit with the city shall be retained by the city. 
C.  If the hearing officer determines that the administrative citation should be revoked, the city shall refund the amount of the deposited fine within thirty days of the issuance of the hearing officer's decision. 
D.  The recipient of the administrative citation shall be served by way of U.S. mail with a copy of the hearing officer's written decision within twenty days from the date of the final hearing. 
(Ord. 2780 § 1 (part), 2001)  
1.09.100 - Collection of unpaid fines. 
A.  The city at its discretion may pursue any and all legal and equitable remedies, to which the city may be entitled, for the collection of unpaid fines and penalties. Pursuit of one remedy does not preclude the pursuit of any other remedies. 
B.  Any responsible person who has unpaid and/or delinquent fines, may be refused the issuance of a land use approval, or other city approval pertaining to the property, real or personal, that is the subject of the citation issued pursuant to this chapter. 
C.  Any fine required by the provisions of this chapter shall be paid or deposited with the city clerk. 
(Ord. 2780 § 1 (part), 2001)  
1.09.110 - Right to judicial review. 
Any person aggrieved by a decision of the hearing officer on an administrative citation may obtain review of the administrative decision by filing an appeal of the final decision or order in the Los Angeles County Superior Court in accordance with the requirements of California Government Code Section 53069.4. 
(Ord. 2780 § 1 (part), 2001)  
1.09.120 - Notices. 
Except as specifically provided in this chapter, all notices to be given by this chapter shall be served on the responsible person in accordance with the provisions of Section 1.04.200 of the Whittier Municipal Code. Failure to receive any notice specified in this chapter does not affect the validity of proceedings conducted in this chapter. 
(Ord. 2780 § 1 (part), 2001)  
Chapter 1.10 - CLAIMS REQUIREMENT 
Sections: 
 
1.10.010 - Person to present claim. 
No city officer shall, except for his own service, present any claim, account or demand for allowance against the city, or in any way, except in the discharge of his official duty, advocate the relief asked in the claim or demand made by any other person. Any person may appear before the city council and oppose the allowance of any claim or demand made against the city. 
(Ord. 2805 § 2 (part), 2002)  
1.10.020 - Itemization necessary. 
The city council shall not hear, consider, allow or approve any claim, bill or demand against the city unless the same is itemized, giving names, dates, and particular service rendered, character of process served and upon whom, distance traveled, character of work done, and number of days engaged, materials and supplies furnished, when and to whom, and in what quantity furnished, the price therefore, and any other pertinent details. 
(Ord. 2805 § 2 (part), 2002)  
1.10.030 - Claims required. 
This chapter shall not apply to those claims that are not a municipal affair and/or for which a claim is required or not permitted to be required, pursuant to the Tort Claims Act (Cal. Govt. Code § 900, et seq.). Such claims shall continue to be governed by the Tort Claims Act and shall comply with all applicable provisions of that Act. Notwithstanding any other provision, requirement, policy, ordinance or resolution of the city or the city of Whittier Municipal Code or Charter, no suit for money or damages may be brought against the city, any of its agencies, employees, officers or others, acting in the course and scope of employment, representation or authority, to act on behalf of any of the foregoing, on any cause of action for which a claim is required to be presented in accordance with this chapter until a written claim therefore has been presented to the city and has been acted upon by the city council or its designee, or has been deemed rejected. This chapter is intended to supersede and take precedence over any claims procedure or provision related to the time within which claims or actions must be filed as set forth in any other chapter, section, provision, ordinance, resolution, or policy of the city or the city of Whittier Municipal Code or Charter, only as to those claims exempted from the Tort Claims Act by California Government Code Section 905. 
A.  Any of the following claims against the city for money or damages require a claim to be presented to the city pursuant to the provisions of this chapter as a prerequisite to suit thereon, by delivering or mailing such claim to the city clerk, who shall forward all claims or demands to the city controller: 
1.  Claims under the Revenue and Taxation Code or other statute, prescribing procedures for the refund, rebate, exemption, cancellation, amendment, modification or adjustment of any tax, assessment, fee or charge or any portion thereof, or of any penalties, costs or charges related thereto. 
2.  Claims in connection with which the filing of a notice of lien, statement of claim, or stop notice is required under any provision of law relating to mechanics', laborers' or materialmen's lien. 
3.  Claims by public employees for fees, salaries, wages, mileage or other expenses and allowances. 
4.  Claims for which the workmen's compensation authorized by Division 4 (commencing with Section 3201) of the Labor Code is the exclusive remedy. 
5.  Applications of claims for any form of public assistance under the Welfare and Institutions Code or other provisions of law relating to public assistance programs, and claims for goods, services, provisions or other assistance rendered for or on behalf of any recipient of any form of public assistance. 
6.  Applications or claims for money or benefits under any public retirement or pension system. 
7.  Claims for principal or interest upon any bonds, notes, warrants, or other evidences of indebtedness. 
8.  Claims which relate to a special assessment constituting a specific lien against the property assessed and which are payable from the proceeds of such an assessment, by offset of a claim for damages against it or by delivery of any warrant or bonds representing it. 
9.  Claims by the state or by a state department or agency or by another local public entity. 
10.  Claims arising under any provision of the Unemployment Insurance Code, including but not limited to claims for money or benefits, or for refunds or credits of employer or worker contributions, penalties, or interest, or for refunds to workers of deductions from wages in excess of the amount prescribed. 
11.  Claims for the recovery of penalties or forfeitures made pursuant to Article 1 (commencing with Section 1720) of Chapter 1 of Part 7 of Division 2 of the Labor Code. 
12.  Claims governed by the Pedestrian Mall Law of 1960, Part 1 (commencing with Section 11000) of Division 13 of the Streets and Highways Code. 
Notwithstanding anything in this chapter, all claims, other than (1) those specifically identified above, and (2) those which are not a municipal affair and are governed by the Tort Claims Act (Cal. Govt. Code § 900, et seq.), shall be subject to the claims requirements in Sections 1113 and 1115 of the Charter, as to the time for presentation of claims, but shall be subject to this chapter regarding the other procedures for the presentation and consideration of such claims. 
B.  A claim shall be presented by the claimant or by a person acting on his or her behalf on the form provided by the city clerk, or shall be filed in such other format that shows all of the following: 
1.  The name and post office address of the claimant. 
2.  The post office address to which the person presenting the claim desires notices to be sent. 
3.  The date, place and other circumstance of the occurrence or transaction which gave rise to the claim asserted. 
4.  A general description of the indebtedness, obligation, injury, damage or loss incurred so far as it may be known at the time of presentation of the claim. 
5.  The name or names of the public employee or employees causing the injury, damage, or loss, if known. 
6.  The amount claimed if it totals less than ten thousand dollars as of the date of presentation of the claim, including the estimated amount of any prospective injury, damage, or loss, insofar as it may be known at the time of the presentation of the claim, together with the basis of computation of the amount claimed. If the amount claimed exceeds ten thousand dollars, no dollar amount shall be included in the claim. However, it shall indicate whether the claim would be a limited civil case. 
C.  The claim shall be signed by the claimant or by some person on his behalf. Claims against local public entities for supplies, materials, equipment or services need not be signed by the claimant or on his behalf if presented on a billhead or invoice regularly used in the conduct of the business of the claimant. 
(Ord. 2805 § 2 (part), 2002)  
1.10.040 - Amendment of claim. 
A claim may be amended at any time before the expiration of the period designated in Section 1.10.070 or before final action thereon is taken by the city, whichever is later, if the claim as amended relates to the same transaction or occurrence which gave rise to the original claim. The amendment shall be considered a part of the original claim for all purposes and shall be presented to the city in the same manner as required for the original claim. A failure or refusal to amend a claim, whether or not notice of insufficiency is given, shall not constitute a defense to any action brought upon the cause of action for which the claim was presented if the court finds that the claim as presented complied substantially with this chapter. 
(Ord. 2805 § 2 (part), 2002)  
1.10.050 - Notice of insufficiency of claim. 
If in the opinion of the city controller a claim as presented fails to comply substantially with the requirements of this chapter, the city controller may, at any time within twenty days after the claim is presented, give written notice of its insufficiency, stating with particularity the defects of omission therein. Such notice shall be personally delivered to the person presenting the claim or shall be mailed to the address stated in the claim. No notice need be given where the claim fails to state an address for the claimant. The city council or its designee may not take action on the claim for a period of fifteen days after such notice is given. 
(Ord. 2805 § 2 (part), 2002)  
1.10.060 - Time of presentation of claims. 
A claim under this chapter shall be presented within one year of the accrual of the cause of action. For purposes of this chapter, the date of accrual of a cause of action to which a claim relates is the date upon which the cause of action would be deemed to have accrued within the meaning of the statute of limitation which would be applicable thereto if there were no requirement that a claim be presented to and acted upon by the city before an action could be commenced thereon. However, for purposes of this chapter, the date upon which a cause of action for equitable indemnity or partial equitable indemnity accrues shall be the date upon which a defendant is served with the complaint giving rise to the defendant's claim for equitable indemnity or partial equitable indemnity against the city. 
(Ord. 2805 § 2 (part), 2002)  
1.10.070 - Time for action. 
A.  The city council or its designee shall act on a claim within forty-five days after the claim has been presented. If a claim is amended, the city council or its designee shall act on the amended claim within forty-five days after the amended claim is presented. 
B.  The claimant and the city council or its designee may extend the period within which an action is required on the claim by written agreement made: 
1.  Before the expiration of such period; or 
2.  After the expiration of such period if an action based on the claim has not been commenced and is not yet barred by the applicable period of limitations. 
C.  If the city council or its designee fails or refuses to act on a claim within the time prescribed by this section, the claim shall be deemed to have been rejected on the last day of the period within which action was required on the claim, or the last day of the period within which action was required under any agreement to extend pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. 2805 § 2 (part), 2002)  
1.10.080 - Action required. 
A.  The city council or its designee may act on a claim in one of the following ways: 
1.  If the city council or its designee finds the claim is not a proper charge against the city, it or its designee shall reject the claim. 
2.  If the city council or its designee finds the claim is a proper charge against the city and is for an amount justly due, it or its designee shall allow the claim. 
3.  If the city council or its designee finds the claim is a proper charge against the city but is for an amount greater than is justly due, it shall either reject the claim or allow it in the amount justly due and reject it as to the balance. 
4.  If legal liability of the city or the amount justly due is disputed, the city council or its designee may reject the claim or may compromise the claim. 
B.  If the city council or its designee allows the claim in whole or in part or compromises the claim, it or its designee may require the claimant, if the claimant accepts the amount allowed or offered to settle the claim, to accept it in settlement of the entire claim. 
C.  If the claim is allowed in full and the claimant accepts the amount allowed, no suit may be maintained on any part of the cause of action to which the claim relates. 
D.  If the claim is allowed in part and the claimant accepts the amount allowed, no suit may be maintained on that part of the cause of action which is represented by the allowed portion of the claim. 
E.  If the claim is allowed in part, no suit may be maintained on any portion of the cause of action where, pursuant to a requirement of the city council or its designee to such effect, the claimant has accepted the amount allowed in settlement of the entire claim. 
(Ord. 2805 § 2 (part), 2002)  
1.10.090 - Notice of rejection of claim. 
Written notice of the action taken on a claim or amended claim, or the inaction which is deemed rejection, shall be personally delivered to the person presenting the claim or shall be mailed to the address stated in the claim or amended claim, if any. No notice need be given where the claim fails to state an address for the person presenting the claim. Such notice may be in substantially the following form: 
"Notice is hereby given that the claim which you presented to the City on (indicate date) was (indicate whether rejected, allowed, allowed in the amount of $_______ and rejected as to the balance, rejected by operation of law, or other appropriate language, whichever is applicable) on (indicate date of action or rejection by operation of law)." 
If the claim is rejected in whole or in part, the notice required shall include a warning in substantially the following form: 
"WARNING: Subject to certain exceptions, you have only six months from the date this notice was personally delivered or deposited in the mail to file a court action on this claim. Whittier Municipal Code Section 1.10.120. You may seek the advice of an attorney of your choice in connection with this matter. If you desire to consult an attorney, you should do so immediately." 
(Ord. 2805 § 2 (part), 2002)  
1.10.100 - Re-examination of rejected claim. 
The city council or its designee may, in its or its designee's discretion, within the time prescribed for commencing an action on the claim, re-examine a previously rejected claim in order to consider a settlement of the claim. 
(Ord. 2805 § 2 (part), 2002)  
1.10.110 - Mailing manner. 
If any claim, notice or other item is required or allowed to be mailed by this chapter, the claim, notice or other item shall be mailed in the manner prescribed in this section. Such claim, notice, or other item shall be deposited in the United States post office, or a mailbox, subpost office, substation, or mail chute, or other like facility regularly maintained by the government of the United States, in a sealed envelope, properly addressed, with first class postage paid and shall be deemed to have been presented and received at the time of the deposit. 
(Ord. 2805 § 2 (part), 2002)  
1.10.120 - Time limit for filing of action upon claim. 
Any suit brought against the city on a cause of action for which a claim is required under this chapter must be commenced: 
A.  If written notice of rejection of claim is given, not later than six months after the date such notice is personally delivered or deposited in the mail. 
B.  If written notice of rejection of claim is not given, within two years from the accrual of the cause of action. If the period within which the city is required to act is extended, the period of extension is not part of the time limits for the commencement of the action under this paragraph. 
C.  When a person is unable to commence a suit of a cause of action within the time prescribed because he has been sentenced to imprisonment in a state prison, the time limit for the commencement of such suit is extended to six months after the date that the civil right to commence such action is restored to such person, except that the time shall not be extended if the city establishes that the plaintiff failed to make a reasonable effort to commence the suit, or to obtain a restoration of his civil right to do so, before the expiration of the time prescribed herein. 
(Ord. 2805 § 2 (part), 2002)  
1.10.130 - Amortization. 
Every claim which is subject to the provisions of Sections 1113 and 1115 of the Whittier City Charter as set forth in this chapter, which accrued nine months or less prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter and which required a claim pursuant to Chapter 2.58 before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, must be filed and must comply with all of the provisions of this chapter within ninety days of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(Ord. 2805 § 2 (part), 2002)  
Chapter 1.12 - CITY JAIL 
Sections: 
 
1.12.010 - Location. 
Those certain premises in the police building located at 13200 Penn Street, Whittier, California, the same being the southern portion of the basement floor of the police department building, which premises are now being used and occupied as a city jail and are more particularly described as follows: 
The first floor of the police building located at 13200 Penn Street, Whittier, California, including the cell blocks, holding room and area designated as quarters and accommodations for prisoners, shall be and are named, designated and established as the city jail of, in, and for this city. 
( Ord. No. 3031, § 1 , 4-28-15) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3031, § 1 , adopted April 28, 2015, repealed the former § 1.12.010, and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former § 1.12.010 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from prior code § 1210.  
1.12.020 - Approval of use. 
A.  All designations, previous references to and prior use of the premises described in Section 1.12.010 as the city jail are approved, ratified and confirmed by the city council as being true and correct. 
B.  Wherever in any prior ordinance of the city the term "city jail" is used, it shall be and mean the city jail as defined and described in Section 1.12.010. 
(Prior code § 1210.1)  
1.12.030 - Commitment to. 
Any person under arrest, charged with the violation of any ordinance of this code, may before conviction, unless released on bail, or on recognizance, be committed to the custody of the sheriff of the county, or to the city jail, except during such times as it may be necessary for the persons to attend court upon any proceeding connected with the trial of the charge. 
(Prior code § 1210.2)  
Chapter 1.16 - CITY SEAL 
Sections: 
 
1.16.010 - Designated. 
The round metal disc seal having thereon the words and figures "City of Whittier, California, Incorporated, 1898" an imprint of which is shown on Ordinance No. 1288, is adopted as the official seal of the city. The official seal was heretofore adopted by the city council by Ordinance No. 1288 as the official seal of this city. 
(Amended during 1984 codification; prior code § 1500)  
1.16.020 - Use of the seal. 
Whenever any document, ordinance, resolution, agreement, order, or paper requires the seal of the city, the seal from which the foregoing impression was made shall be used and attached to the documents by the proper officials of the city. The original and master seal shall be kept in the custody of the city clerk-treasurer; copies thereof may be made and placed in the custody of the city officials of the city as directed by the city manager. The seal shall only be used by the official having custody thereof or his duly authorized deputy. 
(Prior code § 1500.1)  
Chapter 1.20 - CITY LOGO AND LETTERHEAD 
Sections: 
 
1.20.010 - Designation. 
The city council may adopt by resolution an official city logo and official city letterhead. 
(Ord. 2504 § 1 (part), 1990)  
1.20.020 - Authorized use. 
Whenever in the course of conducting city business or related actions of the city, it shall be lawful to use and display the city logo and city letterhead as officially adopted. The use of the city logo and letterhead shall be used as authorized by the city council or city manager. The unauthorized use of the city logo or letterhead shall constitute a misdemeanor violation of law. 
(Ord. 2504 § 1 (part), 1990)  
Title 2 - ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL  
Chapter 2.04 - CITY COUNCIL 
 
2.04.010 - Meetings—Place. 
Except as otherwise directed by the city council, all meetings of the council shall be held in the council chambers in the City Hall, located at 13230 Penn Street in the city. 
(Amended during 1984 codification; prior code § 2110.15)  
2.04.020 - Meetings—Time. 
The regular meetings of the City Council shall be held on the second and fourth Tuesday of each month at six p.m. In the event any regular meeting falls on a legal holiday, the regular meeting shall be held at the same hour on the first day thereafter, which is not a legal holiday. 
(Ord. 2782 § 1, 2001: Ord. 2653 § 1, 1995: Ord. 2581 § 1, 1992: prior code § 2110.16) 
(Ord. No. 3086 , § 1, 5-22-18)  
2.04.030 - Council reimbursement for expenses. 
Pursuant to Section 402 of the city Charter, members of the city council shall each receive the sum of two hundred eighty-three dollars and fifty cents per month, as and for reimbursement of out-of-pocket expenditures and costs imposed upon them in serving as city council members. 
(Ord. 2882 § 1, 2006: Ord. 2807 § 1, 2002: Ord. 2784 § 1, 2001: Ord. 2766 § 1, 2000: Ord. 2753 § 1, 1999: Ord. 2736 § 1, 1998: Ord. 2713 § 1, 1997: Ord. 2688 § 1, 1996: Ord. 2668 § 1, 1995: Ord. 2625 § 1, 1994: Ord. 2511 § 1, 1990: Ord. 2488 § 1, 1990: Ord. 2440 § 1, 1988)  
2.04.040 - Qualifications. 
A.  A person is not eligible to hold office as mayor unless he is at the time of seeking nomination or appointment to office an elector of the city. If, during his term of office he moves his place of residence outside of the city limits or ceases to be an elector of the city, his office shall immediately become vacant. 
B.  A person is not eligible to hold office as council member unless he is at the time of seeking nomination or appointment to office an elector of the city, residing in the district from which he is appointed or elected. If, during his term of office he moves his place of residence outside of the district boundaries or ceases to be an elector of the city, his office shall immediately become vacant. However, no council member shall be deemed to have moved outside of his district as a result of district boundary changes which may occur during his term of office. Any council member who is no longer a resident of the district from which he was appointed or elected shall continue to serve until his term is complete or the office otherwise becomes vacant. 
(Ord. 2869 § 6, 2006: prior code § 2140) 
( Ord. No. 3033 , § 1, 6-9-15)  
2.04.050 - District boundaries. 
The council member districts of the city shall have the following legal boundaries: 
District1. The region bounded and described as follows: Beginning at the point of intersection of Broadway and City Boundary, and proceeding easterly along Broadway to Comstock Avenue, and proceeding southerly along Comstock Avenue to Wardman Street, and proceeding easterly along Wardman Street to Painter Avenue, and proceeding southerly along Painter Avenue to Whittier Boulevard, and proceeding westerly along Whittier Boulevard to Washington Avenue, and proceeding southerly along Washington Avenue to Putnam Street, and proceeding northerly along Putnam Street to Greenleaf Avenue, and proceeding southerly along Greenleaf Avenue to Danbrook Drive, and proceeding easterly along Danbrook Drive to Shoemaker Avenue, and proceeding southerly along Shoemaker Avenue to Block Boundary, and proceeding easterly along Block Boundary to Somerset Street, and proceeding easterly along Somerset Street to Addington Street, and proceeding easterly along Addington Street to Painter Avenue, and proceeding southerly along Painter Avenue to City Boundary, and proceeding westerly along City Boundary to the point of beginning. 
District 2. The region bounded and described as follows: Beginning at the point of intersection of City Boundary and Broadway, and proceeding easterly along City Boundary to Block Boundary, and proceeding southerly along Block Boundary to Penn Street, and proceeding westerly along Penn Street to Painter Avenue, and proceeding northerly along Painter Avenue to Wardman Street, and proceeding westerly along Wardman Street to Comstock Avenue, and proceeding northerly along Comstock Avenue to Broadway, and proceeding westerly along Broadway to the point of beginning. 
District 3. The region bounded and described as follows: Beginning at the point of intersection of City Boundary and Block Boundary, and proceeding easterly along City Boundary to Colima Road, and proceeding northerly along Colima Road to Whittier Boulevard, and proceeding westerly along Whittier Boulevard to Catalina Avenue, and proceeding northerly along Catalina Avenue to Mar Vista Street, and proceeding westerly along Mar Vista Street to Catalina Avenue, and proceeding northerly along Catalina Avenue to Precinct Boundary, and proceeding northerly along Precinct Boundary to Block Boundary, and proceeding easterly along Block Boundary to the point of beginning. 
District 4. The region bounded and described as follows: Beginning at the point of intersection of Penn Street and Painter Avenue, and proceeding easterly along Penn Street to Block Boundary, and proceeding easterly along Block Boundary to Precinct Boundary, and proceeding southerly along Precinct Boundary to Catalina Avenue, and proceeding southerly along Catalina Avenue to Mar Vista Street, and proceeding easterly along Mar Vista Street to Catalina Avenue, and proceeding southerly along Catalina Avenue to Whittier Boulevard, and proceeding easterly along Whittier Boulevard to Colima Road, and proceeding southerly along Colima Road to City Boundary, and proceeding westerly along City Boundary to Painter Avenue, and proceeding northerly along Painter Avenue to Addington Street, and proceeding westerly along Addington Street to Somerset Street, and proceeding westerly along Somerset Street to Block Boundary, and proceeding westerly along Block Boundary to Shoemaker Avenue, and proceeding northerly along Shoemaker Avenue to Danbrook Drive, and proceeding westerly along Danbrook Drive to Greenleaf Avenue, and proceeding northerly along Greenleaf Avenue to Putnam Street, and proceeding southerly along Putnam Street to Washington Avenue, and proceeding northerly along Washington Avenue to Whittier Boulevard, and proceeding easterly along Whittier Boulevard to Painter Avenue, and proceeding northerly along Painter Avenue to the point of beginning. 
These district boundaries are depicted on a boundary map attached hereto as Exhibit A. These boundaries will remain in effect until amended by ordinance. 
Nothing herein shall affect the terms of office of the five members of the city council in office at the time this section takes effect, who shall continue in office until their terms expire. 
  
( Ord. No. 3033, § 2 , 6-9-15)  
Chapter 2.05 - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 
 
2.05.005 - Appointments. 
Appointments to every board and commission established under this title shall be made according to Article VII of the Charter of the city of Whittier and the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2637 § 3 (part), 1994)  
2.05.010 - Eligibility. 
The members of a board or commission shall be appointed by the city council from the qualified electors of the city, none of whom shall hold any paid office or employment in the city government. 
(Ord. 2637 § 3 (part), 1994)  
2.05.020 - Appointment. 
The term of office for each board or commission member shall be four years; except for initial appointments, which shall be determined by the city council, and an appointment to fill an unexpired term, which shall be for the unexpired portion of such term. 
(Ord. 2637 § 3 (part), 1994)  
2.05.030 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2981, § 1, adopted Oct. 25, 2011, repealed § 2.05.030, which pertained to term limits for board or commission members and derived from Ord. 2708, § 1, adopted 1997; and Ord. 2637, § 3(part), adopted 1994.  
2.05.040 - Removal from office. 
Each board or commission member shall serve at the pleasure of the city council and may be removed from such office, at any time, by not less than three affirmative votes. 
(Ord. 2637 § 3 (part), 1994)  
2.05.045 - Removal for absence. 
In addition to the attendance standard expressed in the city charter any board or commission member who absents himself from any five regular meetings of the board or commission in any six-month period without the consent of the board or commission so expressed in the minutes shall thereby automatically forfeit his position as a member of the board or commission and the name of such person shall be automatically removed from the membership of the board or commission immediately after the adjournment of the fifth regular meeting in any such six-month period at which the board or commission member has not appeared. 
(Ord. 2821 § 1 (part), 2003)  
2.05.050 - Meetings—Holidays. 
In the event any regular meeting of a board or commission falls on a legal holiday, the regular meeting shall be held at the same hour on the first business day thereafter which is not a legal holiday. 
(Ord. 2774 § 1, 2001)  
Chapter 2.06 - CULTURAL ARTS COMMISSION 
 
2.06.010 - Created. 
There is created and established for the city a cultural arts commission, hereinafter in this part termed "commission," which commission shall be concerned with the study and recommendation of matters pertaining to the cultural arts needs of the community and the local government responsibility therefor. 
(Ord. 2400 § 1 (part), 1987)  
2.06.020 - Purpose. 
The commission's general purpose will be to advise the city council regarding programs that would enhance, service, advocate and provide support for excellence in the arts for the citizens of Whittier; to prioritize recommendations to the city council regarding the development and improvement of arts activities in Whittier in conjunction with other appropriate agencies; to raise the level of awareness and involvement of all citizens in the preservation, expansion, and enjoyment of the arts in Whittier; and to provide a forum within city government where planning and debate on these issues can be carried out. 
(Ord. 2400 § 1 (part), 1987)  
2.06.030 - Appointment. 
The commission shall consist of five members who shall be appointed by the city council. Membership eligibility is established as follows: 
A.  Each appointee shall be qualified elector of the city. 
B.  The commission shall reflect the composition of the city as nearly as possible. 
C.  Officials of the city shall not be eligible for appointment as members to this commission. 
(Ord. 2400 § 1 (part), 1987) 
(Ord. No. 3073 , § 1, 9-26-17)  
2.06.050 - Organization. 
The commission shall elect its own chairman and vice-chairman at the first meeting which shall be convened as soon as practicable after the appointments have been made and shall reorganize on an annual basis, effective July 1st of each year. 
(Ord. 2400 § 1 (part), 1987)  
2.06.060 - Powers and duties. 
The commission shall have the following duties: 
A.  To meet at least monthly; 
B.  To advise the city council on matters relating to cultural arts within the city; 
C.  To assess and report to the city council issues relating to cultural needs in the community; 
D.  To work in cooperation with any appointed staff in developing policy and programs directed toward meeting such needs and making appropriate recommendations to the city council in this regard; 
E.  Perform such other duties as are not inconsistent with the City Charter and which may be delegated or prescribed by the city council; 
F.  This commission shall not have authority to obligate, by contract or otherwise, the city in any manner; 
G.  With the exception of any staff specifically assigned to work with the commission, contact with other staff, boards or commissions shall be cleared through the city manager's office. 
(Ord. 2400 § 1 (part), 1987)  
2.06.070 - Staff. 
There shall be paid staff appointed by the city manager whose duties shall be to carry out the daily activities pertaining to cultural arts as authorized by the city council. This staff person shall serve as the secretary to the commission and shall record accurate minutes of meetings held by the commission, furnishing copies of all such minutes to the city council. 
(Ord. 2400 § 1 (part), 1987)  
2.06.080 - Compensation. 
No compensation shall be paid commission members as such; however, members may be entitled to reasonable and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties as such commission members, subject to prior approval by the city council and provided further that the total of such expenditures shall not exceed the amount budgeted. 
(Ord. 2400 § 1 (part), 1987)  
Chapter 2.08 - BOARD OF LIBRARY TRUSTEES AND LIBRARY DEPARTMENT 
 
2.08.010 - Board of trustees created. 
There is created and established a board of library trustees in conformity with Article VII of the Charter of the city. 
(Prior code § 2430)  
2.08.020 - Department established. 
In accordance with the provisions of Section 601 of the Charter of the city, the council creates and establishes a library department, which department shall be in charge of and headed by a chief librarian. 
(Prior code § 2431)  
Chapter 2.12 - DESIGN REVIEW BOARD 
 
2.12.010 - Created. 
A.  There is created and established for the city a design review board (hereinafter "board"). 
B.  The board's general purpose will be to perform the functions required of it pursuant to the city's zoning regulations, and by order of the city council. 
( Ord. No. 3044, § 2 , 1-26-16)  
2.12.020 - Membership. 
A.  The board shall consist of five members who shall be appointed by, and shall serve at the pleasure of, a majority of the city council and shall represent the following categories of membership: 
1.  All appointees shall be qualified electors of the city; and 
2.  At least two appointees shall be licensed architectural and/or landscape design professions or hold professional expertise in a related field to serve effectively on the board. 
( Ord. No. 3044, § 2 , 1-26-16)  
2.12.040 - Initial appointment. 
A.  Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter to the contrary, members of the design review board who are representing the qualified electors shall initially be appointed and serve the following terms: 
1.  Office No. 1, for a term expiring July 1, 2016; 
2.  Office No. 2, for a term expiring July 1, 2017; 
3.  Office No. 3, for a term expiring July 1, 2018; 
4.  Offices No. 4 and 5, each for a term expiring July 1, 2019. 
( Ord. No. 3044, § 2 , 1-26-16)  
2.12.050 - Powers and duties. 
The board shall have the following duties: 
A.  To meet regularly; 
B.  To establish its rules and designate future meeting dates and places. The time and place of all meetings shall be furnished to the city council along with notices of any changes that may from time to time be agreed to by the board; and 
C.  To advise city approval authorities on matters related to design guidelines within the city. 
( Ord. No. 3044, § 2 , 1-26-16)  
2.12.060 - Organization. 
The board shall elect its own chair and vice chair at the first meeting which shall be convened as soon as practicable after the appointments have been made and shall reorganize on an annual basis, effective July 1 of each year. 
( Ord. No. 3044, § 2 , 1-26-16)  
2.12.070 - Staff person. 
There shall be a paid staff person appointed by the city manager whose duties shall be to carry out the activities pertaining to the board. The appointee shall serve as the secretary to the board and shall record accurate minutes of the meetings held by the board, furnishing copies of all such minutes to the city council. 
( Ord. No. 3044, § 2 , 1-26-16)  
2.12.080 - Compensation. 
No compensation shall be paid to board members. 
( Ord. No. 3044, § 2 , 1-26-16)  
2.12.090 - City obligation. 
The board shall not have authority to obligate, by contract or otherwise, the city in any manner. 
( Ord. No. 3044, § 2 , 1-26-16)  
Chapter 2.16 - PARKS, RECREATION AND COMMUNITY SERVICES COMMISSION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2958, § 1, adopted Oct. 12, 2010, amended ch. 2.16 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch. 2.16, §§ 2.16.010—2.16.030, pertained to the parks and recreation commission and derived from Prior code, §§ 2420, 2421 and 2421.1. 
 
2.16.010 - Created. 
There is created and established a parks, recreation and community services commission in conformity with Article VII of the Charter of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2958, § 1, 10-12-10)  
2.16.020 - Parks, recreation and community services department created. 
In accordance with the provisions of Section 601 of the Charter of the city, the city council creates and establishes a parks, recreation and community services department, which department shall be headed by a director of parks, recreation and community services. 
(Ord. No. 2958, § 1, 10-12-10)  
Chapter 2.20 - PARKING AND TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION 
 
2.20.010 - Created. 
There is created and established a parking and transportation commission which shall be concerned with the study and recommendation of matters pertaining to the movement of goods and people throughout the community; the establishment, abandonment and regulation of parking zones and otherwise shall cooperate with the city traffic engineer and the police department in establishing policy pertaining to traffic movement and control. 
(Prior code § 2440)  
2.20.020 - Membership. 
The commission shall consist of five members who shall be appointed by the city council. 
(Ord. 2637 § 2, 1994: amended during 1984 codification; prior code § 2441)  
2.20.030 - Meetings. 
The commission shall meet at regular intervals at such time and place as may be determined by resolution of the commission; provided, however, that the commission shall meet at least once each month. The commission may adopt rules and regulations not inconsistent with the city Charter and other applicable laws, which rules and regulations shall govern the organization, procedure and activities of the commission. The rules and regulations shall not be effective until approved by the city council. The city traffic engineer and the chief of police or their designees shall attend all meetings of the commission. 
(Prior code § 2444)  
2.20.040 - Duties and authority. 
A.  The commission shall have the following duties and authority: 
1.  To recommend to the city council the most practical means for coordinating the activities of all offices and agencies of the city having responsibility with respect to the administration or enforcement of traffic regulations; and 
2.  To review long-range capital outlay plans for the city as they apply to parking and transportation within the city and make recommendations regarding such plans to the city council; and 
3.  To review and comment on environmental impact reports as they apply to parking and transportation within the city; and 
4.  To receive complaints having to do with parking and transportation within the city, and recommend the disposition thereof to the city council; and 
5.  To study and recommend to the city council where school crossing guards should be situated within the city; and 
6.  To issue permits for parades within the city; and 
7.  To determine where signs for no stopping, standing or parking of vehicles, signs for stopping and standing of vehicles for periods of not more than twenty minutes or one hour or two hours where necessary, should be located, and to direct the city traffic engineer to post the necessary signs giving notice thereof; and 
8.  To determine areas where parking should be prohibited between the hours of two a.m. and six a.m. 
B.  Commission decisions made pursuant to subdivisions 6, 7 and 8 of subsection A of this section shall be final and conclusive on the twentieth calendar day following the date of commission's decision to the city council. The denial of a parade permit may be appealed to the city council in accordance with the provisions of Section 12.12.090. Such an appeal may be made by any interested person; the appeals shall be in writing, and must be timely filed with the city clerk-treasurer. The city clerk-treasurer shall not accept such an appeal for filing unless a filing and processing fee, in an amount set by the city council, is paid by the party offering the appeal for filing. 
(Ord. 2819 § 2, 2003; Ord. 2577 § 5, 1992; Ord 2362 § 1, 1985; prior code § 2445)  
2.20.050 - Officers. 
The commission shall elect its own chairman and vice chairman at the first meeting, which shall be convened after July 1st of each year. 
(Prior code § 2443)  
2.20.060 - Compensation. 
No compensation shall be paid commission members as such. However, members may be entitled to reasonable and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties as commission members, subject to prior approval of the city council and provided further, that the total of the expenditures shall not exceed the amount budgeted. 
(Prior code § 2447)  
2.20.080 - Staff. 
There shall be paid staff appointed by the city manager and approved by the city council whose duties shall be to carry out the daily activities pertaining to parking and transportation needs. This staff person shall serve as the secretary to the commission and shall record accurate minutes of meetings held by the commission, furnishing copies of all such minutes to the city council. 
(Prior code § 2446)  
Chapter 2.24 - PERSONNEL BOARD 
 
2.24.010 - Created. 
There is created and established a personnel board in conformity with Article VII of the Charter of the city. 
(Prior code § 2460)  
2.24.030 - Duties and functions. 
The personnel board shall annually select one of its members as chairman and shall determine the order of business for the conduct of its meetings, which shall be held regularly if so required by the rules, or on call of the chairman or three members of the board. Three members of the board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. The functions of the board shall be: 
A.  To consider and recommend to the council a set of rules and regulations and revisions and amendments thereof to supplement this chapter. All rules and regulations so recommended shall be consistent with the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  To act in an advisory capacity to the council on problems concerning personnel administration. 
C.  As provided in this chapter and by the rules and regulations, to hear appeals submitted by any person in the classified service relative to any situation connected with his employment status or condition of employment. Upon the conclusion of any such hearing, the personnel board shall certify to its findings to the council and make such recommendations as it may deem warranted, and the council shall consider such recommendations in any decision it may make. 
D.  In any investigation or hearing conducted by the board, it shall have the power to examine witnesses under oath and compel their attendance or the production of evidence before it by subpoenas issued in the name of the city and attested by the city clerk-treasurer. It shall be the duty of the chief of police to cause all such subpoenas to be served and refusal of a person to attend or to testify in answer to such subpoena shall subject the person to prosecution in the same manner set forth by law for failure to appear before the council in response to a subpoena issued by the council. Each member of the personnel board shall have the power to administer oaths to witnesses. 
E.  To hold hearings and make recommendations to the council on the adoption or revision of the position classification plan. The council shall adopt a position classification plan and class specifications and revisions thereof and allocate and reallocate positions in the classified service to classes in the classification plan. 
(Prior code § 2461.1)  
2.24.040 - Personnel officer. 
The council shall appoint a personnel officer whose duty it shall be to act in the capacity of clerk for the personnel program. The duties of the office of personnel officer may be combined with those of any other office in the event the work involved does not warrant, in the discretion of the council, the creation of a special position. The personnel officer shall: 
A.  Be the custodian of all personnel records and shall be the official upon or with whom all notices, requests for hearings, complaints and other official documents shall be served and filed; 
B.  Attend all meetings of the personnel board; 
C.  Administer all provisions of this chapter and the rules established under this chapter, not specifically reserved to the council or the personnel board; 
D.  Under the direction of the personnel board, prepare rules and amendments thereof, for the consideration of the personnel board; 
E.  Under the direction of the personnel board, prepare a position, classification plan, class specifications and divisions thereof, for the consideration of the personnel board. 
(Prior code § 2461.2)  
2.24.050 - Classified services. 
A.  The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all appointees, officers and employees of the city except the following: 
2.  City clerk-treasurer, city manager, city attorney, department heads, other positions as may be so designated by resolution of the city council, and all elective officers of the city elected pursuant to the laws of the state and the Charter of this city; 
3.  Members of the appointive boards, commissions and committees; 
5.  Casual, part-time or full-time temporary, casual, seasonal or emergency employees of any office or department; 
6.  All employees in any office or department receiving an hourly or per diem wage or salary; 
8.  Appointees, officers and employees of the county doing contractual work for the city; 
9.  Disaster volunteer appointees, officers or employees appointed to such positions pursuant to the city disaster ordinance. 
B.  All employees of the city except those specifically exempted in subsection A of this section shall constitute the classified service of the city. All appointees, officers and employees excluded from the classified service of the city shall abide and be governed by the personnel rules and regulations that may be specifically adopted for said employees by the city council. 
(Ord. 2577 §§ 7—12, 1992; Amended during 1983 codification; prior code § 2461.3)  
2.24.060 - Rules adoption. 
In addition to such other matters as may be necessary and proper to carry out the intent and purposes of this chapter, rules shall be formulated by the personnel board, subject to approval by the city council, establishing specific procedures to govern the following phases of the personnel programs: 
A.  The preparation, installation, revision and maintenance of a position classification plan covering all positions in the classified service; 
B.  The formation of minimum standards and qualifications for each class providing that, all things being equal, preference shall be given applicants who are residents of the city, but the council may authorize open recruitment whenever it deems this procedure necessary in the best interests of the public service; 
C.  The public announcement of vacancies and pending examinations and the acceptance of applications for employment; 
D.  The preparation and conduct of examinations and the establishment of employment lists containing names of persons eligible for appointment; 
E.  The certification and appointment of persons from employment lists to fill vacancies and the making of temporary and emergency appointments; 
F.  The evaluation of employees; 
G.  The transfer, promotion, demotion and reinstatement of employees in the competitive service; 
H.  The separation from the service of employees through layoff, suspension, dismissal and for incapacity to perform required duties; 
I.  The development of employee morale and training programs; 
J.  The maintenance and use of necessary records and forms. 
(Ord. 2577 § 13, 1992; prior code § 2461.4)  
2.24.070 - Appointments. 
A.  Appointments and promotions to vacant positions in the classified service shall be made in accordance with the rules established under this chapter, from employment lists and promotional lists resulting from competitive examination or by transfer, demotion or reinstatement. 
B.  Appointments shall be made by the council or by the officer in whom the power to make appointments is vested by law. 
C.  If appointment is to be made from employment or promotional lists, the names of persons willing to accept appointment shall be certified by the personnel officer to the appointment power in the order they appear on the lists. The personnel officer shall certify a minimum of three to each eligible list whenever possible. 
D.  In the absence of appropriate employment lists, a temporary appointment may be made by the appointing power; provided, however, that an employment list shall be established for the position within ninety days. A person so appointed must meet the minimum qualifications for the position. No person shall be employed by the city under temporary appointment for a total of more than six months in any fiscal year. The temporary appointment shall not be construed as being a probationary appointment. In the event of emergency, the appointing power may appoint such persons as are required to meet the emergency, but the appointment shall not exceed thirty working days. 
E.  No credit shall be allowed in the giving of any examination or the establishment of any employment or promotional lists for service rendered under a temporary appointment. 
F.  During the period of suspension of any employee, or pending final action on proceeding to review the suspension, demotion or dismissal of any employee, the vacancy so created may be filled by a temporary employment by the appointing power from the appropriate employment list. The employee thus temporarily employed holds the position subject to the final disposition of the suspension or dismissal proceedings. 
(Prior code § 2461.5)  
2.24.080 - Probationary period. 
All original and promotional appointments shall be for a probationary period of six months, except sworn police personnel which shall be for a probationary period of twelve months, during which the employee may be rejected by the appointing power, upon assigning reasons therefor in writing in accordance with Section 2.24.110. The name of the discharged probationer may at his request be restored to the eligible list with its original percentage in the discretion of the board. The restoration, however, shall not permit the certification to the position or department from which the probationer has been dismissed, except on the written request of the appointing power. An employee rejected during the probationary period from a position to which he has been promoted shall be reinstated to the position from which he has been promoted unless charges are filed and he is discharged as provided in this chapter and the rules. 
(Amended during 1984 codification; prior code § 2461.6)  
2.24.090 - Status of persons employed on August 25, 1950. 
A.  Any person now holding a permanent position or employment included in the classified service who, on the twenty-fifth day of August, 1950, had served continuously in the position, or any person holding some other position not included in the classified service, for a period of at least six months immediately prior to the twenty-fifth day of August, 1950, shall assume regular status in the classified service in the position held on such effective date without preliminary examination or working tests and shall thereafter be subject in all respects to the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  Any other persons holding positions or employments in the classified service shall be regarded as holding their positions or employment as probationers who are serving out the balance of their probationary periods before obtaining regular status. 
(Prior code § 2461.7)  
2.24.100 - Powers of council and officers. 
The council and any other officer in whom is vested by law the power to make transfers, promotions, demotions, reinstatements, layoffs, and to suspend or dismiss employees, shall retain such power subject to the provisions of this chapter and the rules established under this chapter where not inconsistent with the laws of the state or the city Charter, it being the intent and spirit of this chapter to improve the efficiency of the public service by providing a fair and just approach to municipal employment in order that city employees may be selected and promoted on a merit basis. 
(Prior code § 2461.8)  
2.24.110 - Removal or suspension of employees. 
A.  Every officer and employee in the competitive service shall retain his office or employment so long as it exists under the same or a different title, during good behavior, and shall be suspended, fined, demoted, removed, reduced in compensation as a punishment or otherwise penalized only as provided in this section. 
B.  This section is subject, however, to every provision of the Constitution and applicable state statutes designating a general ground or general grounds of forfeiture of office or employment, or imposing a criminal liability. No person who has served the probationary period in a permanent office or employment as provided for in this chapter shall be removed therefrom or penalized therein, other than as provided in this chapter except on written charges by the council or appointing officer; the written charges shall be specific as to time, place and circumstances and after opportunity to be heard in his own defense personally or by counsel. Pending the hearing the appointing authority may suspend the accused for not more than thirty days, unless the hearing is delayed beyond the time by act of the accused. A copy of the charges and place of hearing shall be given the accused personally or shall be mailed to him by registered mail at his last known address by the personnel board not later than ten days before the hearing. If he fails to appear thereat without showing good cause for such failure to appear, he may be dismissed without further proceedings. If he appears at the time and place set, the personnel board shall publicly hear the charges and within ten days after concluding the hearing, the personnel board shall certify its findings to the council together with its recommendation that the accused be exonerated, reprimanded, fined, suspended, demoted or dismissed. The council shall then affirm or modify the action taken as in its judgment seems warranted. The personnel board shall hear and act on every signed written complaint, specific as to time, place and circumstance, filed against any officer or employee. Any penalty provided for in this chapter may be imposed for incompetence, habitual intemperance, immoral conduct, insubordination, repeated discourteous treatment of the public and fellow employees, dishonesty, conviction of a felony, inattention to duties, engaging in prohibited political activity, acts inimical to the public service, physical or mental incompetency, or other ground of penalty or forfeiture specified by the Constitution. The provisions of this section shall not apply to reductions in pay which are a part of a general plan to reduce salaries and wages as an economy measure or as part of a general curtailment program. 
C.  Nothing in this section shall restrict the right to make bona fide reductions in force or to enact legislation requiring retirement for disability or age. 
(Prior code § 2461.9)  
2.24.120 - Abolition of positions. 
Whenever in the judgment of the council it becomes necessary in the interest of economy or because the necessity for the position involved no longer exists, the council may abolish any position or employment in the competitive service and thereby reduce the personnel by laying off employees without the filing of written charges or without the right of appeal. In reducing the personnel and laying off any employee or employees through the abolition of position, the council shall observe the seniority rule. The name of the employee or employees so laid off shall be placed at the top of the appropriate employment list or lists as provided by the rules. 
(Prior code § 2461.10)  
2.24.130 - Military service. 
Any permanent employee in the classified service of the city in good standing, who enlists or is enlisted in the armed forces of the United States of America engaged in a war declared by the Congress or proclaimed by the President of the United States, shall be on leave of absence, without pay, from the date of his enlistment until ninety days after the termination of his service thereunder, at which time, or earlier if he desires, upon presentation of a certificate of honorable discharge from, or satisfactory termination of, the services, the employee shall be restored to the position in which he was employed at the time of his enlistment, if he is still qualified to perform the duties of the position. 
(Prior code § 2461.11)  
2.24.140 - Solicitation of contributions. 
No officer, agent, clerk, or employee, under the government of the city, and no candidate for any city office, shall directly or indirectly solicit or receive or be in any manner concerned in soliciting or receiving any assessment, subscription or contribution, whether voluntary or involuntary, for any political purpose whatever, from anyone on the employment lists or holding any position under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 2461.13)  
2.24.150 - Contracting for services. 
The council may contract with any reputable public or private agency for the performance of technical personnel services as needed. 
(Prior code § 2461.14)  
2.24.160 - Appropriation of funds. 
The council shall appropriate such funds as are necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 2461.15)  
2.24.170 - Compliance with initiative ordinance. 
The council declares that it is the intent of this chapter to operate a personnel system for the employees of the city placed in the classified service in this chapter in conjunction with Ordinance No. 1048, an initiative ordinance of the city adopted by the electors and providing a personnel system for the appointees, officers and employees of the police department of the city. The personnel board and personnel officer appointed by the council pursuant to Ordinance No. 1048 shall be the personnel board and personnel officer appointed pursuant to the terms of this chapter. Insofar as possible, Section 2.24.010 of this code (established by Ordinance No. 1048) and the provisions of this chapter shall be operated as a whole, it being the intent that there shall be but one personnel system in the city. 
(Ord. 2869 § 7, 2006: amended during 1984 codification; prior code § 2461.16)  
2.24.180 - Recruitment and training of police officers. 
The recruitment and training of police officers of the city shall hereafter be in accordance with the standards as established from time to time by the Commission on Peace Officers' Standards and Training of the Department of Justice of the state, created pursuant to Section 13500 et seq. of the Penal Code of the state. 
(Prior code § 2461.17)  
Chapter 2.28 - PLANNING COMMISSION 
 
2.28.010 - Created. 
There is created and established a planning commission in conformity with Article VII of the Charter of the city. 
(Prior code § 2410)  
2.28.020 - Planning department created. 
In accordance with the provisions of Section 601 of the Charter of the city, the council creates and establishes a department of planning, which department shall be in charge of and headed by a planning director. 
(Prior code § 2411)  
Chapter 2.32 - REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY 
 
2.32.010 - Created. 
A.  There is created in and for the city a redevelopment agency. The city council of the city shall be and act as the agency. 
B.  The agency created by this section shall operate and exercise its powers pursuant to the Community Redevelopment Law of the state (Section 33000 et seq. of the Health and Safety Code of the state), except as provided in Section 33204 of the Community Redevelopment Law. 
(Prior code § 2130)  
Chapter 2.36 - SOCIAL SERVICES COMMISSION 
 
2.36.010 - Created. 
There is created and established for the city a social services commission, termed in this chapter "commission," which commission shall be concerned with the study and recommendation of matters pertaining to the social needs of the community and the local government responsibility therefor. 
(Prior code § 2462)  
2.36.020 - Purpose. 
The commission's general purpose will be to advise the city council on the development of a social element to the general plan, to assess social changes and needs of the community, to define social goals for the community, to review social programs being offered by any and all organizations operating within the city, to suggest priorities pertaining to unmet social needs, and to provide a forum within city government where planning and debate on these issues can be carried out. 
(Prior code § 2462.1)  
2.36.030 - Appointment. 
The commission shall consist of five members who shall be appointed by the city council. Membership eligibility is established as follows: 
A.  Each appointee shall be a resident of the city. 
B.  The commission shall reflect the composition of the city as nearly as possible. 
C.  Officials of the city shall not be eligible for appointment as members to this commission. 
(Prior code § 2462.2) 
(Ord. No. 3095 , § 2, 10-23-2018)  
2.36.050 - Organization. 
The commission shall elect its own chairman and vice chairman at the first meeting which is convened as soon as practicable after the appointments have been made and shall reorganize on an annual basis, effective July 1st of each year. 
(Prior code § 2462.5)  
2.36.060 - Powers and duties. 
The commission shall have the following duties: 
A.  To meet at least monthly; 
B.  To advise the city council on all matters relating to social conditions within the city; 
C.  To assess and report to the city safety council the social needs of the citizenry; 
D.  To work in cooperation with any appointed staff in developing policy and programs directed toward meeting such needs and making appropriate recommendations to the city council in this regard; 
E.  Perform such other duties as are not inconsistent with the City Charter and which may be delegated or prescribed by the city council; 
F.  This commission shall not have authority to obligate, by contract or otherwise, the city in any manner; 
G.  With the exception of any staff specifically assigned to work with the commission, contact with other staff, boards or commissions shall be cleared through the city manager's office. 
(Prior code § 2462.6)  
2.36.070 - Staff. 
There shall be paid staff appointed by the city manager and approved by the city council whose duties shall be to carry out the daily activities pertaining to social needs as authorized by the city council. This staff person shall serve as the secretary to the commission and shall record accurate minutes of meetings held by the commission, furnishing copies of all such minutes to the city council. 
(Prior code § 2462.7)  
2.36.080 - Compensation. 
No compensation shall be paid commission members as such; however members may be entitled to reasonable and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties as commission members, subject to prior approval by the city council and provided further that the total of such expenditures shall not exceed the amount budgeted. 
(Prior code § 2462.8)  
Chapter 2.40 - ADDITIONAL DEPARTMENTS 
 
2.40.010 - Building and safety department. 
In accordance with the provisions of Section 601 of the Charter of the city, the council creates and establishes a building and safety department, which department shall be in charge of and headed by a director of building and safety. 
(Prior code § 2470)  
2.40.020 - Public works department. 
In accordance with the provisions of Section 601 of the Charter of the city, the council creates and establishes a public works department, which department shall be in charge of and headed by a director of public works-city engineer-superintendent of streets responsible for the divisions of engineering, solid waste collection and disposal, water, sewer, streets, fleet and civic center maintenance. 
( Ord. No. 3028, § 1 , 4-14-15) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3028, § 1, adopted April 14, 2015, amended § 2.40.020 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 2.40.020 pertained to engineering department, and derived from prior code § 2471.  
2.40.030 - Police department. 
In accordance with the provisions of Section 601 of the Charter of the city, the council creates and establishes a police department, which department shall be in charge of and headed by a chief of police. 
(Prior code § 2473)  
2.40.040 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3043, § 1 , adopted Oct. 27, 2015, repealed § 2.40.040, which pertained to sanitation department and derived from Prior code, § 2474.  
2.40.050 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3043, § 1 , adopted Oct. 27, 2015, repealed § 2.40.050, which pertained to street maintenance department and derived from Prior code, § 2475.  
2.40.060 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3043, § 1 , adopted Oct. 27, 2015, repealed § 2.40.060, which pertained to water department and derived from Prior code, § 2476.  
2.40.070 - Department head authority—Exception to competitive bidding requirement. 
The department heads authorized to execute contracts for public work projects are authorized to seek proposals from qualified private entities ("contractors") for design-build construction without being required to follow competitive bidding procedures, under the following conditions: 
A.  Before any request for proposals is issued on a project, the department head shall determine that a design-build program is necessary or appropriate, finding at least one of the following circumstances relating to the proposed project, and shall communicate such finding to the city council and generally describing the proposed project: 
1.  Competitive proposals for the project would be unavailing or would not produce an advantage for the city; 
2.  Competitive bidding would be undesirable, impractical, futile or impossible; 
3.  Public interest would be served by avoiding competitive bidding procedures, including the best overall economic result for the public relating to the proposed project. 
B.  Before any request for proposals is issued on a project, the department head shall obtain approval for the solicitation of design-build proposals by the mayor, unless the proposed public works project is for the use or benefit of a department that is under the jurisdiction of a commission, in which case the commission's approval shall be obtained in place of the mayor's. 
C.  Contractors submitting design-build proposals shall offer evidence of qualifications in the field of design and construction of similar projects or of skills relating to proposed project. The department head may request contractors to create partial designs, which will be evaluated as part of the selection process. 
D.  All solicitations for design-build proposals shall require contractors to agree not to discriminate against any employee, city employee working with such contractor or subcontractor on the proposed project, or applicant for employment with such contractor or subcontractor on the basis of the fact or perception of that person's race, color, religion, ancestry, national origin, age, sex, marital status or disability, or association with members of those classes or persons. 
E.  The department head shall evaluate developers' proposals and rank the proposals to determine which provides the best overall benefit and value to the city, according to the following criteria: 
1.  Time period for completion of the proposed project; 
2.  Cost to the city, including both short-term and long-term costs; 
3.  Qualifications of the contractors to design the proposed project; 
4.  Qualifications of the contractors to construct the proposed project; 
5.  Quality of design proposal; 
6.  Compliance with all the requirements and criteria established by the department head in the request for proposals. 
F.  Subject to final approval by the city council, the department head is authorized to negotiate with the highest ranked contractor for all items necessary and appropriate for the proposed project. If the department head determines that contract negotiations with the highest-ranked contractor are not proceeding satisfactorily, the department head may terminate such negotiations and enter into negotiations with the next-highest-ranked contractor. If the department head deems a contract to have successfully been negotiated with a contractor, the department head may then recommend such proposed contract to the city council for final approval by way of resolution, adopted by at least four affirmative votes. The city council shall retain the absolute discretion to determine not to proceed with any proposed project, which right may be exercised without liability to contractors for costs incurred during the entire proposal and negotiation process, and such rights shall be reserved in all requests for proposals. 
G.  All actions heretofore taken by a department head consistent with the provisions of this section are hereby deemed approved by the city. 
(Ord. 2783 § 1, 2001)  
Chapter 2.44 - EMERGENCY ORGANIZATION 
 
2.44.010 - Purposes. 
The declared purposes of this chapter are to provide for the preparation and carrying out of plans for the protection of persons and property within this city in the event of an emergency; the direction of the emergency organization; and the coordination of the emergency functions of this city with all other public agencies, corporations, organizations, and affected private persons. 
(Ord. 2309 § 1(part), 1983: prior code § 2450)  
2.44.020 - Emergency defined. 
As used in this chapter, "emergency" means the actual or threatened existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within this city caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot or earthquake, or other conditions, including conditions resulting from war or imminent threat of war, but other than conditions resulting from a labor controversy, which conditions are or are likely to be beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment and facilities of the city, requiring the combined forces of other political subdivisions to combat. 
(Ord. 2309 § 1(part), 1983: prior code § 2450.1)  
2.44.030 - Disaster council—Membership. 
The city disaster council is created, and shall consist of the following: 
A.  The mayor, who shall be chairman; 
B.  The director of emergency services, who shall be vice chairman; 
C.  The assistant director of emergency services; 
D.  Such chiefs of emergency services as are provided for in a current emergency plan of this city, adopted pursuant to this chapter; 
E.  Such representatives of civic, business, labor, veterans, professional, or other organizations having an official emergency responsibility, as may be appointed by the director with the advice and consent of the city council. 
(Ord. 2309 § 1(part), 1983: prior code § 2450.2)  
2.44.040 - Disaster council—Powers and duties. 
It shall be the duty of the city disaster council, and it is empowered, to develop and recommend for adoption by the city council, emergency and mutual-aid plans and agreements, and such ordinances and resolutions and rules and regulations as are necessary to implement such plans and agreements. The disaster council shall meet upon call of the chairman or, in his absence from the city or inability to call such meeting, upon call of the vice chairman. 
(Ord. 2309 § 1(part), 1983: prior code § 2450.3)  
2.44.050 - Director and assistant director of emergency services—Offices created. 
A.  There is created the office of director of emergency services. The city manager shall be the director of emergency services. 
B.  There is created the office of assistant director of emergency services, who shall be appointed by the director. 
(Ord. 2309 § 1(part), 1983: prior code § 2450.4)  
2.44.060 - Director and assistant director of emergency services—Powers and duties. 
A.  The director is empowered to: 
1.  Request the city council to proclaim the existence or threatened existence of a "local emergency" if the city council is in session, or to issue such proclamation if the city council is not in session. Whenever a local emergency is proclaimed by the director, the city council shall take action to ratify the proclamation within seven days thereafter or the proclamation shall have no further force or effect; 
2.  Request the Governor to proclaim a "state of emergency" when, in the opinion of the director, the locally available resources are inadequate to cope with the emergency; 
3.  Control and direct the effort of the emergency organization of this city for the accomplishment of the purposes of this chapter; 
4.  Direct cooperation between and coordination of services and staff of the emergency organization of this city, and resolve questions of authority and responsibility that may arise between them; 
5.  Represent this city in all dealings with the public or private agencies on matters pertaining to emergencies as defined in this chapter; 
6.  In the event of the proclamation of a "local emergency" as provided in this section, the proclamation of a "state of emergency" by the Governor or the Director of the State Office of Emergency Services, or the existence of a "state of war emergency," the director is empowered: 
a.  To make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by such emergency; provided, however, such rules and regulations must be confirmed at the earliest practicable time by the city council, 
b.  To obtain vital supplies, equipment, and such other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of life and property and to bind the city for the fair value thereof and, if required immediately, to commandeer the same for public use, 
c.  To require emergency services of any city officer or employee and, in the event of the proclamation of a "state of emergency" in the county in which this city is located or the existence of a "state of war emergency," to command the aid of as many citizens of this community as he deems necessary in the execution of his duties; such persons shall be entitled to all privileges, benefits and immunities as are provided by state law for registered disaster service workers; 
d.  To requisition necessary personnel or material of any city department or agency; and 
e.  To execute all of his ordinary power as city manager, all of the special powers conferred upon him by this chapter or by resolution or emergency plan pursuant hereto adopted by the city council, all powers conferred upon him by any statute, by any agreement approved by the city council, and by any other lawful authority. 
B.  The director of emergency services shall designate the order of succession to that office, to take effect in the event the director is unavailable to attend meetings and otherwise perform his duties during an emergency. Such order of succession shall be approved by the city council. 
C.  The assistant director shall, under the supervision of the director and with the assistance of the emergency service chiefs, develop emergency plans and manage the emergency programs of this city, and shall have such other powers and duties as may be assigned by the director. 
(Ord. 2309 § 1(part), 1983: prior code § 2450.5)  
2.44.070 - Emergency organization—Composition. 
All officers and employees of this city, together with those volunteer forces enrolled to aid them during an emergency, and all groups, organizations and persons who may, by agreement or operation of law, including persons impressed into service under the provisions of subsection A6c of Section 2.44.060, charged with duties incident to the protection of life and property in this city during such emergency, shall constitute the emergency organization of the city. 
(Ord. 2309 § 1(part), 1983: prior code § 2450.6)  
2.44.080 - Emergency plan. 
The city disaster council shall be responsible for the development of the city emergency plan, which plan shall provide for the effective mobilization of all of the resources of the city, both public and private, to meet any condition constituting a local emergency, and shall provide for the organization, powers and duties, services and staff of the emergency organization. Such plan shall take effect upon adoption by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 2309 § 1(part), 1983: prior code § 2450.7)  
2.44.090 - Expenditures. 
Any expenditures made in connection with emergency activities, including mutual-aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the city. 
(Ord. 2309 § 1(part), 1983: prior code § 2450.8)  
2.44.100 - Violations—Penalties. 
It shall be a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not to exceed five hundred dollars, or by imprisonment for not to exceed six months, or both, for any person, during an emergency, to: 
A.  Wilfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him by virtue of this chapter; 
B.  Do any act forbidden by any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, if the act is of such a nature as to give, or be likely to give, assistance to the enemy, or to imperil the lives and property of inhabitants of this city, or to prevent, hinder or delay the defense or protection thereof; 
C.  Wear, carry or display, without authority, any means of identification specified by the emergency agency of the state. 
(Ord. 2309 § 1(part), 1983: prior code § 2450.9)  
Chapter 2.48 - EMPLOYEES' COMPENSATION BENEFITS AND FUND 
 
2.48.010 - Administration. 
The city manager is charged with the administration of the city workmen's compensation program, and the employees' compensation fund, as referred to in this code. The city manager shall be empowered to take all steps reasonably necessary to insure the prompt, expeditious, and fair handling and processing of all valid claims filed by officers and employees of the city with respect to workmen's compensation benefits. 
(Prior code § 2310)  
2.48.020 - Fund created. 
There is created a fund which shall be known as the "employees' compensation fund." All moneys heretofore appropriated, budgeted or otherwise set aside for the payment of industrial accident claims, or premiums for workmen's compensation insurance are transferred to the fund. The fund shall be increased and maintained from year to year, in amounts deemed sufficient by the council to pay the industrial accident compensation claims and administration by an appropriation by the council in its annual budget and, in the event of unexpectedly large or numerous claims, by special appropriations by the council. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed as barring the city from carrying excess compensation insurance in any desirable form or amount. 
(Prior code § 2310.10)  
2.48.030 - Purpose of fund. 
A.  It is the purpose of this chapter to provide the payment of compensation to employees of the city, for industrial accidents sustained in the course and scope of their employment, and for the dependents of employees who die as the result of such accidents, in all cases in which the employees or dependents would be entitled thereto under the applicable provisions of the Labor Code of the state. The right of the employees and dependents of deceased employees to receive compensation shall be determined by the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of the Labor Code. 
B.  The total compensation to be paid any city employee in case of disability, except "public safety employees," defined as such by the Public Employees Retirement Act of the state, Section 20,000 et seq. of the Government Code, but including elected and appointed officials of the city, shall be paid from the inception of the disability and in all cases, including the total and partial disability, the rate of compensation shall be as follows: 
1.  Miscellaneous employees, defined as such in the Public Employees Retirement Law, who have worked less than five years continuously for the city and who have attained permanent status with the city, shall be entitled to two calendar months' full pay during any absence from work necessitated by any disability or injury arising out of or in connection with his employment with the city. 
2.  Miscellaneous employees who have worked not less than five nor more then ten years continuously for the city shall be entitled to five calendar months' full pay during any absence from work necessitated by any disability or injury arising out of or in connection with his employment with the city. 
3.  Miscellaneous employees who have worked ten years continuously for the city shall be entitled to eight calendar months' full pay during any absence from work necessitated by any disability or injury arising out of or in connection with his employment with the city. 
C.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the city manager shall reduce the amount of any payments authorized pursuant to subdivisions 1, 2 or 3 of subsection B of this section, to any such employee, by an amount equal to any moneys earned from other employment by the employee during any such period of disability. 
D.  For the purpose of calculating an employees' eligibility, in terms of the continuous employment by the city, referred to in subdivisions 1, 2 and 3 of subsection B of this section, leaves of absence, other than sick leave or vacation leave, shall not be counted as continuous employment. 
(Prior code § 2310.11)  
2.48.040 - Disability payments. 
Payments of compensation for disability to public safety employees shall be that authorized by the applicable provisions of the Labor Code of the state and the Public Employees Retirement Act of the state. No public safety employee shall be entitled to any compensation pursuant to subdivisions 1, 2 or 3 of subsection B of Section 2.48.030. 
(Prior code § 2310.12)  
2.48.050 - Processing claims. 
The city manager shall establish rules and regulations, including appropriate forms, for processing claims of employees of the city, with regard to workmen's compensation benefits, and the benefits provided in lieu thereof by the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 2310.13)  
Chapter 2.50 - HISTORIC RESOURCES COMMISSION 
 
2.50.010 - Creation. 
There is created and established for the city, a historic resources commission, hereinafter in this part, termed "commission," which commission shall be concerned with the study and recommendation on matters pertaining to the city's historic resources. 
(Ord. 2671 § 1, 1995: Ord. 2667 § 1, 1995; Ord. 2595 § 1 (part), 1993)  
2.50.020 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the commission shall be to advise the city council regarding policies, programs and procedures necessary to implement the historic resources element of the general plan. 
(Ord. 2595 § 1 (part), 1993)  
2.50.030 - Membership. 
The commission shall consist of five members who shall be appointed by, and serve at the pleasure of, the city council and shall have a demonstrated interest, competence or knowledge in historic preservation in the disciplines of architecture, history, architectural history, planning, archeology or other preservation-related disciplines. 
(Ord. 2595 § 1 (part), 1993)  
2.50.040 - Powers and duties. 
The commission shall have the following powers and duties in addition to those otherwise expressly provided in this chapter: 
A.  To advise the city council on matters relating to historic resources of the city; 
B.  To oversee a continuing survey of the city so as to recommend designation of historic buildings and/or districts; 
C.  To recommend to the city council that certain areas, buildings or structures be designated historic buildings and historic districts; 
D.  To recommend amendment of appropriate and/or conflicting provisions of the zoning regulations; 
E.  To keep current and publish a register of historic buildings and historic districts; 
F.  To recommend to the city council steps to encourage public understanding of and involvement in the unique architectural and environmental heritage of the city through educational and interpretive programs; 
G.  To encourage the protection, retention and use of any designated or potential historic buildings and/or historic districts; 
H.  To recommend and encourage the protection, enhancement, appreciation and use of structures of historical, cultural, architectural, community or aesthetic value, which have not been designated as historic buildings but are deserving of recognition, so as to emphasize their importance to Whittier. The commission may recommend to the city council steps desirable to recognize these structures without imposing any regulations or controls upon them; 
I.  To encourage cooperation between cultural heritage groups, public and private; and 
J.  To review redevelopment plans, and make recommendations to the city council as to proposed historic buildings or historic districts within the area covered by such plan; 
K.  To not obligate, by contract or otherwise, the city in any manner. 
(Ord. 2595 § 1 (part), 1993)  
2.50.050 - Staff. 
There shall be paid staff appointed by the city manager whose duties shall be to carry out the daily activities pertaining to historic resources as authorized by the city council. This staff person shall serve as the secretary to the commission and shall record accurate minutes of the meetings held by the commission, furnishing copies of all such minutes to the city council. With the exception of any staff specifically assigned to work with the commission, contact with other staff, boards or commissions shall be cleared through the city manager's office. 
(Ord. 2595 § 1 (part), 1993)  
2.50.060 - Initial appointments. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter to the contrary, members of the historic resources commission shall initially be appointed and serve the following terms: 
A.  Office No. 1, for the term of one year; and 
B.  Office No. 2, for the term of two years; and 
C.  Office No. 3, for the term of three years; and 
D.  Office Nos. 4 and 5, for the term of four years. 
(Ord. 2671 § 2, 1995)  
Chapter 2.52 - ELECTIONS 
 
2.52.010 - General municipal election. 
General municipal elections for the election of officers and for such other purposes as the city council may prescribe shall be held in the city of Whittier on the same day as the statewide direct primary election, as defined in the California Elections Code, beginning in 2020. 
(Ord. No. 3081 , § 2, 12-12-17; Ord. No. 3093 , § 3, 9-11-18)  
Chapter 2.54 - CAMPAIGN FINANCE DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS 
Sections: 
 
2.54.010 - Application. 
The provisions of this chapter are applicable to persons, including candidates and committees, participating in a municipal election within the city and are in addition to the requirements of the Political Reform Act of 1974, as amended, whose provisions, definitions and interpretations are to be relied upon in administering this chapter. 
(Ord. 2611 § 1 (part), 1993)  
2.54.020 - Citation. 
This chapter shall be cited as the "City of Whittier Election Campaign Finance Disclosure Requirements." 
(Ord. 2611 § 1 (part), 1993)  
2.54.030 - Definitions. 
Definitions codified in the Political Reform Act, beginning at Section 82000 et seq., shall apply to this chapter notwithstanding the fact that the following words shall have the meanings ascribed to them by the definitions set forth in this particular section. 
"Election" means any municipal election in the city, including elections to fill public offices, elections on measures and propositions, initiatives and referenda. 
"Organization" means any entity other than an individual, political action committee or controlled committee of a candidate, but including any corporation, association, partnership, joint venture, syndicate, business trust, company, labor organization, labor union, political party, and any other organization or group of persons acting in concert, whether organized for profit or not. 
"Political Action Committee" means any committee as defined under California state law, other than a controlled committee of a candidate. 
(Ord. 2611 § 1 (part), 1993)  
2.54.040 - Return of contributions. 
A contribution shall not be considered to be received if it is not negotiated, deposited or utilized in any way, and in addition if it is returned to the donor within seven days of receipt or prior to the closing date of the campaign statement on which it would otherwise be reported, whichever is sooner. 
(Ord. 2638 § 1, 1994: Ord. 2611 § 1 (part), 1993)  
2.54.050 - Campaign disclosure requirements. 
The purpose of this section is to further the city's goal of an informed electorate. In addition to the campaign statements which every candidate, elected officer and committee involved in a city election is required to file under Government Code Section 84200 et seq., a campaign disclosure statement shall be filed with the city clerk no later than three p.m. on the Friday immediately preceding the city election date. The period covered by the statement shall be from sixteen days before the election through and including the seventh day before the election. 
(Ord. 2611 § 1 (part), 1993)  
2.54.060 - Campaign disclosure document. 
A.  Every candidate, political action committee, or organization that receives campaign contributions or disburses funds on behalf of a campaign for a city election must file a campaign disclosure document with the city clerk. The disclosure must include all contributions, loans, and disbursements received and made during the campaign disclosure period (as defined in Section 2.54.050) in excess of one hundred dollars, including in kind services, donations per person, per political action committee, and per organization. 
B.  The campaign disclosure document required by this section must also include all late contributions and late independent expenditures as defined and described in Government Code Sections 82036, 82036.5, and 84203. 
(Ord. 2611 § 1 (part), 1993) 
(Ord. No. 2945, § 1, 1-12-10; Ord. No. 3089 , § 2, 7-10-18)  
2.54.070 - Reporting form. 
The campaign disclosure document to be submitted to the city clerk shall be consistent with the requirements of California Government Code Section 84203 and all persons, committees or organizations shall comply consistent with and in the manner as required under Government Code Section 84203. 
Effective August 20, 2020, every candidate, political action committee, or organization required to file campaign disclosure documents, shall file the statement with the city clerk in an electronic format. The requirements contained in Government Code Section 84615 shall apply to all electronic filings. 
(Ord. 2611 § 1 (part), 1993) 
(Ord. No. 3089 , § 3, 7-10-18)  
2.54.080 - Public record. 
Every campaign disclosure statement is a public record which shall be open to inspection at all times during normal city business hours. 
(Ord. 2611 § 1 (part), 1993)  
2.54.090 - Late filing of campaign disclosure statement. 
If any person files a campaign statement after any deadline imposed by this chapter, he or she shall, in addition to any other penalties or remedies established in this chapter, be liable to the city clerk in amounts as set forth by state guidelines until the statement is filed. 
The city clerk shall deposit any funds received under this section into the general funds of the city to defray the cost of municipal elections. 
(Ord. 2611 § 1 (part), 1993)  
2.54.100 - City clerk review. 
In addition to other duties required by law, the city clerk shall monitor all campaign disclosure statements filed pursuant to this chapter. The city clerk shall: 
A.  Determine whether the campaign disclosure statement required by this chapter has been timely filed with the city clerk; and, if so, whether they conform on their face with the requirements of this chapter; 
B.  The candidate or committee may correct any mistake made in the preparation of any statement within forty-eight hours after receipt of the notice from the city clerk or attorney. The city clerk shall notify promptly all persons and known committees who have failed to file a document in the form and at the time required by this chapter; 
C.  The city clerk shall report to the city council, any apparent violations of this chapter which have not been corrected or cannot be corrected by the candidate or committee; 
D.  The city clerk shall compile and maintain, for seven years, a list of campaign disclosure statements, or portions of statements, which the city clerk is required to review. Each list shall be indexed by the candidate's or committee's name. 
(Ord. 2611 § 1 (part), 1993)  
2.54.110 - Enforcement. 
The city attorney or the designated and appointed legal representative for the city shall investigate and where deemed appropriate prosecute any violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2611 § 1 (part), 1993)  
2.54.120 - Penalty. 
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and any person who violates a provision of this chapter shall be liable in a civil action for damages in the amount of two thousand dollars per offense. Upon collection, said sum shall be deposited into the general fund of the city. 
(Ord. 2611 § 1 (part), 1993)  
Chapter 2.56 - ARGUMENTS ON CITY MEASURES 
 
2.56.010 - Arguments for and against measure. 
A.  The legislative body or any member or members of the legislative body authorized by that body, either alone or jointly with any other entity, bona fide association of citizens, individual voters, or any combination thereof; and/or any individual voter who is eligible to vote on a city measure, or bona fide association of citizens, or any combination of voters and associations, may file a written argument for or against any city measure. 
B.  No argument shall exceed a total of three hundred words in length. 
C.  The city elections official shall enclose a printed copy of both arguments with each sample ballot. 
(Ord. 2812 § 1(part), 2002)  
2.56.020 - Rebuttal arguments. 
At the time the city council calls for an election at which a city measure is to be considered by the voters, it shall determine by resolution whether rebuttal arguments regarding such measure shall be permitted. If rebuttal arguments are permitted, the following provisions shall govern such rebuttal arguments: 
A.  The person(s) and/or entity(ies) filing the argument in favor of or against the city measure, may prepare and submit a rebuttal argument. The city council may, by resolution, permit the authors of arguments in favor of or against the city measure to authorize in writing a rebuttal argument to be prepared and submitted by other person(s) and/or entity(ies). The city council may by resolution, permit any other entity, bona fide association of citizens, individual voters eligible to vote on the measure, or any combination thereof, to submit a rebuttal argument. 
B.  No such rebuttal argument shall exceed a total of two hundred and fifty words and shall be filed with the elections official not more than ten days after the final date for filing direct arguments. Rebuttal arguments shall be printed in the same manner as the direct arguments. Each rebuttal argument shall immediately follow the direct argument which it seeks to rebut. 
(Ord. 2812 § 1(part), 2002)  
2.56.030 - Copies of arguments. 
If an argument is submitted to the city elections official against a city measure, and an argument has been filed in favor of the measure, the elections official shall immediately send copies of the argument against the measure to the person(s) and/or entity(ies) filing the argument in favor of the city measure. The elections official shall send copies of the argument in favor of the measure to the person(s) and/or entity(ies) filing the argument against the city measure. 
(Ord. 2812 § 1(part), 2002)  
2.56.040 - Priority for selection of arguments to be printed and distributed to voters. 
If more than one argument for or more than one argument against any city measure is submitted to the city elections official within the time prescribed, he or she shall select one of the arguments in favor and one of the arguments against the measure for printing and distribution to the voters. In selecting the argument the city elections official shall give preference and priority, in the order named, to the arguments of the following: 
A.  The legislative body, or member or members of the legislative body authorized by that body, either alone or jointly with any other entity, bona fide association of citizens, individual voters, or any combination thereof. 
B.  The individual voter, or bona fide association of citizens, or combination of voters and associations, who are the bona fide sponsors or proponents of the measure. 
C.  Bona fide associations of citizens, either alone or in combination with individual voters who are eligible to vote on the measure. 
D.  Individual voters who are eligible to vote on the measure. 
This priority shall apply unless the city council, by resolution, requires that some other priority shall apply in any particular election. 
(Ord. 2812 § 1(part), 2002)  
2.56.050 - Priority for selection of rebuttal arguments to be printed and distributed to voters. 
If rebuttal arguments are permitted, and more than one rebuttal argument to an argument in favor or to an argument against any city measure is submitted to the city elections official within the time prescribed, he or she shall select one of the rebuttal arguments to the argument in favor and one of the rebuttal arguments to the argument against the measure for printing and distribution to the voters. In selecting the rebuttal argument the city elections official shall give preference and priority, in the order named, to the rebuttal arguments of the following: 
A.  The legislative body, or member or members of the legislative body authorized by that body, either alone or jointly with any other entity, bona fide association of citizens, individual voters, or any combination thereof. 
B.  The individual voter, or bona fide association of citizens, or combination of voters and associations, who are the bona fide sponsors or proponents of the measure and who filed a primary argument regarding the measure, or the person(s) or entity(ies) authorized in writing by the author(s) of a primary argument if permitted by resolution applying to that election. 
C.  Bona fide associations of citizens either alone or in combination with individual voters who are eligible to vote on the measure. 
D.  Individual voters who are eligible to vote on the measure. 
This priority shall apply unless the city council, by resolution, requires that some other priority shall apply in any particular election. 
(Ord. 2812 § 1(part), 2002)  
Chapter 2.60 - CITY COUNCIL REVIEW OF DECISIONS OF CITY BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 
 
2.60.010 - City council's right to review decisions and actions of city boards and commissions. 
A.  The city council shall have the right to review the decisions or actions of any city board or commission that reports directly to the city council. Any such review shall be initiated as set forth in subsection 2.60.010(B). Except as may be specifically stated herein to the contrary, any review initiated under this section must comply with all requirements that would ordinarily apply to an appeal from the type of decision or action at issue. This shall specifically include, but shall not be limited to, the duty to provide proper notice, hold public hearings, make appropriate findings and the duty to have the decision first reviewed by other offices, boards or commissions, before being heard by the city council, but only to the degree any such requirement is explicitly set forth in the city code, charter or under applicable law. 
B.  A review under this section may be initiated by any member of the city council by delivering a written request to the city clerk-treasurer or by making a verbal request during the course of an open and public meeting of the city council. If the request is made in writing and is not during an open and public meeting of the council, the city clerk-treasurer shall promptly provide notice of the request to each of the other city council members. If the request is made during a council meeting, the city clerk-treasurer is directed to note the request in the minutes of that meeting. No filing fee shall be required in making a request for review under this section. Notwithstanding anything stated herein to the contrary, any request for review under this section will not be valid unless it is made and delivered to the city clerk-treasurer as provided for herein, within the applicable time period allowed for an appeal under the city code for the decision or action at issue. If there is no appeal period stated in the code for such action or decision, then the request must be made no later than thirty days from the date that the decision or action of the board or commission was issued. Upon receipt of a request for review by the city clerk-treasurer enforcement of the action or decision of the city board or commission at issue shall be stayed. 
C.  Upon receiving a request for review under this section, the city clerk treasurer shall promptly set the matter for review before the city council on the next most convenient agenda. In no case shall the review be held more than sixty days from the date the request was made, or within the period required under the applicable law, whichever period is less. At least ten days prior to the date the matter is set to be heard by the city council, the city clerk-treasurer shall send written notice of the date, time and place set for the hearing to the affected party (if any), and to every interested party shall specifically state that the matter is being reviewed under this section, and shall specify that it will involve a de novo review of all issues. If the decision or action to be reviewed directly concerns an application involving one or more pieces of real property, the city clerk-treasurer shall provide written notice of the hearing to all property owners who own property within three hundred feet of the external boundaries of the subject property. If a public hearing would ordinarily be required, under the city code, the city charter or under applicable law, from the decision or action at issue, then the city council shall be required to hold a public hearing in conjunction with its review under this section. In such case, the city clerk-treasurer shall provide whatever additional notice as may be required under the code, the charter or under applicable law, concerning a review of the decision or action at issue. 
D.  At the date, time and place set for the review/hearing the city council shall conduct a de novo review of all issues. At the conclusion of the hearing, the city council shall make a determination whether the decision or action of the city board or commission shall be approved, conditionally approved, modified or overturned. In its discretion, and prior to making a final decision, the city council may also refer the matter back to a board, commission or committee, for further investigation or analysis. Unless a greater percentage is required under the city code, the city charter or under applicable law, the determination of the city council shall be by resolution adopted by not less than a majority of a quorum of the city council. Where a public hearing has been held, the resolution shall set forth the facts as found by the city council supporting its action. The decision of the city council shall be final and conclusive in all cases. Notice of the city council's decision and its findings shall be mailed to the applicant, or to any other interested party requesting notice. 
(Ord. 2819 § 1, 2003)  
Title 3 - REVENUE AND FINANCE 
Chapters:  
Chapter 3.04 - TAX ASSESSMENT AND COLLECTION 
Sections: 
 
3.04.010 - Election by city. 
The council of the city, a city of the sixth class, by the provisions of Ordinance No. 1021 of the city, elected that the duties of assessing property and collecting taxes thereon, provided by law to be performed by the assessor and tax collector of the city, should thereafter be performed by the county assessor and the county tax collector as provided in Act 8464 of Deering's General Laws of the State of California, being an act entitled "An act to provide for the levy and collection of taxes by and for the use of municipal corporations and cities incorporated under the laws of the State of California, except municipal corporations of the first class, and to provide for the consolidation and abolition of certain municipal offices, and to provide that their duties may be performed by certain officers of the county, and fixing the compensation to be allowed for such county officers for the services so rendered to such municipal corporations," and approved March 27,1895, and all acts amendatory thereof and supplementary thereto. 
(Prior code § 2510)  
3.04.020 - Assessments as basis for taxes. 
From and after the twenty-first day of November, 1949, and a filing of a certified copy of Ordinance No. 1021 with the auditor of the county, all assessments made by the county assessor, after they have been equalized or corrected by the board of supervisors or the State Board of Equalization, shall be used as a basis for the levy of the taxes of the city and the taxes shall be collected by the assessor and tax collector of the county at the same time and in the same manner county taxes are collected. 
(Prior code § 2510.1)  
3.04.030 - Duties transfer. 
From and after the twenty-first day of November, 1949, and the filing of a certified copy of Ordinance No. 1021 of this city with the auditor, assessor and tax collector of the county, the assessment for taxation, the equalization of assessments, the levy of taxes, and the collection of the same in the city shall be conducted in all respects in accordance with and in the manner set out in Act 8464 of Deering's General Laws of the state, more particularly described in Section 1 of Ordinance No. 1021, and all acts amendatory thereof and supplementary thereto. The duties of all officers and agents of the county and the city in relation to the assessment, equalization, levy and collection of all taxes current and delinquent in the city shall be such as are prescribed by the Act and all acts amendatory thereof and supplementary thereto; provided, however, that all such taxes when so collected shall be paid to the city treasurer as provided in the Act and any amendments thereof. 
(Prior code § 2510.2)  
3.04.040 - Termination of city official duties. 
A.  From and after the twenty-first day of November, 1949, the duties of assessing and collecting taxes in the city by the city clerk-treasurer, city assessor and city tax and license collector shall be terminated and abolished and the duties are transferred to and conferred upon the county assessor and county tax collector, as provided in the Act described in Section 3.04.010; provided, however, that nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as affecting or limiting the right and power of the city and its officers with respect to any tax, fee or other charge not included within the scope and purview of Act 8464 described in Section 3.04.010. None of the present duties or powers of the city clerk-treasurer, city assessor and city tax and license collector shall be affected by this chapter except those concerning the assessing and collecting of taxes in the city, and such duties and powers other than the excepted duties specified in this chapter shall remain and be performed by the respective officers of the city. 
B.  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this chapter, the duty and right of the city assessor and city tax and license collector to collect any and all taxes due and payable to the city which have become a lien prior to the effective date of Ordinance No. 1021 shall not be terminated or abolished, and the city assessor and city tax and license collector shall collect any and all taxes heretofore assessed or levied by the city against any real or personal property to and including the effective date of Ordinance No. 1021 of this city as provided by law and the ordinances of the city. The county shall not be authorized or charged with the responsibility of collecting any taxes levied and assessed prior to the effective date of Ordinance No. 1021, and it shall be the duty of the city assessor and the city tax and license collector to collect them as provided by law so long as any such tax remains due, owing and unpaid to the city. 
(Prior code § 2510.3)  
3.04.050 - Abolition of offices and duties. 
From and after the effective date of Ordinance No. 1021 of this city the office of city assessor is abolished and the duties of the city tax and license collector are amended and reduced as provided in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 2510.4)  
3.04.060 - Contracting for services. 
The mayor and city clerk-treasurer of the city were, by the provisions of Ordinance No. 1021, authorized and directed to enter into a contract with the board of supervisors of the county fixing the amount of compensation to be charged by the county and paid by the city to the county for the performance of the services of assessing and collecting taxes in the city, as provided in the Act described in Section 3.04.010. 
(Prior code § 2510.5)  
Chapter 3.08 - HEALTH AND EDUCATIONAL FACILITY REVENUE BOND LAW 
Sections: 
 
3.08.010 - Title. 
This chapter may be cited as the "city health and educational facilities revenue bond law." 
(Ord. 2483 § 2, 1989: Ord. 2361 § 1 (part), 1985: prior code § 6600)  
3.08.020 - Findings. 
The council finds and declares that it is necessary, essential, a public purpose and a municipal affair for the city to be authorized to provide financing to certain health institutions which provide essential services to residents of the city, in order to aid such health institutions in containing costs and thereby to enable such health institutions to establish lower charges or containment of the rate of increase in hospital rates. Unless the city intervenes to provide such financing or refinancing, the rates and charges may increase at an ever accelerated pace because the health institutions cannot obtain financing at equivalent cost from private sources. The council further finds and declares that it is necessary, essential, a public purpose and a municipal affair for the city to be authorized to provide financing to certain educational institutions which provide educational services primarily within the city so as to give this and future generations of youth the fullest opportunity to learn and develop their intellectual and mental capacities and to provide private institutions of higher education an additional means by which to expand, enlarge and establish dormitory, academic and related facilities, to finance such facilities and to refinance existing facilities. 
(Ord. 2483 § 3, 1989; Ord. 2361 § 1 (part), 1985: prior code § 6601)  
3.08.030 - Definitions. 
Unless the context otherwise requires, the terms defined in this section shall have the following meanings: 
A.  "Bonds" means any bonds, notes, certificates, debentures or other obligations issued by the city pursuant to this chapter and payable exclusively from revenues as provided in this chapter upon which the obligations may be made a charge and from which they are payable. 
B.  "City" means the city of Whittier. 
C.  "Cost" means the total of all costs incurred by or on behalf of a participating health institution as are approved by the city as reasonable and necessary for carrying out all works and undertakings necessary or incident to acquisition, construction, financing or refinancing of a health facility. "Cost" includes all such costs, including costs for construction undertaken by a participating health facility as its own contractor, which under generally accepted accounting principles are not properly chargeable as an expense of operation and maintenance. "Cost" also means the total of all costs incurred by or on behalf of an educational institution as are necessary to carry out all works and undertakings incident to the acquisition, construction, financing or refinancing of an educational facility, including, but not limited to the cost of construction and acquisition of all lands, structures, real or personal property, rights, rights-of-way, franchises, easements and interests acquired or used for an educational facility, the cost of demolishing or removing any buildings or structures on land so acquired, including the cost of acquiring any lands to which such buildings or structures may be moved, the cost of all machinery and equipment, financing charges, interest prior to, during and for a period after completions of such construction, provisions for working capital, reserves for principal and interest and for extensions, enlargements, additions, replacements, renovations and improvements, the cost of engineering, financial and legal services, plans, specifications, studies, surveys, estimates, administrative expenses and other expenses necessary or incident to determining the feasibility of constructing any project or incident to the construction or acquisition or financing thereof. 
D.  "Council" means the city council of the city. 
E.  "Health facility" means any facility, place or building within the city (or, if located outside the city's boundaries, that it is owned by a participating health institution whose primary acute care facilities are located within the city), which is maintained and operated, principally, for the diagnosis, care, prevention and treatment of human illness, physical or mental, including as accessory uses, convalescence, rehabilitation and care during and after pregnancy, and which provides and will continue providing to residents of the city essential health care services designated as such in an agreement between the city and the participating health institution providing or operating the facility, place or building, but excluding nonacute care facilities such as rest homes unless maintained and operated by a participating health institution whose primary activity is the maintenance and operation of acute care facilities. 
"Health care facility" includes a portion of one of the above types of facilities and includes the following facilities if operated in conjunction with one of the above types of facilities: a laboratory, a laundry, a nurses' or interns' residence, a housing facility for patients, staff or employees and the families of any of them, an administration building, an office building, a research, maintenance, storage, utility or parking facility and all structures or facilities related to any of the foregoing or required or useful for the operation of a health facility. 
"Health facility" does not include any facility or building used or to be used primarily for sectarian instruction or study or as a place for devotional activities or religious worship. 
F.  "Participating health institution" means a private nonprofit corporation or association authorized by the laws of the state to provide or operate a health facility as defined in this section, and which, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, undertakes the financing of the acquisition and construction of a health facility or undertakes the refunding or refinancing of obligations incurred to finance the acquisition and construction of a health facility. 
G.  "Revenues" means amounts received by the city as repayment of principal, interest, and all other charges with respect to a loan under this chapter, any proceeds received by the city from mortgage, hazard or other insurance on or with respect to such a loan, all other rents, charges, fees, income and receipts derived by the city from the financing or refinancing of a health or educational facility under this chapter, any amounts received by the city as investment earnings on moneys deposited in a reserve fund or any similar fund securing bonds, and such other moneys as the council may, in its discretion, lawfully designate as revenues. 
H.  "Educational facility" means a structure suitable for use as a dormitory, dining hall, student union, administration building, academic building, library, laboratory, research facility, classroom, health care facility (including for an institution of higher education which maintains and operates a school of medicine, structures or facilities providing or designed to provide services as a hospital or clinic, whether such hospital or clinic is operated directly by the institution of higher education or by a separate nonprofit corporation, the member or members of which consist of the educational institution or the members of its governing body), and parking, maintenance, storage or utility facility and other structures or facilities related thereto or required or useful for the instruction of students or the conducting of research or the operation of an institution for higher education, and the necessary and usual attendant and related facilities and equipment, which facility is located in the city or, if located outside the boundaries of the city, is part of an educational institution whose main campus is located within the city. 
I.  "Educational institution" means a private college or secondary school which neither restricts entry on racial or religious grounds or any other nonprofit educational institution empowered to provide a program of education beyond the high school level. 
(Ord. 2483 § 4, 1989; Ord. 2361 § 1 (part), 1985: prior code § 6602)  
3.08.040 - Omissions or defects not to invalidate. 
If the jurisdiction of the council to order the proposed act is not affected, any omission of any officer or the city in proceedings under this chapter or any other defect in the proceedings shall not invalidate the proceedings or the bonds issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 2361 § 1 (part), 1985: prior code § 6631)  
3.08.050 - Authority to issue bonds. 
This chapter is full authority for the issuance of bonds by the city for the purposes specified in this chapter. 
(Ord. 2361 § 1 (part), 1985: prior code § 6632)  
3.08.060 - Construction. 
This chapter being necessary for the welfare of the city and its inhabitants, shall be liberally construed to effect its purposes. 
(Ord. 2361 § 1 (part), 1985: prior code § 6630)  
3.08.070 - Effect of other laws. 
This chapter shall be deemed to provide a complete additional and alternative method for doing the things authorized by this chapter, and shall be regarded as supplemental and additional to the powers conferred by other laws. The issuance of bonds under the provisions of this chapter need not comply with the requirements of any other law applicable to the issuance of bonds. The purposes authorized by this chapter may be effectuated and bonds may be issued for any such purposes under this chapter notwithstanding that any other law may provide for such purposes or for the issuance of bonds for like purposes and without regard to the requirements, restrictions, limitations, or other provisions contained in any other law. 
(Ord. 2361 § 1 (part), 1985: prior code § 6633)  
3.08.080 - Conflicts with other laws. 
To the extent that the provisions of this chapter are inconsistent with the provisions of any general statute or special act or parts thereof, the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed controlling. 
(Ord. 2361 § 1 (part), 1985: prior code § 6634)  
3.08.090 - Financing new construction. 
The city may make, purchase, or otherwise contract for the making of a mortgage or other secured or unsecured loan, upon such terms and conditions as the city deems proper, to any participating health institution or educational institution for the cost of acquiring or constructing a health or educational facility or financing thereof; provided, however, that with respect to participating health institutions, no such loan shall exceed the total cost of the health facility as determined by the participating health institution and approved by the city. 
(Ord. 2483 § 5, 1989: Ord. 2361 § 1 (part), 1985: prior code § 6605)  
3.08.100 - Refinancing. 
The city may make, purchase, or otherwise contract for the making of a mortgage or other secured or unsecured loan, upon such terms and conditions as the city deems proper, to any participating health institution or educational institution to refund or refinance outstanding obligations of such participating health or educational institution incurred to finance the cost of acquiring or constructing a health or educational facility, whether the obligations were incurred prior to or after the enactment of this chapter, if the city finds the refunding or refinancing is in the public interest and either alleviates a financial or operating hardship of the health or educational institution, or is in connection with other financing by the city for the participating health institution or educational institution or may be expected to result in lower charges or containment of the rate of increase in hospital rates and a saving to third parties, including government, and to others who must pay for care, or any combination thereof. 
(Ord. 2483 § 6, 1989: Ord. 2361 § 1 (part), 1985: prior code § 6606)  
3.08.110 - Acquisition or construction for sale or lease. 
A.  The city may acquire, construct, enlarge, remodel, renovate, alter, improve, furnish, equip, own and lease as lessee a health or educational facility for the purpose of selling or leasing the health or educational facility to a participating health institution or educational institution as its agent to undertake to construct, enlarge, remodel, renovate, alter, improve, furnish, and equip the health facility. 
B.  The city may sell or lease, upon such terms and conditions as the city deems proper, to a participating health institution or educational institution any health or educational facility owned by the city under this chapter, including a health or educational facility conveyed to the city in connection with a financing under this chapter but not being financed or refinanced under this chapter. 
(Ord. 2483 § 7, 1989: Ord. 2361 § 1 (part), 1985: prior code § 6607)  
3.08.120 - Recovery of costs. 
The city may charge participating health institutions and educational facilities application, commitment, financing and other fees, in order to recover all direct administrative and other costs and expenses incurred in the exercise of the powers and duties conferred by this chapter. 
(Ord. 2483 § 8, 1989: Ord. 2361 § 1 (part), 1985: prior code § 6608)  
3.08.130 - Insurance or guarantee. 
The city may obtain, or aid in obtaining, from any department or agency of the United States or of the state or any private company, any insurance or guarantee as to, or of, or for the payment or repayment of, interest or principal, or both, or any part thereof, on any loan, lease or sale obligation or any instrument evidencing or securing the same, made or entered into pursuant to the provisions of this chapter; and may accept payment in such manner and form as provided therein in the event of default by a participating health institution or educational institution, and may assign any such insurance or guarantee as security for bonds. 
(Ord. 2483 § 9, 1989: Ord. 2361 § 1 (part), 1985: prior code § 6609)  
3.08.140 - Fixing terms of financing. 
The city may fix rents, payments, fees, charges and interest rates for financing under this chapter and may agree to revise from time to time such rents, payments, fees, charges and interest rates to reflect changes in interest rates on bonds, losses due to defaults or changes in other expenses related to this chapter, including city administrative expenses. 
(Ord. 2361 § 1 (part), 1985: prior code § 6610)  
3.08.150 - City as mortgagee. 
The city may hold deeds of trust or mortgages as security for loans under this chapter and may pledge or assign them as security for repayment of bonds. The deeds of trust or mortgages may be assigned to, and held on behalf of the city by, any bank or trust company appointed to act as trustee by the city in any resolution or indenture providing for issuance of bonds. 
(Ord. 2361 § 1 (part), 1985: prior code § 6611)  
3.08.160 - Consultants. 
The city may employ such engineering, architectural, financial, accounting, legal or other services as may be necessary in the judgment of the city for the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2361 § 1 (part), 1985: prior code § 6612)  
3.08.170 - Additional powers. 
In addition to all other powers specifically granted by this chapter, the city may do all things necessary or convenient to carry out the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2361 § 1 (part), 1985: prior code § 6613)  
3.08.180 - Bonds authorized. 
A.  Issue. The city may, from time to time, issue bonds for any of the purposes specified in Sections 3.08.090 and 3.08.100. 
Bonds shall be negotiable instruments for all purposes, subject only to the provisions of the bonds for registration. 
B.  Obligation Bonds. Every issue of bonds shall be a limited obligation of the city payable from all or any specified part of the revenues and the moneys and assets authorized in this chapter to be pledged or assigned to secure payment of bonds. Such revenues, moneys or assets shall be the sole source of repayment of such issue of bonds. Bonds issued under the provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to constitute a debt or liability of the city or a pledge of the faith and credit of the city but shall be payable solely from specified revenues, money and assets. The issuance of bonds shall not directly, indirectly, or contingently obligate the city to levy or pledge any form of taxation or to make any appropriation for their payment. 
All bonds shall contain on the face thereof a statement to the following effect: 
Neither the faith and credit nor the taxing power of the City is pledged to the payment of the principal of, or premium or interest on this bond. 
(Ord. 2361 § 1 (part), 1985: prior code § 6615)  
3.08.190 - Amount of bonds. 
In determining the amount of bonds to be issued, the city may include all costs of the issuance of the bonds, reserve funds, and capitalized bond interest. 
(Ord. 2361 § 1 (part), 1985: prior code § 6616)  
3.08.200 - Nature of bonds. 
Bonds may be issued as serial bonds, term bonds, installment bonds or pass-through certificates or any combination thereof. Bonds shall be authorized by resolution of the council and shall bear such date or dates, mature at such time or times, bear interest at such fixed or variable rate or rates, be payable at such time or times, be in such denominations, be in such form, either coupon or registered, carry such registration privileges, be executed in such manner, be payable in lawful money of the United States of America at such place or places, be subject to such terms of redemption and have such other terms and conditions as the resolution or any indenture authorized by the resolution to be entered into by the city may provide. Bonds may be sold at either a public or private sale and for such prices as the city shall determine. Pending preparation of definitive bonds, the city may issue temporary bonds, which shall be exchanged for the definitive bonds when prepared. 
(Ord. 2361 § 1 (part), 1985: prior code § 6617)  
3.08.210 - Terms of bonds. 
Any resolution authorizing any bonds or any issue of bonds, or any indenture authorized by the resolution to be entered into by the city, may contain provisions respecting any of the following terms and conditions which shall be a part of the contract with the holders of the bonds: 
A.  The terms, conditions and form of the bonds and the interest and principal to be paid thereon; 
B.  Limitations on the uses and purposes to which the proceeds of sale of the bonds may be applied, and the pledge or assignment of the proceeds to secure the payment of the bonds; 
C.  Limitations on the issuance of additional parity bonds, the terms upon which additional parity bonds may be issued and secured, and the refunding of outstanding bonds; 
D.  The setting aside of reserves, sinking funds and such other funds as are necessary and the regulation and disposition thereof; 
E.  The pledge or assignment of all or any part of the revenues and the use and disposition thereof, subject to such agreements with the holders of bonds as may then be outstanding; 
F.  Limitation on the use of revenues for expenditures for operating, administration or other expenses of the city or a participating health institution or educational institution; 
G.  Specification of the acts or omissions to act which shall constitute a default in the duties of the city or a participating health institution or educational institution to holders of such bonds, and providing the rights and remedies of the holders in the event of default, including any limitations on the right of action by individual bondholders; 
H.  The appointment of a corporate trustee to act on behalf of the city and the holders of its bonds, the pledge or assignment of loans, deeds of trust, mortgages and any other contracts to such trustee, and the rights of the trustee; 
I.  The procedure, if any, by which the terms of any contract with bondholders may be amended or abrogated, the amount of the bonds the holders of which must consent thereto, and the manner in which the consent may be given; and 
J.  Any other provisions which the council may deem reasonable and proper for the purposes of this chapter and the security of the bondholders. 
(Ord. 2483 § 10, 1989; Ord. 2361 § 1 (part), 1985: prior code § 6618)  
3.08.220 - Additional purposes of bonds. 
A.  The city may issue bonds for the purpose of refunding any bonds then outstanding including the payment of any redemption premiums thereof and any interest accrued or to accrue to the earliest or any subsequent date or dates of redemption, purchase, or maturity of such bonds. 
B.  The proceeds of bonds issued for the purpose of refunding any outstanding bonds may, in the discretion of the city, be applied to the purchase or retirement at maturity or redemption of the outstanding bonds, either at their earliest or any subsequent redemption date or dates or upon the purchase or retirement at the maturity thereof and may, pending such application, be placed in escrow, to be applied to such purchase or retirement at maturity or redemption on such date or dates as may be determined by the city. 
C.  Pending use for purchase, retirement at maturity or redemption of outstanding bonds, any proceeds held in escrow pursuant to subsection B of this section may be invested and reinvested as provided in the resolution or indenture. Any interest or other increment earned or realized on any such investment may be applied to the payment of the outstanding bonds to be refunded or to the payment of interest on the refunding bonds. After the terms of the escrow have been fully satisfied and carried out, any balance of the proceeds and any interest or increment earned or realized from the investment thereof may be returned to the city to be used by it for any lawful purpose. 
D.  All bonds issued pursuant to this section shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter in the same manner and to the same extent as other bonds issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 2361 § 1 (part), 1985: prior code § 6623)  
3.08.230 - Validity of bonds. 
The validity of the authorization and issuance of any bonds is not dependent on and shall not be affected in any way by any proceedings taken by the city for the making of any loan or the entering into of any agreement, or by the failure to make any loan or enter into any agreement, for which bonds are authorized to be issued under this chapter. 
(Ord. 2361 § 1 (part), 1985: prior code § 6624)  
3.08.240 - Revenue pledges. 
Any pledge of revenues or other moneys or assets pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be valid and binding from the time the pledge is made. Revenues, moneys and assets so pledged and thereafter received by the city shall immediately be subject to the lien of the pledge without any physical delivery thereof or further act, and the lien of any such pledge shall be valid and binding as against all parties having claims of any kind in tort, contract, or otherwise against the city, irrespective of whether such parties have notice thereof. Neither the resolution nor any indenture by which a pledge is created need be filed or recorded except in the records of the city. 
(Ord. 2361 § 1 (part), 1985: prior code § 6619)  
3.08.250 - Liability of officers and employees. 
Neither the members of the council, the officers or employees of the city, nor any person executing any bonds shall be liable personally on the bonds or be subject to any personal liability or accountability by reason of the issuance thereof. 
(Ord. 2361 § 1 (part), 1985: prior code § 6620)  
3.08.260 - City purchase of bonds. 
The city shall have the power out of any funds available therefor to purchase its bonds. The city may hold, pledge, cancel or resell such bonds, subject to and in accordance with agreements with the bondholders. 
(Ord. 2361 § 1 (part), 1985: prior code § 6621)  
3.08.270 - Litigation to compel performance of duties. 
Any holder of bonds issued under the provisions of this chapter or any of the coupons appertaining thereto, and any trustee appointed pursuant to any resolution authorizing the issuance of bonds, except to the extent the rights thereof may be restricted by such resolution or any indenture authorized thereby to be entered into by the city, may either at law or in equity, by suit, action, mandamus, or other proceedings, protect or enforce any and all rights specified in law or in the resolution or indenture, and may enforce and compel the performance of all duties required by this chapter or by the resolution or indenture to be performed by the city or by any officer, employee, or agent thereof, including the fixing, charging, and collecting of rates, fees, interest, and charges authorized and required by the provisions of the resolution or indenture to be fixed, charged and collected. 
(Ord. 2361 § 1 (part), 1985: prior code § 6622)  
Chapter 3.12 - SALES AND USE TAX 
Sections: 
 
3.12.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Ordinance." 
(Prior code § 6310)  
3.12.020 - Rate. 
The rate of sales tax and use tax imposed by this chapter shall be one percent. 
(Prior code § 6311)  
3.12.030 - Effective date. 
This chapter shall be operative on January 1, 1974. 
(Prior code § 6312)  
3.12.040 - Purpose. 
The city council declares that the provisions of this chapter are adopted to achieve the following, among other, purposes, and directs that the provisions of this chapter be interpreted in order to accomplish these purposes: 
A.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which complies with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; 
B.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the state insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; 
C.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which imposes a tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the state sales and use taxes; 
D.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which can be administered in a manner that will, to the degree possible consistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting city sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of recordkeeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 6313)  
3.12.050 - Contract with state. 
Prior to the operative date of this chapter, this city shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this sales and use tax ordinance; provided, that if this city has not contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract rather than the first day of the calendar quarter following the adoption of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 6314)  
3.12.060 - Sales tax imposed. 
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is imposed upon all retailers in the city at the rate stated in Section 3.12.020 of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in this city on and after the operative date. 
(Prior code § 6315)  
3.12.070 - Place of sale designated. 
For the purpose of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization. 
(Prior code § 6316)  
3.12.080 - Use tax imposed. 
An excise tax is imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in this city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date for storage, use or other consumption in this city at the rate stated in Section 3.12.020 of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. 
(Prior code § 6317)  
3.12.090 - State law adopted. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 6318)  
3.12.100 - Limitation on adoption of state law. 
In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, wherever the state is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this city shall be substituted therefor. The substitution, however, shall not be made when the word "state" is used as a part of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, State Board of Equalization, the State Treasury, or the Constitution of the state; the substitution shall not be made when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the city, or any agency thereof, rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter; the substitution shall not be made in those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remains subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or to impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the provisions of that Code; the substitution shall not be made in Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; and the substitution shall not be made for the word "state" in the phrase "retailer engaged in business in this State" in Section 6203 or in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. 
(Prior code § 6319)  
3.12.110 - Additional seller's permit not required. 
If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional seller's permit shall not be required by this chapter. 
(Prior code § 6320)  
3.12.112 - Exclusions and exemptions—Current provisions. 
A.  The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the state upon a retailer or consumer. 
B.  The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city in this state shall be exempt from the tax due under this chapter. 
C.  There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. 
D.  In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, the storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax. 
(Ord. 2317 § 1, 1983: prior code § 6322)  
3.12.120 - Amendments adopted. 
All subsequent amendments of the Revenue and Taxation Code which relate to the sales and use tax and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code shall automatically become a part of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 6324)  
3.12.130 - Enjoining collection prohibited. 
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or this city, or against any officer of the state or this city, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter, or Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. 
(Prior code § 6325)  
Chapter 3.16 - SEWER CONSTRUCTION FUND 
Sections: 
 
3.16.010 - Created. 
There is created in the city treasury a special capital outlay fund to be known as the sewer construction fund pursuant to Section 1112 of Article XI of the city Charter. 
(Prior code § 2610)  
3.16.020 - Deposit of funds. 
The charges established in this chapter shall be received by the city clerk-treasurer from property owners whose property will be benefited by any such sewer, and all such moneys shall be deposited in the sewer construction fund. 
(Prior code § 2610.1)  
3.16.030 - Expenditures. 
Upon recommendation of the city engineer and/or the sanitation superintendent, and upon approval by resolution of the council and when money is available in the sewer construction fund, sewers shall be constructed and paid for from the fund. 
(Prior code § 2610.2)  
3.16.040 - Payment required for connection. 
No property shall be connected to any public sewer in the city unless the owner thereof or his predecessor in interest has heretofore paid for the construction of the sewer to which his property is to be connected. 
(Prior code § 2610.3)  
3.16.050 - Installation and costs. 
A.  Installation of all sewer mains, house connections and appurtenances under the terms of this chapter shall be done either by the city or by a licensed sewer contractor approved by the city; shall be of such size and kind as shall in the opinion of the city engineer be adequate to serve the abutting parcel or parcels of land; and shall be constructed in accordance with specifications of the city, and to the satisfaction of the city engineer. All costs shall be paid by the owner or owners of the real property to be served by any such improvement. 
B.  The owner or owners of any property desiring sanitary sewer facilities shall make application to the city engineer and/or the sanitation superintendent. The city engineer shall thereupon make or cause to be made plans and/or estimates to determine the cost of the required installation or connection. Charges to be made when sewer mains have been previously installed shall be based on estimated cost at the time of application. 
C.  On completion of the estimates the city engineer shall notify the property owner or owners of the amount of the estimated cost, which amount in cash or certified check must be deposited with the city prior to the installation of sewer facilities. 
D.  Upon completion of any work under the provisions of this chapter, the property owner or owners shall be entitled to a refund of any surplus of deposit over actual cost, and shall be required to pay the difference between the amount deposited and actual cost if actual cost exceeds the amount previously deposited. 
(Prior code § 2610.4)  
3.16.060 - Maps and records required. 
It shall be the duty of the city engineer to make and maintain sewer maps and to keep such other books and records as may be necessary to show and record the existence of any sewer connection charges that may be established by this chapter or that may hereafter exist as the result of the construction of any sewer with money from the sewer construction fund. These charges shall also be recorded on the water department atlas maps. 
(Prior code § 2610.5)  
Chapter 3.20 - TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX 
Sections: 
 
3.20.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax Ordinance" of the city. 
(Prior code § 6500)  
3.20.020 - Definitions. 
Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions given in this section govern the construction of this chapter: 
A.  "Lodging Facility" means any structure, or any portion of any structure, which is occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes, and includes any hotel, inn, tourist home or house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodginghouse, roominghouse, apartment house, dormitory, public or private club, mobilehome or house trailer at a fixed location, or other similar structure or portion thereof, so as not to be in conflict with other provisions of the Municipal Code. 
B.  "Occupancy" means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any room or rooms or portion thereof, in any lodging facility for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes. 
C.  "Operator" means the person who is proprietor of the lodging facility, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sub-lessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee, or any other capacity. Where the operator performs his functions through a managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this chapter and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his principal. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter by either the principal or the managing agent shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both. 
D.  "Person" means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit. 
E.  "Rent" means the consideration charged, whether or not received, for the occupancy of space in a lodging facility valued in money, whether to be received in money, goods, labor or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property and services of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
F.  "Transient" means any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license or other agreement for a period of thirty calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. A person shall not be deemed a transient where the occupancy is pursuant to a written agreement providing for a stay of thirty consecutive days or longer, so long as the agreement is permitted under Title 18 of this code for the subject property. Notwithstanding the existence of a valid agreement for any period of time, a person shall be considered a transient for purposes of this chapter if for any reason the actual period of occupancy does not exceed thirty days. In determining whether a person is a transient, uninterrupted periods of time extending both prior and subsequent to the effective date of this chapter may be considered. 
(Prior code § 6501) 
(Ord. No. 2917, §§ 1—5, 1-27-09)  
3.20.030 - Imposed. 
For the privilege of occupancy in any lodging facility, each transient is subject to and shall pay a tax in the amount of ten percent of the rent charged by the operator. The tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the city which is extinguished only by payment to the operator or to the city. The transients shall pay the tax to the operator of the lodging facility at the time the rent is paid. If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid with each installment. The unpaid tax shall be due upon the transient's ceasing to occupy space in the lodging facility. If for any reason the tax due is not paid to the operator of the lodging facility, the city clerk-treasurer may require that the tax shall be paid directly to the city clerk-treasurer. 
(Ord. 2673 § 1, 1995: prior code § 6502) 
(Ord. No. 2917, § 6, 1-27-09) 
Editor's note— Per Ord. 2721, Ord. 2673 was ratified by voters in the April 14, 1998 election.  
3.20.040 - Exemptions. 
A.  No tax shall be imposed upon: 
1.  Any person as to whom, or any occupancy as to which, it is beyond the power of the city to impose the tax provided in this chapter; 
2.  Any federal or state officer or employee when on official business; 
3.  Any officer or employee of a foreign government who is exempt by reason of express provision of federal law or international treaty. 
B.  No exemption shall be granted except upon a claim therefor made at the time rent is collected and under penalty of perjury upon a form prescribed by the city clerk-treasurer. 
(Prior code § 6503)  
3.20.050 - Operator duties. 
Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter to the same extent and at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient. The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the amount of the rent charged, and each transient shall receive a receipt for payment from the operator. No operator of a lodging facility shall advertise or state in any manner, whether directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, if added, any part will be refunded except in the manner provided in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 6504) 
(Ord. No. 2917, § 7, 1-27-09)  
3.20.060 - Registration required. 
Within thirty days after the effective date of this chapter, or within thirty days after commencing business, whichever is later, each operator of any lodging facility renting occupancy to transients shall register the lodging facility with the city clerk-treasurer and obtain from him a "transient occupancy registration certificate" to be at all times posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. The certificate shall, among other things, state the following: 
A.  The name of the operator; 
B.  The address of the lodging facility; 
C.  The date upon which the certificate was issued; 
D.  "This Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax Ordinance by registering with the City Clerk-Treasurer for the purpose of collecting from transients the Transient Occupancy Tax and remitting said tax to the City Clerk-Treasurer. This certificate does not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful business in an unlawful manner, nor to operate a lodging facility without strictly complying with all local applicable laws, including but not limited to those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department or office of this City. This certificate does not constitute a permit." 
(Prior code § 6505) 
(Ord. No. 2917, § 8, 1-27-09)  
3.20.070 - Reporting and remitting. 
Each operator shall, on or before the last day of the month following the close of each calendar quarter, or at the close of any shorter reporting period which may be established by the city clerk-treasurer, make a return to the city clerk-treasurer, on forms provided by him, of the total rents charged and received and the amount of tax collected for transient occupancies. At the time the return is filed, the full amount of the tax collected shall be remitted to the city clerk-treasurer. The city clerk-treasurer may establish shorter reporting periods for any certificate holder if he deems it necessary in order to insure collection of the tax and he may require further information in the return. Returns and payments are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. All taxes collected by operators pursuant to this chapter shall be held in trust for the account of the city until payment thereof is made to the city clerk-treasurer. 
(Prior code § 6506)  
3.20.080 - Penalties and interest. 
A.  Original Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter within the time required shall pay a penalty of ten percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax. 
B.  Continued Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any delinquent remittance on or before a period of thirty days following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency penalty of ten percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax and the ten percent penalty first imposed. 
C.  Fraud. If the city clerk-treasurer determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of twenty-five percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in subsections A and B of this section. 
D.  Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter shall pay interest at the rate of one-half of one percent per month or fraction thereof on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid. 
E.  Penalties Merged with Tax. Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this section shall become a part of the tax required in this chapter to be paid. 
(Prior code § 6507)  
3.20.090 - Determination when not collected. 
If any operator fails or refuses to collect the tax and to make, within the time provided in this chapter, any report and remittance of the tax or any portion thereof required by this chapter, the city clerk-treasurer shall proceed in such manner as he deems best to obtain facts and information on which to base his estimate of the tax due. As soon as the city clerk-treasurer procures such facts and information as he is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by this chapter and payable by any operator who has failed or refused to collect it and to make the report and remittance, he shall proceed to determine and assess against the operator the tax, interest and penalties provided for by this chapter. In case the determination is made, the city clerk-treasurer shall give notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the operator so assessed at his last-known place of address. The operator may within ten days after the serving or mailing of the notice make application in writing to the city clerk-treasurer for a hearing on the amount assessed. If application by the operator for a hearing is not made within the time prescribed, the tax, interest and penalties, if any, determined by the city clerk-treasurer shall become final and conclusive and immediately due and payable. If the application is made, the city clerk-treasurer shall give not less than five days' written notice in the manner prescribed in this section to the operator to show cause at a time and place fixed in the notice why the amount specified therein should not be fixed for the tax, interest and penalties. At the hearing, the operator may appear and offer evidence why the specified tax, interest and penalties should not be so fixed. After the hearing, the city clerk-treasurer shall determine the proper tax to be remitted and shall thereafter give written notice to the person in the manner prescribed in this section of the determination and the amount of the tax, interest and penalties. The amount determined to be due shall be payable after fifteen days unless an appeal is taken as provided in Section 3.20.100. 
(Prior code § 6508)  
3.20.100 - Appeal. 
Any operator aggrieved by any decision of the city clerk-treasurer with respect to the amount of the tax, interest and penalties, if any, may appeal to the council by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk-treasurer within fifteen days of the serving or mailing of the determination of the tax due. The city clerk-treasurer shall fix a time and place for hearing the appeal by the city council, and the city clerk-treasurer shall give notice in writing to the operator at his last known place of address. The findings of the council shall be final and conclusive and shall be served upon the appellant in the manner prescribed in Section 3.20.090 for service of notice of hearing. Any amount found to be due shall be immediately due and payable upon the service of notice. 
(Prior code § 6509)  
3.20.110 - Records required. 
It shall be the duty of every operator liable for the collection and payment to the city of any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of three years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of the tax as he may have been liable for the collection of and payment to the city, which records the city clerk-treasurer shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times. 
(Prior code § 6510)  
3.20.120 - Refunds. 
A.  Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under this chapter, it may be refunded as provided in subsections B and C of this section, provided a claim in writing therefor, stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the city clerk-treasurer within three years of the date of payment. The claim shall be on forms furnished by the city clerk-treasurer. 
B.  An operator may claim a refund or take as credit against taxes collected and remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received when it is established in a manner prescribed by the city clerk-treasurer that the person from whom the tax has been collected was not a transient; provided, however, that neither a refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has either been refunded to the transient or credited to rent subsequently payable to the operator by the transient. 
C.  A transient may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid or paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city by filing a claim in the manner provided in subsection A of this section, but only when the tax was paid by the transient directly to the city clerk-treasurer, or when the transient under the provisions of this chapter is deemed a debt owed by the city clerk-treasurer that the transient has been unable to obtain a refund from the operator who collected the tax. 
D.  No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant establishes his right thereto by written records showing entitlement thereto. 
(Prior code § 6511)  
3.20.130 - Actions to collect. 
Any tax required to be paid by any transient under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the transient to the city. Any such tax collected by an operator which has not been paid to the city shall be deemed a debt owed by the operator to the city. Any person owing money to the city under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the city for the recovery of such amount. 
(Prior code § 6512)  
Chapter 3.24 - UTILITIES TAX 
Sections: 
 
3.24.010 - Effective date. 
The provisions of this chapter shall become operative and effective as of September 1, 1970. 
(Prior code § 6536)  
3.24.015 - Termination or suspension of utility users' tax. 
The service supplier shall, upon notification, terminate or suspend any utility users' tax commencing with the first full billing period which occurs after the effective date of such action by the city council. 
(Ord. 2436 § 1, 1988: Ord. 2435 § 1, 1988)  
3.24.020 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "utility tax law of the city." 
(Prior code § 6520)  
3.24.030 - Definitions. 
Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions set forth in this section shall govern the construction of this chapter: 
A.  "City" means the city of Whittier. 
B.  "Month" means a calendar month. 
C.  "Mobile telecommunications service" shall have the same meaning and usage as set forth in the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Act and regulations thereunder, 4 U.S.C. Section 124, as those provisions existed on January 1, 2002. 
D.  "Person" means any domestic or foreign corporation, firm, association, syndicate, joint stock company, partnership of any kind, joint venture, club, trust, Massachusetts business or common law trust, society, individual or municipal corporation. 
E.  "Return" shall mean information regarding the type of tax being remitted; the time period of collection for the remittance submitted; whether the amount is an estimate or an amount actually collected from service users; identification of the service user(s) and the reason for a refund, when a refund is being requested; and any other information necessary to the city's processing of a payment, remittance, refund, or other aspect of administration of the utility users' tax. 
F.  "Service address" shall mean the residential street address or the business street address of the service user. In the case of mobile telecommunications service, "service address" shall mean the service user's "place of primary use" as such term is defined and used in the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Act and the regulations thereunder, 4 U.S.C. Section 116, et seq., as those provisions existed on January 1, 2002. 
G.  "Service supplier" means any entity which receives taxes paid and remits same as imposed by this chapter. 
H.  "Service user" means a person required to pay a tax imposed by this chapter. 
I.  "Tax administrator" means the city clerk-treasurer of the city. 
J.  "Telephone communication services" shall mean "communications services" as defined in Sections 4251 and 4252 of the Internal Revenue Code, and the regulations thereunder, as those provisions existed on January 1, 2002; and shall include any telephonic quality communication for the purpose of transmitting messages or information (including but not limited to digital and analog voice, telegraph, teletypewriter, data, facsimile, video, or text) by electronic, radio or similar means through "interconnected service" with the "public switched network" (as those terms are commonly used in the Federal Communications Act and the regulations of the Federal Communications Commission, 47 U.S.C. Section 332 (d), as those provisions existed on January 1, 2002), whether such transmission occurs by wire, cable, cable modem, internet (e.g., Internet telephone or VOiP), fiber-optic, light wave, laser, microwave, radio wave (including, but not limited to, mobile telecommunications service, cellular service, commercial mobile service and commercial mobile radio service (47 U.S.C. Section 332 (d)(1) and 47 C.F.R. Section 20.3, as those provisions existed on January 1, 2002), personal communications service (PCS), specialized mobile radio (SMR), regardless of radio spectrum used), switching facilities, satellite or any other similar communication facilities. As used in this section, the term "telephone communication services" shall not include "private mobile radio service" as defined in Section 20.3 of Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations, or "private mobile service" as defined in 47 U.S.C. Section 332(d)(3), as those provisions existed on January 1, 2002, which is not interconnected to the public switched network. The term "telephone communication services" shall not include private land or maritime mobile services as defined in Section 2.1 of Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations, as that section existed on January 1, 1970. 
K.  "Telephone corporation," "electrical corporation," "gas corporation," "water corporation" and "cable television corporation," except as provided in this chapter, have the same meaning as defined in Sections 234, 218, 222, 241 and 216.4, respectively, of the Public Utilities Code of the state, as those sections existed on January 1, 1970; except, as follows: 
1.  "Electrical corporation" shall be construed to include any municipality or franchised agency engaged in the selling or supplying of electrical power to a service user; however, does not include a corporation or person employing cogeneration technology or producing power from other than a conventional power source for the generation of electricity, as specified by Section 218 of the Public Utility Code, as it existed on January 1, 1970. 
2.  "Water corporation" shall be construed to include any organization or municipality, including, but not limited to, a mutual water company, engaged in the selling or supplying of water to a service user. 
(Ord. 2804 § 1, 2002: Ord. 2436 § 2, 1988: Ord. 2435 § 2, 1988; prior code § 6521) 
(Ord. No. 2916, § 1, 11-18-08)  
3.24.040 - Cable television tax. 
There is imposed a tax upon every person in the city using cable television service. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of five percent of the charges made for such service and shall be paid by the person paying for the service. 
(Prior code § 6526)  
3.24.050 - Electricity tax. 
A.  There is imposed a tax upon every person in the city using electrical energy in the city. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of five percent of the charges made for the energy and shall be paid by the person paying for the energy. "Charges," as used in this section, shall include charges made for metered energy and minimum charges for the service, including customer charges, service charges, demand charges, standby charges, and annual and monthly charges. 
B.  As used in this section, the term "using electrical energy" shall not be construed to include the storage of the energy by a person in a battery owned or possessed by him for use in an automobile or other machinery or device; provided, however, that the term includes the receiving of the energy for the purpose of using it in the charging of batteries. The term shall not include electricity used in water pumping by water corporations; nor shall the term include the mere receiving of the energy by an electrical corporation at a point within the city for resale. 
(Prior code § 6523)  
3.24.060 - Gas tax. 
A.  There is imposed a tax upon every person using, in the city, gas which is delivered through mains or pipes. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of five percent of the charges made for the gas and shall be paid by the person paying for the gas. 
B.  There shall be excluded from the base on which the tax imposed by this section is computed: 
1.  Charges made for gas which is to be resold and delivered through mains and pipes; 
2.  Charges made for gas used in the generation of electrical energy by an electrical corporation; 
3.  Charges made for gas used in water pumping by water corporations; 
4.  Charges made by a gas corporation for gas used and consumed in the conduct of its business; and 
5.  Charges made for gas used in the propulsion of a motor vehicle, as that phrase is defined in the Vehicle Code of the state, utilizing natural gas. 
(Prior code § 6524)  
3.24.070 - Telephone tax. 
A.  There is imposed a tax upon every person in the city, other than a telephone corporation, using intrastate, interstate, intercontinental and cellular telephone communication services in the city. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of five percent of all charges made for such services and shall be paid by the person paying for such services. 
B.  To the extent allowed by law, the tax on telephone communication services shall apply to a service user if the billing or service address of the service user is within the city's boundaries, as they existed at the time of enactment of the ordinance codified in this chapter or as they may be modified thereafter from time to time, regardless of where any individual communication may originate, terminate, or pass through, as provided in the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Act, 4 U.S.C. Section 116, et seq., as those provisions existed on January 1, 2002. If the billing address of the service user is different from the service address, the service address of the service user shall be used. 
C.  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this section, the tax imposed under this section shall not be imposed upon any person for using intrastate telephone communication services to the extent that the amounts paid for such services are exempt from or not subject to, the tax imposed by Section 4251 of Title 26 of the United States Code as that provision existed and was interpreted on January 1, 2002, and the tax imposed under this section shall not be imposed on "prepaid telephone cards," as that term is used in 26 U.S.C. Section 4251(d), as such section existed and was interpreted on January 1, 2002. In the event that the federal excise tax on "communications services" as provided in Sections 4251, 4252 and 4253 of the Internal Revenue Code is subsequently repealed, any reference in this section and in Section 1(m) to such law, including any related federal regulations, private letter ruling, case law, and other opinions interpreting these sections, shall refer to that body of law that existed as of January 1, 2002. 
D.  As used in this section, the term "charges" shall include the value of any other services, credits, property of every kind or nature, or other consideration provided by the service user in exchange for the telephone communication services. The term "charges" shall not include charges for telephone communication services which are paid for by inserting coins in coin-operated telephones except that where such coin-operated service is furnished to a person for a guaranteed amount, the amounts paid under such guarantee plus any fixed monthly or other periodic charge shall be included within the term "charges." 
E.  The tax administrator, from time to time, may issue and disseminate to telecommunication service suppliers, which are subject to the tax collection requirements of this chapter, an administrative ruling identifying those telecommunication services which are subject to the tax of subsection A of this section. Such administrative rulings shall not impose a new tax, revise an existing tax methodology, or increase an existing tax. 
F.  To prevent actual multi-jurisdictional taxation of telephone communication services subject to tax under this section, any service user, upon proof to the tax administrator that the service user has previously paid the same tax in another state or city on such telephone communication services, shall be allowed a credit against the tax imposed to the extent of the amount of such tax legally imposed in such other state or city; provided, however, the amount of such credit shall not exceed the tax owed to the city under this section. 
G.  For purposes of establishing sufficient legal nexus for the imposition and collection of utility users' tax on charges for telephone communication services pursuant to this chapter, "minimum contacts" shall be construed broadly in favor of the imposition and collection of the utility users' tax to the fullest extent permitted by California and federal law, and as it may change from time to time by judicial interpretation or by statutory enactment. 
(Ord. 2883 § 2, 2006; Ord. 2804 §§ 2—7, 2002; Ord. 2575 § 1, 1992; prior code § 6522)  
3.24.080 - Water tax. 
A.  There is imposed a tax upon every person using, in the city, water which is delivered through mains or pipes. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of five percent of the charges made for the water and shall be paid by the person paying for the water. "Charges," as used in this section, shall include charges made for: 
1.  Metered water; and 
2.  Minimum charges for services, including customer charges, ready to serve charges, standby charges, and annual and monthly charges. 
B.  There shall be excluded from the base on which the tax imposed by this section is computed, charges for water which is to be resold and delivered through mains or pipes; and charges made by a water corporation for water used and consumed by the water corporation in the conduct of its business. 
(Prior code § 6525)  
3.24.100 - Exemptions. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as imposing a tax upon any person if the imposition of the tax upon that person would be in violation of the Constitution of the United States or the Constitution of the state. 
(Prior code § 6527)  
3.24.110 - Individual exemptions—Utility users' tax. 
A.  The taxes imposed by this chapter shall not apply to any residential service user who has received from the tax administrator an exemption from the payment of such taxes. The tax administrator shall issue such exemptions to those service users who are found qualified, pursuant to this section, to receive such an exemption. A service user shall be qualified to obtain such an exemption if: 
1.  The exemption application relates to a residential dwelling unit; and 
2.  The combined gross income for all members of the family or household residing together with the applicant service user for the calendar year immediately preceding the date of filing of an application for such exemption was twenty-nine thousand five hundred fifty dollars or less. 
B.  Exemptions granted pursuant to this section shall be valid for a period of three hundred sixty-five days following the effective date of such exemption, which shall be at least sixty days after approval of the exemption by the tax administrator, in order to allow implementation by applicable service suppliers. Exemptions shall be granted prospectively only. At least thirty days prior to the expiration of such exemption, the holder of such exemption shall file an application for renewal upon forms provided by the tax administrator. Renewals shall be granted by the tax administrator, if the applicant is found qualified, for additional periods of three hundred sixty-five days each. 
C.  The tax administrator shall make his or her determination from competent written proof demonstrating that an applicant is qualified for such an exemption. The decision of the tax administrator shall be final and conclusive. 
D.  The tax administrator, upon granting an exemption pursuant to this chapter, shall notify all service suppliers of the fact of such exemption and shall supply each service supplier with all information necessary to permit each service supplier to terminate any further billings for the tax to the person to whom such exemption has been granted. Each service supplier shall eliminate from its billing processes for the utility users' tax each service user to whom an exemption has been granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, not later than sixty days following the giving of notice by the tax administrator of such exemptions. 
E.  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly receive or accept the benefits of an exemption granted pursuant to this chapter when the basis for such exemption does not exist and that fact is known to such person or should have been known to such person. 
F.  Only an application, amended application, or re-application for exemption under this section shall be exempt from the claims requirements in Section 3.24.180 of this chapter and Sections 1113 and 1115 of the city Charter. 
(Ord. 2804 § 8, 2002) 
(Ord. No. 2929, § 1, 7-28-09; Ord. No. 2986, § 1, 6-26-12)  
3.24.120 - Collection. 
A.  The tax imposed by this chapter shall be collected from the service user by any energy service supplier. 
B.  The tax shall be collected at the same time, and in the same manner, as the collection of charges made in accordance with the regular billing practice of the service supplier. 
C.  The duty to collect tax from a service user shall commence with the beginning of the first regular billing period applicable to that person which starts on or after the effective date of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2436 § 5, 1988; Ord. 2435 § 5, 1988; prior code § 6528)  
3.24.130 - Reporting and remitting. 
The amount of tax collected in one month by each service supplier shall be remitted by United States mail to the tax administrator, postmarked on or before the twentieth day of the following month; or remitted electronically on or before the twentieth day of the following month. The tax administrator may authorize remittance on a quarterly basis if the average quarterly remittance is less than one hundred dollars per quarter; such payment, if allowed, shall be remitted on or before the twentieth day of the month following the end of the calendar quarter. Remittances shall be accompanied by a return. In the event a service supplier for any reason remits to the city based upon estimates of the amount anticipated to be collected from a service user, the service supplier shall provide a supplemental return to the city for the actual amount collected, which shall be accompanied by the amount of any additional remittance to the city. Such supplemental return shall be presented to the tax administrator within ninety days of the initial return, in accordance with Sections 1113 and 1115 of the Charter. The tax administrator may also require information he or she deems necessary to determine if the tax imposed in this chapter is being levied and collected in accordance with this chapter. A final return and remittance is due from all service suppliers immediately upon cessation of business by the supplier for any reason. 
(Ord. 2804 § 9, 2002)  
3.24.135 - Tax administrator's rules and regulations. 
The tax administrator shall have the power to adopt rules and regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter for the purpose of carrying out and enforcing the payment, collection, and remittance of the taxes herein imposed. A copy of such rules and regulations shall be on file in the tax administrator's office. The tax administrator may also make administrative agreements to vary the strict requirements of this chapter, so that collection of any tax imposed here may be in conformance with the billing procedures of a particular service supplied, so long as said agreement results in collection of the tax in conformance with the general purpose and scope of this chapter. A copy of such agreement shall be on file in the tax administrator's office. 
(Ord. 2804 § 11, 2002)  
3.24.140 - Penalty for violation. 
A.  Taxes collected by a service supplier which are not remitted to the tax administrator on or before the due dates provided in this chapter are delinquent, and shall be subject to the imposition of penalties as provided in this section. Should the date occur on a weekend or legal holiday, the return may be postmarked on the first regular working day following a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. 
B.  Penalties for delinquency in remittance of any tax collected or any deficiency determination shall attach and be paid by the person required to collect and remit them in an amount equal to fifteen percent of the total tax collected or imposed in this chapter. 
C.  The tax administrator shall have power to impose additional penalties upon persons required to collect and remit taxes under the provisions of this chapter for fraud or negligence in reporting or remitting in the sum of fifteen percent of the amount of the tax collected or as recomputed by the tax administrator. 
D.  The tax administrator shall have the power to waive penalties upon written request for any person required to collect and remit the tax if the administrator finds that the failure to collect and remit the tax in a timely manner was not intentional or repetitive. 
E.  Every penalty imposed under the provisions of this section shall be deemed, for all purposes, a part of the tax required to be remitted and paid to the city. 
(Ord. 2717 §§ 1, 2, 1997; Ord. 2436 § 8, 1988; Ord. 2435 § 8, 1988; prior code § 6530)  
3.24.150 - Actions to collect. 
Any tax required to be paid by a service user pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, shall be deemed a civil debt owed by the service user to the city. Any such tax collected from a service user, but which has not been remitted to the tax administrator, shall be deemed to be held in trust by such service supplier for the benefit of the city. Any tax which a service supplier had a duty to collect under the provisions of this chapter but failed to so collect, shall be a civil debt owed to the city by the person required to collect and remit it. Any service supplier or service user who has failed to remit or pay taxes to the city, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, shall be liable therefor in an action brought in the name of the city for the recovery of the amount. 
(Ord. 2804 § 10, 2002)  
3.24.160 - Administrative remedy. 
Whenever the tax administrator determines that a service user has deliberately withheld the amount of the tax owed by him from the amounts remitted to a service supplier, or that a service user has failed to pay the amount of the tax for a period of two or more billing periods, or whenever the tax administrator otherwise deems it in the best interest of the city, he shall relieve the affected service supplier of the obligation to collect taxes due under this chapter from the specific service users for one or more specified billing periods. The tax administrator shall notify the service user that he has assumed responsibility to collect the taxes due for the stated periods and demand payment of the taxes. The notice shall be served on the service user by handing it to him personally or by deposit of the notice in the United States mail, postage prepaid thereon, addressed to the service user at his last known address. If a service user fails to pay the tax to the tax administrator within fifteen days from the date of the service of the notice upon him, which shall be the date of mailing if service is not accomplished in person, a penalty of twenty-five percent of the amount of the tax set forth in the notice shall be imposed, but in no event less than five dollars. The penalty shall become, for all purposes, a part of the tax required to be paid pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 6532)  
3.24.170 - Records required. 
It shall be the duty of every service supplier who is required to collect and remit to the city a tax by this chapter, to keep and preserve, for a period of not less than three years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of the taxes due to the city from service users supplied by the services supplier, which records the tax administrator shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times. 
(Prior code § 6533)  
3.24.175 - Administrative procedures for claims other than overpayments or money damages. 
A.  If any service user or service supplier is aggrieved by any decision of the tax administrator, or with the administration of this chapter, except as may be otherwise specifically provided for in this chapter, such person may appeal to the city manager, or his/her duly authorized designee(s), by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within ten calendar days of the decision which aggrieved the applicant. The city clerk shall thereupon fix a time and place for hearing of such appeal. The city clerk shall give notice to such person of the time and place of hearing. 
B.  If the service user or service supplier is aggrieved by any decision of the city manager, or her/her duly authorized designee(s) with respect to the administration of this chapter, he/she may appeal to the city council by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within ten calendar days of the decision rendered by the city manager, or his/her duly authorized designee(s). The city clerk shall thereupon fix a time and place for hearing such appeal. The city council shall have the authority to determine all questions raised on such appeal. No such determination shall conflict with any substantive provision of this chapter. The city council shall issue a written decision within fifteen days after the hearing on the appeal. The city clerk shall thereafter mail a copy of such written decision to the person appealing, and shall notify the person appealing that such decision is governed by the city's claims requirements. 
(Ord. 2804 § 12, 2002)  
3.24.176 - Administrative procedures for refunds, money or damages. 
All claims for refunds not covered by Section 3.24.180 and, notwithstanding Section 3.24.175 all claims involving a claim for money or damages, shall be made in accordance with the provisions of Section 1113 and 1115 of the Charter. The claims requirements contained in Section 1113 and 1115 of the Charter shall be an administrative prerequisite to the maintaining of any legal action against the city relating to those issues for which the claims requirement is mandatory according to this chapter. 
(Ord. 2804 § 13, 2002)  
3.24.180 - Refund of overpayments only. 
A.  Whenever an overpayment of any tax collected or received by the tax administrator under this chapter is claimed, a service user, or service supplier on behalf of the service use, may make written application of a refund of such overpayment to the tax administrator, with appropriate supporting documentation to demonstrate the claimed overpayment, within thirty days of such overpayment. The applicant may appeal a denial of the application for refund of overpayment according to the provisions of Section 3.24.175 of this chapter. If the appeal is denied, any claim for overpayment shall thereafter be subject to the provisions of Sections 1113 and 1115 of the Charter. 
B.  A service supplier may claim a refund for overpayment, or claim as a credit against taxes collected but not yet remitted to the city, the amount overpaid, provided that the amount claimed as overpaid by a service user has been refunded to, or credited to charges subsequently payable by, the service user. A service supplier that has collected any amount of tax in excess of the amount of tax imposed by this chapter and actually due from a service user, may refund such amount to the service user and claim credit for such overpayment against the amount of tax which is due upon any other monthly returns, provided such credit is claimed in a return dated no later than ninety days from the date of overpayment. 
C.  Notwithstanding other provisions of this section, whenever a service supplier, pursuant to an order of the California Public Utilities Commission or a court of competent jurisdiction, makes a refund to service users of charges for past utility services, the taxes paid pursuant to this chapter on the amount of such refunded charges shall also be refunded to service users, and the service supplier shall be entitled to claim a credit for such refunded taxes against the amount of tax which is due upon the next monthly returns. 
(Ord. 2804 § 14, 2002)  
3.24.190 - Tax validity—Time to bring action. 
Any legal action to challenge, test, or otherwise determine the validity of this chapter, or any portion thereof; the ordinance enacting this chapter, or any portion thereof; or the tax imposed in this chapter must be brought within sixty days of the effective date of the ordinance adopting this chapter, in accordance with the provisions of California Code of Civil Procedure Section 860, et seq., and Sections 860 and 863 in particular. 
(Ord. 2804 § 15, 2002)  
Chapter 3.28 - SALE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY 
Sections: 
 
3.28.010 - Sale of surplus city property. 
Whenever the city or any department thereof has any material, supplies, equipment or other personal property which is no longer needed for municipal purposes, the city manager may provide for the sale of the materials, supplies, equipment or other personal property by such means and in such manner as he determines to be most advantageous to the city. He shall sell the property for the best possible price and the selling price shall be credited to the general fund or to the department of the city having custody and possession of the personal property, at the discretion of the city manager. In the event any such materials, supplies, equipment or personal property has a sale value of more than one thousand five hundred dollars, then the city manager shall obtain the consent and approval of the council before consummating any sale. Upon the payment of the purchase price, the city manager is authorized and directed to execute and deliver a bill of sale to the purchaser and deliver possession thereof to the purchaser. 
(Prior code § 2720)  
3.28.020 - Lost property—Finder duties. 
Any person who finds a thing lost is not bound to take charge of it, but if he does so he is thenceforward a depository for the owner with the rights and obligations of a depository for hire. Any person who finds and takes possession of any money, goods, things in action, or other personal property, or saves any domestic animal from drowning or starvation, shall, within a reasonable time, inform the owner, if known, and make restitution without compensation, except a reasonable charge for saving and taking care of the property. 
(Prior code § 2720.1)  
3.28.030 - Lost property—Delivery to police chief. 
A.  If the owner is unknown or has not claimed the property, the person saving or finding the property shall, if the property is of the value of one hundred dollars or more, within a reasonable time turn the property over to the police chief if found within the city limits, and make an affidavit, stating when and where he found or saved the property, particularly describing it. If the property was saved, he shall state: 
1.  From what and how it was saved; 
2.  Whether the owner of the property is known to him; 
3.  That he has not secreted, withheld or disposed of any part of the property. 
B.  The police chief shall notify the owner, if his identity is reasonably ascertainable, that it possesses the property and where it may be claimed. The police chief may require payment by the owner of a reasonable charge to defray costs of storage and care of the property. 
(Ord. 2869 § 10, 2006; prior code § 2720.2)  
3.28.040 - Lost property—Disposal. 
A.  Any lost personal property, other than money or a negotiable instrument, coming into the possession of the police chief, shall be held by him for a period of not less than ninety days. At the time of receipt of the property by the chief from the finder thereof, the chief shall advise the finder that if the owner is not ascertained within the ninety-day period referred to in this section, the finder may file a written request within a period of thirty days after the expiration of the ninety day period, requesting that the title of the property be vested in him. During such period of time the chief shall take such steps as may be reasonably necessary to attempt to ascertain the identity of the owner thereof. If the owner of the personal property cannot be identified, or, if within the ninety-day period the owner of the property fails to appear and establish the fact of his ownership to the reasonable satisfaction of the police chief, the chief shall dispose of the property as follows: 
1.  If a written request by the finder is made, as described in this section, and filed with the chief and the owner fails within the ninety-day period to appear and claim the property, then for all purposes title to the property shall vest in the finder and the chief shall deliver it to the finder; and 
2.  If neither the owner nor the finder makes claim to the property within the times permitted in this chapter, then the chief shall dispose of the property at a public auction held for that purpose. The police chief shall, in the case of the public auction, cause notice to be given of the fact of the public auction in a newspaper of general circulation, adjudicated as such within the city, not less than five days in advance of the time set for the auction. If the personal property remains unsold after the public auction, the police chief shall dispose of it as may be directed by the city manager. 
B.  Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions relating to public auction of unclaimed property, where the property is perishable, or if the chief of police finds that the value thereof is negligible, he shall dispose of it in a manner to be directed and approved by the city manager. In addition, should the city manager so direct, any property which is unclaimed by the true owner and/or finder thereof need not be submitted to public auction if the city manager determines that it is needed for any public purpose. Upon such determination by the city manager, title to the property shall vest, for all purposes, in the city. 
(Ord. 2869 § 11, 2006; prior code § 2720.3)  
3.28.050 - Lost money or negotiable instruments. 
Any lost money or a negotiable instrument coming into the possession of the police chief shall be held by him for a period of ninety days after the receipt thereof. During such period of time the police chief shall take such steps as may be necessary to ascertain the identity of the owner thereof. If the owner of the lost money or negotiable instrument fails to appear for any reason, and establish his ownership thereof, within the period of ninety days, the police chief shall notify the finder of the money or negotiable instrument, who shall then have a period of thirty days from the date of such notification within which to appear and claim the money or negotiable instrument. Where the claim by the finder is timely made, title to the money and/or negotiable instrument shall vest in the finder. Where the finder of the property does not appear within such time, title to the money and/or negotiable instrument shall, for all purposes, vest in the city. 
(Ord. 2869 § 12, 2006: prior code § 2720.4)  
Chapter 3.32 - UTILITY REVENUE BONDS 
Sections: 
 
3.32.010 - Title. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known and cited as the "Whittier Utility Revenue Bond Ordinance." 
(Ord. 2408 § 1.1, 1987)  
3.32.020 - Charter authority. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter is adopted pursuant to the provisions of Sections 412 through 415 of the Charter. 
(Ord. 2408 § 6.2, 1987)  
3.32.030 - Applicability. 
This chapter applies to any bonds which are, by their terms, stated to have been issued pursuant to the Whittier utility revenue bond ordinance and which are issued and delivered after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, despite the fact that city council action in ordering their issuance may have been taken prior to such effective date. 
(Ord. 2408 § 6.1, 1987)  
3.32.040 - Conflicting provisions. 
In the event of conflict or inconsistency between this chapter and the bond law, this chapter is controlling. 
(Ord. 2408 § 1.2, 1987)  
3.32.050 - Definition in resolution or indenture. 
Subject to the limitations of Section 3.32.110 of this chapter, in any general resolution or master indenture providing for the issuance of or securing bonds for acquiring, constructing, improving or financing any enterprise under Sections 3.32.110 through 3.32.160 of this chapter, or for refunding any outstanding bonds under Sections 3.32.170 through 3.32.220 of this chapter, the city council may define "enterprise" and that definition applies to the bonds authorized in such resolution or indenture. Such definition may include any one of the purposes set forth in Section 3.32.110B of this chapter, and may include all or any portion of the proceedings of refunding bonds. 
(Ord. 2408 § 1.3, 1987)  
3.32.060 - Supplemental procedural resolution. 
The city council may, at any time prior to the issuance of any series of bonds under this chapter, adopt a supplemental procedural resolution or resolutions for the purpose of granting statutory liens on gross or net revenues to secure the repayment of obligations incurred in connection with any one or more series of bonds or for any other lawful purpose. Any such supplemental resolution or resolutions shall be deemed to be an amendment to and part of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2408 § 5.1, 1987)  
3.32.070 - Municipal bond insurance. 
The city council may cause payment of principal, premiums on redemption (if any) and interest on any bonds issued under this chapter to be insured or guaranteed, and may include the premiums on such insurance or guaranty in determining the principal amount and pay such premiums from the proceeds of the bonds. 
(Ord. 2408 § 5.2, 1987)  
3.32.080 - Credit enhancement and liquidity. 
The city council may authorize other arrangements for the enhancement of the credit standing or liquidity of any bonds issued under this chapter, including without limitation letters of credit, surety bonds, guarantees and similar arrangements, and may include the cost of such arrangements in determining the principal amount and pay such cost from the proceeds of the bonds. 
(Ord. 2408 § 5.3, 1987)  
3.32.090 - Taxable bonds. 
Any bonds issued under this chapter may be issued on the basis that the interest thereon will be subject to federal income taxation, in which event the provisions of Chapter 11, commencing with Section 5900 of Division 6 of Title 1 of the Government Code of the state, shall apply. 
(Ord. 2408 § 5.4, 1987)  
3.32.100 - Special provisions—City council powers. 
The city council has and may exercise all of the powers granted to a state or local government under Chapter 11 of Division 6 of Title 1 of the Government Code of the state, cited in Section 15, in connection with bonds issued under this chapter whether the interest on the bonds is exempt from federal taxation or not. 
(Ord. 2408 § 5.5, 1987)  
3.32.110 - New money bonds—Definitions. 
As used in Sections 3.32.110 through 3.32.160 of this chapter: 
A.  "Bond law" means the Revenue Bond Law of 1941, being Chapter 6, commencing with Section 54300, of Part 1 of Division 2 of Title 5 of the Government Code of the state. 
B.  1.  "Enterprise" means any revenue-producing improvement, building, system, plant, works, facilities or undertaking used for or useful for any of the following purposes: 
a.  The obtaining, conserving, treating and supplying of water for domestic use, irrigation, sanitation, industrial use, fire protection, recreation or any other public or private uses; 
b.  The collection, treatment or disposal of sewage, waste or stormwater, including drainage; 
c.  The collection, treatment or disposal of solid waste including, but not limited to landfill. 
2.  The term "enterprise" includes, but is not limited to, all parts of the enterprise, all appurtenances to it, and all of the various components of it set forth in Section 54309.1 of the bond law. 
C.  "Obligations" means all obligations payable by the city to any bank or other financial institution under any credit enhancement or liquidity arrangements made by the city pursuant to Section 3.32.080. 
(Ord. 2408 § 2.1, 1987)  
3.32.120 - New money bonds—City council powers. 
A.  Issue Bonds. The city council may provide for the issuance of and authorize, issue, sell and deliver revenue bonds of the city for the purpose of providing funds for the acquisition, construction, improving or financing of an enterprise, including any or all expenses incidental thereto or connected therewith. 
B.  Acquire Project and Pledge Revenues. The city council may acquire, construct, improve or finance any project to improve any enterprise defined in the resolution or indenture providing for the issuance of bonds pursuant to Section 3.32.050 of this chapter, and may pledge, place a charge upon and assign all or any part of the gross or net revenues of such enterprise for the security of the bonds. 
C.  Bond Law. The city council has and may exercise all of the powers set forth in the bond law, subject to the restrictions therein set forth, except as otherwise expressly provided in this section and Sections 3.32.110 and 3.32.130 through 3.32.160 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2408 § 2.2, 1987)  
3.32.130 - New money bonds—Bond law powers. 
Except as otherwise expressly provided in this chapter, the provisions of the bond law shall apply to the exercise of the powers set forth in Section 3.32.120 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2408 § 2.3(a), 1987)  
3.32.140 - New money bonds—General resolution or master indenture. 
The city council may authorize and provide for the issuance of the bonds by a general resolution or master indenture to take effect upon adoption or delivery, as the case may be. Such resolution or indenture shall state: 
A.  The purpose or purposes for which the bonds are proposed to be issued; 
B.  The limits, if any, on total principal amount of the bonds; 
C.  That the bonds are to be revenue bonds, payable exclusively from the net revenues of the enterprise and from such of the other funds referred to in Section 54478 of the bond law as shall be specified in the resolution of indenture; 
D.  That the bonds are not to be secured by the taxing power of the city; and 
E.  Such other matters authorized by the bond law as are deemed appropriate by the city council. 
(Ord. 2408 § 2.3(b), 1987)  
3.32.150 - New money bonds—Series resolution and supplement to indenture. 
The city council may issue, sell and deliver any series of bonds by series resolution or supplement to indenture (which may be the general resolution or master indenture, respectively, referred to in Section 3.32.140 of this chapter to take effect upon adoption or delivery, as the case may be. Such series resolution or supplement to indenture shall: 
A.  Define and state the estimated cost of the project or projects for which the series of bonds are proposed to be issued; 
B.  State the principal amount of such series of bonds; 
C.  State the maximum rate of interest on such series of bonds, if any, the maximum discount at which such series of bonds may be sold, if any, and the dates on which the interest thereon shall be payable; and 
D.  State such other matters authorized by the bond law as are deemed appropriate by the city council. 
(Ord. 2408 § 2.3(c), 1987)  
3.32.160 - New money bonds—Certain state provisions nonapplicable. 
Sections 54380 through 54387, inclusive, 54402(b), 54403 and 54418 of the bond law shall not apply. 
(Ord. 2869 § 13, 2006: Ord. 2408 § 2.3(d), 1987)  
3.32.170 - Refunding—Definitions. 
As used in Sections 3.32.180 through 3.32.220 of this chapter: 
A.  "Bond law" means the Revenue Bond Law of 1941, being Chapter 6, commencing with Section 54300 of Part 1 of Division 2 of Title 5 of the Government Code of the state, and in particular Article 11, commencing with Section 54660 thereof, and Article 10, commencing with Section 53570 and Article 11, commencing with Section 53580 of Chapter 3 of Part 1 of Division 2 of Title 5 of the Government Code of the state. 
B.  Enterprise. "Enterprise" has the meaning assigned to such term in Section 3.32.110 of this chapter. 
C.  "Obligations" means all obligations payable by the city to any bank or other financial institution under any credit enhancement or liquidity arrangements made by the city pursuant to Section 3.32.080 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2408 § 3.1, 1987)  
3.32.180 - Refunding—City council powers. 
A.  Issue Refunding Bonds. 
1.  The city council may provide for the issuance of and authorize, issue, sell at public or private sale and deliver refunding revenue bonds of the city for the purpose of redeeming or retiring bonds issued by it, including any or all expenses incidental thereto or connected therewith. 
2.  Any outstanding bonds or other obligations of the city issued to finance any portion of the enterprise defined in the resolution or indenture providing for the issuance of the refunding bonds may be refunded under this section and Sections 3.32.170 and 3.32.190 through 3.32.220 of this chapter, without regard to whether the authority for their issuance was state law, chartered city procedure ordinance or otherwise, and regardless of whether the security therefor was the unlimited taxing power of the city, revenues of an enterprise, special assessments a combination of revenues of special assessments or otherwise. 
B.  Redeem Bonds and Pledge Proceeds of Sale of Refunding Bonds and Revenues. The city council may redeem or retire the bonds or other obligations either at or prior to their maturity, as set forth in the resolution or indenture providing for the issuance of the refunding bonds, and may pledge, place a charge upon and assign all or any part of the proceeds of sale of such refunding bonds for the security of the bonds or other obligations to be refunded. Such proceeds may be invested in such manner as may be provided in such resolution or indenture. The city council may pledge, place a charge upon, and assign all or any part of the gross or net revenues of the enterprise defined in the resolution or indenture providing for the issuance of refunding bonds for the security of the refunding bonds. 
C.  Bond Law. The city council has and may exercise all of the powers set forth in the bond law, subject to the restrictions therein set forth, except as otherwise expressly provided by this section and in Sections 3.32.170 and 3.32.190 through 3.32.220 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2408 § 3.2, 1987)  
3.32.190 - Refunding—Procedures. 
Except as otherwise expressly provided in this chapter, the provisions of the bond law shall apply to the exercise of the powers set forth in Section 3.32.180 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2408 § 3.3(a), 1987)  
3.32.200 - Refunding—Resolution or indenture. 
The city council may authorize and provide for the issuance of the refunding bonds by a resolution or indenture to take effect upon adoption or delivery, as the case may be. Such resolution or indenture shall state: 
A.  The purpose or purposes for which the refunding bonds are proposed to be issued; 
B.  The limits, if any, on the total principal amount of the refunding bonds, subject to the provisions of Section 3.32.210 of this chapter; 
C.  That the bonds are to be refunding revenue bonds, payable exclusively from the gross or net revenues of the enterprise and from such of the other funds referred to in Section 54478 of the bond law as shall be specified in the resolution or indenture; 
D.  The maximum rate of interest on the refunding bonds, if any, the maximum discount at which such refunding bonds may be sold, if any, and the date on which the interest thereon shall be payable; 
E.  That the bonds are not to be secured by the taxing power of the city; and 
F.  Such other matters authorized by the bond law as are deemed appropriate by the city council. 
(Ord. 2408 § 3.3(b), 1987)  
3.32.210 - Refunding—Principal. 
The resolution or indenture authorizing and providing for the issuance of the refunding bonds shall state that the refunding bonds shall be issued in a principal amount sufficient to provide funds for the payment of all of the following: 
A.  All bonds to be funded or refunded by the refunding bonds; 
B.  All expenses incident to the calling, retiring or paying of the outstanding bonds and the issuance of the refunding bonds, including the difference in amount between the par value of the refunding bonds and any amount less than that for which the refunding bonds may be sold; 
C.  Interest upon the refunding bonds from the date of sale to the date of payment of the bonds to be funded or refunded out of the proceeds of the sale or the date upon which the bonds to be funded or refunded will be paid pursuant to the call or agreement with the holders of such bonds; and 
D.  Any premium necessary in the calling or retiring of the outstanding bonds and the interest accruing on them to the date of the call or retirement. 
(Ord. 2408 § 3.3(c), 1987)  
3.32.220 - Refunding—Certain portions of law nonapplicable. 
Sections 54380 through 54387, inclusive, 54402(b), 54403 and 54418 and the last sentence of Section 54661 of the California Government Code shall not apply. 
(Ord. 2869 § 14, 2006: Ord. 2408 § 3.3(d), 1987)  
3.32.230 - Combined issues—General requirements. 
The city council may provide for the issuance of bonds for the combined purposes of financing an enterprise or a project or projects to improve an enterprise and to refund any outstanding bonds, in which event the provisions of Sections 3.32.110 through 3.32.220 of this chapter shall apply. 
(Ord. 2408 § 4.1, 1987)  
3.32.240 - Combined issues—Definitions. 
Whenever terms defined in Sections 3.32.110 through 3.32.220 of this chapter are used elsewhere in this chapter, they are used with the meaning assigned to them in any section, as appropriate to the context in which they are used. 
(Ord. 2408 § 4.2, 1987)  
Chapter 3.36 - SPECIAL TAX FINANCING IMPROVEMENT 
Sections:  
Article I. - General Provisions 
 
3.36.010 - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Whittier Special Tax Financing Improvement Code," and shall be referred to herein as "this chapter." 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (1-1), 1989)  
3.36.020 - Municipal and state affairs—Authority conferred by chapter. 
A.  This chapter is adopted pursuant to Section 200 of Article I of the Charter of the city. In proceedings had pursuant to this chapter which are a municipal affair, any general laws referred to in this chapter are deemed a part of this chapter. 
B.  In the event that any proceeding had pursuant to this chapter shall be adjudged a state affair, it is declared to be the intention that the proceedings were had pursuant to any applicable general law or laws. 
(Ord. 2577 § 16, 1992; Ord. 2466 § 2 (1-2) (part), 1989)  
3.36.030 - Applicability of provisions. 
This chapter provides an alternative method of financing certain public and private capital facilities and municipal services. The provisions of this chapter shall not affect or limit any other provisions of law authorizing or providing for the furnishing of facilities or services, or the raising of revenue for these purposes. The city may use the provisions of this chapter instead of or in conjunction with any other method of financing part or all of the cost of providing the authorized kinds of public and private capital facilities and municipal services. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (1-2) (part), 1989)  
3.36.040 - Conflicting provisions—Severability. 
A.  Any provision in this chapter which conflicts with any general law or act shall prevail over the other such provision in connection with any proceedings taken pursuant to this chapter. 
B.  In the event any portion of this chapter shall be declared illegal, unenforceable, or unconstitutional, such provision shall be deemed severable from the rest of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (1-3), 1989)  
3.36.050 - Construction of provisions—Effect of omission. 
This chapter shall be liberally construed in order to effectuate its purposes. No error, irregularity, informality, and no neglect or omission of any officer, in any procedure taken under this chapter, which does not directly affect the jurisdiction of the city council to order the installation of the facility or the provision of service, or the levy of special taxes, shall void or invalidate such proceeding or any levy for the costs of a facility or service. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (1-10), 1989)  
3.36.060 - Actions or determinations generally. 
The city council may take any actions or make any determinations which it determines are necessary or convenient to carry out the purposes of this chapter and which are not otherwise prohibited by law. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (1-4), 1989)  
3.36.070 - Establishment of community facilities district to finance certain services. 
A.  A community facilities district may be established under this chapter to finance any one or more municipal services within an area including, but not limited to, the following: 
1.  Police protection services, including, but not limited to, criminal justice services. Criminal justice services shall not be limited to providing services for jails, detention facilities, and juvenile halls; 
2.  Fire protection and suppression services, and ambulance and paramedic services; 
3.  Recreation program services, library services and the operation and maintenance of parks, parkways, open space, and museums and cultural facilities; 
4.  Flood and storm protection services, including, but not limited to, the operation and maintenance of storm drainage systems; 
5.  Maintenance of sanitary sewer system facilities and storm drainage facilities of the city including, but not limited to, sanitary sewer mains, laterals, manholes, pump stations, and appurtenances of the city to convey, treat, and dispose of sewage, and all storm drainage lines, mains, inlets, channels and all appurtenances of the system of the city designed to convey stormwaters by cleaning, repairing and removal of debris, rubbish and other solid waste; 
6.  Any other municipal service which the city is authorized by law to provide. 
B.  For purposes of this chapter, municipal services that may be financed include the performance by employees of functions, operations, maintenance and repair activities. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (1-5), 1989)  
3.36.080 - Other financing powers of a community facilities district. 
A.  A community facilities district may also finance the purchase, construction, expansion, improvement or rehabilitation of any real or other tangible property with an estimated useful life of three years or longer or may finance planning and design work which is directly related to the purchase, construction, expansion or rehabilitation of any real or tangible property. The facilities need not be physically located within the district. A district may finance the purchase of facilities whose construction has been completed before or after the adoption of the resolution of formation if the facility is or was constructed pursuant to plans approved by the city, and the facility is inspected by the city and found to be in compliance with applicable city building codes and standards. 
B.  For example, a community facilities district may finance facilities, including, but not limited to, the following: 
1.  Local park, recreation, parkway, and open-space facilities; 
2.  Elementary and secondary school sites and structures; 
3.  Libraries; 
4.  The district may also finance the construction or undergrounding of natural gas pipeline facilities, telephone lines, facilities for the transmission or distribution of electrical energy, and cable television lines. The district may enter into an agreement with a public utility to utilize those facilities to provide a particular service and for the conveyance of those facilities to the public utility. Any reimbursement by the public utility made to the district shall be utilized to reduce or minimize the special tax levied within the district or improvement area, or to construct or acquire additional facilities within the district or improvement area, as specified in the resolution of formation; 
5.  The district may also pay in full all amounts necessary to eliminate any fixed special assessment liens or to repay or defease any indebtedness secured by any tax, fee, charge, or assessment levied within the area of a community facilities district or may pay debt service on that indebtedness; 
6.  Improvements to or the rehabilitation of real property related to fire suppression and/or asbestos removal; 
7.  Any other facilities, public or private, which the city is authorized by law to contribute revenue to, or construct, own or operate. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (1-6), 1989)  
3.36.090 - School facilities financed by community facilities district—Cost-sharing by State Allocation Board. 
A.  All or any part of the cost of any school facilities financed by a community facilities district may be shared by the State Allocation Board pursuant to Section 17718.5 of the California Education Code. 
B.  If the State Allocation Board shares in any part of the cost of the school facilities, the ownership of those facilities and the real property upon which the facilities are located shall be transferred to the state of California. A copy of the deed by which the title is transferred shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder of the county in which the property is located. The deed shall be indexed by the county recorder in the grantor-grantee index to the name of the school district as grantor and to the state of California as grantee. In addition, the community facilities district shall take one or more of the following actions: 
1.  Reduce the amount of bonds authorized to be issued by the community facilities district; 
2.  Reduce the amount of any special tax which is levied within the community facilities district; 
3.  Reduce the amount of outstanding bonds or provide for the defeasance of outstanding bonds; 
4.  Shorten the period of time during which a special tax is levied within the community facilities district. 
C.  The amount of savings achieved pursuant to the actions taken in accordance with subsection B of this section shall be in an amount equal to the amount of costs shared by the State Allocation Board pursuant to Section 17018.5 of the California Education Code. 
D.  The city council finds and declares that this section is intended to be in furtherance and not in derogation of education and school financing, and thus an appropriate part of this chapter despite the fact that education is a state affair. 
(Ord. 2869 § 15, 2006; Ord. 2466 § 2 (1-7), 1989)  
3.36.100 - Transfer of funds—Use of money—Interest. 
A.  The city council may from time to time transfer moneys to a community facilities district or to a zone within a community facilities district, for the benefit of the district or zone, from any funds available to the city. The city council also may appropriate any of the city's available moneys to a revolving fund to be used for the acquisition of real or personal property, engineering or other services, or the construction of structures or improvements needed in whole or in part to provide one or more of the facilities or services of a community facilities district. 
B.  The district may reimburse the city for any amount transferred or appropriated pursuant to this section, together with interest at the rate per year, as determined by the city council. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (1-8), 1989)  
3.36.110 - Advances of funds or work in-kind. 
A.  At any time either before or after the formation of a community facilities district, the city council may accept advances of funds or work in-kind from any source, including, but not limited to, private persons or private entities and may provide for the use of those funds or that work in-kind for any authorized purpose, including, but not limited to, paying any cost incurred by the city in creating a community facilities district. The city council may enter into an agreement with the person or entity advancing the funds or work in-kind to repay all or a portion of the funds advanced, or to reimburse the person or entity for the value, or cost, whichever is less, of the work in-kind, as determined by the city council, with or without interest, under all of the following conditions: 
1.  The proposal to repay the funds or the value or cost of the work in-kind, whichever is less, is included in the resolution of intention or the resolution of formation to establish the district, or in the resolution of consideration to alter the types of public facilities and services provided within an established district; 
2.  Any proposed special tax or change in a special tax is approved by the qualified electors of the district pursuant to this chapter. Any agreement may specify that if the qualified electors of the district do not approve the proposed special tax or change in a special tax, the local agency shall return any funds which have not been committed for any authorized purpose by the time of the election to the person or entity advancing the funds; 
3.  Any work in-kind accepted pursuant to this section shall have been performed or constructed pursuant to plans approved by the city, and the work-in-kind shall be inspected by the city and found to be in compliance with applicable city building codes and standards. 
B.  Any such agreement shall not constitute a debt or liability of the city. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (1-9), 1989)  
3.36.120 - Failure to receive notice, resolution, order, or other matter not affecting proceedings. 
The failure of any person to receive a notice, resolution, order, or other matter shall not affect in any way whatsoever the validity of any proceedings taken under this chapter, or prevent the legislative body from proceeding with any hearing so noticed. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (1-11), 1989)  
3.36.130 - Application of provisions—Powers and duties of municipal officials. 
A.  This chapter applies insofar as the city has the power to install or contribute revenue for any of the facilities or provide or contribute revenue for any of the services authorized under this chapter. The officers of the city who have similar powers and duties as the municipal officers referred to in this chapter shall have the powers and duties given by this chapter to the municipal officials. Where no similar officer exists, the city manager shall appoint a person or designate an officer to perform the duties under this chapter. 
B.  The city may initiate proceedings pursuant to Section 3.36.190 to include territory proposed for annexation to the city within a community facilities district if a petition or resolution of application for the annexation of the territory to the city has been accepted for filing and a certificate of filing has been issued by the executive officer of the city formation commission at the time the proceedings to create the district are initiated. Those proceedings may be completed only if the annexation of the territory to the city is completed. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (1-12), 1989)  
3.36.140 - Joint community facilities agreement or joint exercise of powers agreement. 
A.  The city council may enter into a joint community facilities agreement with any other local agency pursuant to this section or into a joint exercise of powers agreement pursuant to Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 6500) of Division 7 of Title 1 of the California Government Code to exercise any power authorized by this chapter if the city council adopts a resolution declaring that such a joint agreement would be beneficial to the residents of the city or the district. 
B.  Notwithstanding Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 6500) of Division 7 of Title 1 of the California Government Code, a contracting party may use the proceeds of any special tax or charge levied pursuant to this chapter or of any bonds or other indebtedness issued pursuant to this chapter to provide facilities or services which that contracting party is otherwise authorized by law to provide, even though another contracting party does not have the power to provide those facilities or services. 
C.  The agreement entered into pursuant to this section may provide for the division of responsibility to provide any of the facilities or services among the entities entering into the agreement. The agreement shall provide for the allocation and distribution of the proceeds of any special tax levy among the parties to the agreement. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (1-13), 1989)  
3.36.150 - Definitions. 
Unless the context otherwise requires, the definitions contained in this section shall govern the construction of this chapter. 
A.  "Clerk-treasurer" means the city clerk-treasurer of the city. 
B.  "Community facilities district" or "district" means a district established pursuant to this chapter for the sole purpose of financing facilities and/or services. 
C.  "Cost" means the expense of constructing or purchasing the facility and of related land, right-of-way, easements, including incidental expenses, and the cost of providing authorized services, including incidental expenses. 
D.  "Debt" means any binding obligation to repay a sum of money, including obligations in the form of bonds, certificates of participation, long-term leases, loans from government agencies, or loans from banks, other financial institutions, private businesses or individuals. 
E.  "Incidental expense" includes all of the following: 
1.  The cost of planning and designing facilities to be financed pursuant to this chapter, including the cost of environmental evaluations of those facilities; 
2.  The costs associated with the creation of the district, issuance of bonds, determination of the amount of taxes, collection of taxes, payment of taxes, or costs otherwise incurred in order to carry out the authorized purposes of the district; 
3.  Any other expenses incidental to the management, administration, completion, and inspection of the construction and/or acquisition of the facilities. 
F.  "Landowner" or "owner" or "owner of land" means any person shown as the owner of land on the last equalized assessment roll or otherwise known to be the owner of the land by the city clerk-treasurer. Notwithstanding the foregoing, "landowner" or "owner" or "owner of land" means, with respect to any land which is the subject of a condemnation action, the person entitled to possession of the land. The city council has no obligation to obtain other information as to the ownership of the land, and its determination of ownership shall be final and conclusive for the purposes of this chapter. The city or any other public agency is not a landowner or owner of land for purposes of this chapter, unless the land owned by the city or any public agency or any leasehold therein would be subject to a special tax levied pursuant to this chapter; as provided in Sections 3.36.160 or 3.36.170. 
G.  "Legislative body" means the legislative body or governing board of any local agency, and with respect to the city, shall mean the city council. 
H.  "Local agency" means any city or county, whether general law or chartered, special district, school district, joint powers entity created pursuant to Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 6500) of Division 7 of Title 1, or any other municipal corporation, district, or political subdivision of the state. 
I.  "Rate" means a single rate of tax or a schedule of rates. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (1-14), 1989)  
3.36.160 - Special tax—Property acquired by public entity through negotiated transaction or by gift or devise. 
A.  If property not otherwise exempt from a special tax levied pursuant to this chapter is acquired by a public entity through a negotiated transaction, or by gift or devise, the special tax shall, notwithstanding Sections 3.36.590 through 3.36.620, continue to be levied on the property acquired and shall be enforceable against the public entity that acquired the property. 
B.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any public agency other than a city, county or school district may subject property owned by it to the levy of special taxes, if it shall certify to the city council: 
1.  Its agreement to do so; 
2.  That it intends to dispose of such property by transfer to a nongovernmental agency at some time in the future; and 
3.  That it agrees to cooperate in the sale of the property if necessary to obtain funds to pay any special taxes levied upon such property. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (1-15), 1989)  
3.36.170 - Special tax—Special assessment on property acquired by public entity through eminent domain. 
If property subject to a special tax levied pursuant to this chapter is acquired by the city or any public entity or entities through eminent domain proceedings, the obligation to pay the special tax shall be treated, pursuant to Section 1265.250 of the California Code of Civil Procedure, as if it were a special annual assessment. For this purpose, the present value of the obligation to pay a special tax to pay the principal and interest on any indebtedness incurred by the district prior to the date of apportionment determined pursuant to Section 5082 of the California Revenue and Taxation Code shall be treated the same as a fixed lien special assessment. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (1-16), 1989)  
3.36.180 - Lease or possessory interest by exempt person or entity to nonexempt person or entity—Lease provisions—Collection. 
A.  If a public agency owning property, including property held in trust for any beneficiary, which is exempt from a special tax pursuant to Sections 3.36.590 through 3.36.620 grants a leasehold or other possessory interest in the property to a nonexempt person or entity, the special tax shall, notwithstanding Sections 3.36.590 through 3.36.620 be levied on the leasehold or possessory interest and shall be payable by the owner of the leasehold or possessory interest. 
B.  When entering into a lease or other written contract creating a possessory interest that may be subject to taxation, pursuant to subsection A of this section, the public agency shall include, or cause to be included, in the contract a statement that the property interest may be subject to special taxation pursuant to this chapter, and that the party in whom the possessory interest is vested may be subject to the payment of special taxes levied on the interest. Failure to comply with the requirements of this section shall not, however, invalidate the contract. 
C.  If the special tax on any possessory interest levied pursuant to subsection A of this section is unpaid when due, the tax collector may use those collection procedures which are available for the collection of assessments on the unsecured roll. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (1-17), 1989)  
Article II. - Proceedings to Create a Community Facilities District 
 
3.36.190 - Institution of proceedings—Request—Petition—Fee. 
A.  Proceedings for the establishment of a community facilities district may be instituted by the city council on its own initiative and shall be instituted by the city council when any of the following occurs: 
1.  A written request for the establishment of a district, signed by two members of the legislative body, describing the boundaries of the territory which is proposed for inclusion in the district and specifying the type or types of facilities and/or services to be financed by the district, is filed with the legislative body; 
2.  A petition requesting the institution of the proceedings signed by the requisite number of registered voters, as specified in Section 3.36.210(A)(4), is filed with the city clerk-treasurer. The petition may consist of any number of separate instruments, each of which shall comply with all of the requirements of the petition, except as to the number of signatures; 
3.  A petition requesting the institution of the proceedings signed by landowners owning the requisite portion of the area of the proposed district, as specified in Section 3.36.210(A)(4),is filed with the city clerk-treasurer. 
B.  The written request filed pursuant to subsection A (4) of this section and the petitions filed pursuant to subsection A(2) and (3) shall be accompanied by the payment of a fee in an amount which the finance director determines is sufficient to compensate the city for all costs incurred in conducting proceedings to create a district pursuant to this chapter, and shall not be considered received until such payment has been made to the city. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (2-1), 1989)  
3.36.200 - Prohibition of LAFCO from district proposal review or decisions. 
Notwithstanding paragraph (2) of subdivision (a) of Section 54790 of the California Government Code, a local agency formation commission shall have no power or duty to review and approve or disapprove a proposal to create a community facilities district or a proposal to annex territory to, or detach territory from, such district, pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (2-2), 1989)  
3.36.210 - Petition—Contents—Findings as to requisite number of signers. 
A.  A petition requesting the institution of proceedings for the establishment of a community facilities district shall do all of the following: 
1.  Request the city council to institute proceedings to establish a community facilities district pursuant to this chapter; 
2.  Describe the boundaries of the territory which is proposed for inclusion in the district; 
3.  Generally state the type or types of facilities and/or services to be financed by the district; 
4.  Be signed by not less than ten percent of the registered voters residing within the territory proposed to be included within the district or by owners of not less than ten percent of the area of land proposed to be included within the district. 
B.  If the city council finds that the petition is signed by the requisite number of registered voters residing within the territory proposed to be included within the district or by the requisite number of owners of land proposed to be included within the district, that finding shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (2-3), 1989)  
3.36.220 - Resolution of intention to establish district—Time limit for adoption. 
Within six months after either a written request by two members of the city council or a petition requesting the institution of proceedings for the establishment of a community facilities district is filed with the city clerk-treasurer, it shall adopt a resolution of intention to establish a community facilities district in the form specified in Section 3.36.230. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (2-4), 1989)  
3.36.230 - Resolution of intention to establish district—Contents. 
Proceedings for the establishment of a community facilities district shall be instituted by the adoption of a resolution of intention to establish the district which shall do all of the following: 
A.  State that a community facilities district is proposed to be established under the terms of this chapter and describe the boundaries of the territory proposed for inclusion in the district, which may be accomplished by reference to a map on file in the office of the city clerk-treasurer, showing the proposed community facilities district; 
B.  State the name proposed for the district in substantially the following form: "Community Facilities District No. of the City of Whittier"; 
C.  Generally state the type or types of facilities and/or services proposed to be financed by the district pursuant to this chapter. If the purchase of completed facilities or the incurring of incidental expenses is proposed, the resolution may identify those facilities or expenses; 
D.  State that, except where funds are otherwise available, a special tax sufficient to pay for all facilities and/or services, secured by recordation of a continuing lien against all nonexempt real property in the district, will be annually levied within the area of the district. The resolution shall specify the rate and method of apportionment and manner of collection of the special tax in sufficient detail to allow each landowner or resident within the proposed district to estimate the maximum amount that he or she will have to pay; 
E.  Fix a time and place for a public hearing on the establishment of the district which shall not be less than ten or more than sixty days after the adoption of the resolution and direct the giving of notice as provided in Section 3.36.250 and, if desired, 3.36.260; 
F.  Direct the preparation and filing of the report under Section 3.36.240; 
G.  Contain a description of the proposed voting procedure. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (2-5), 1989)  
3.36.240 - Reports and estimate of costs by responsible officers. 
At the time of the adoption of the resolution of intention to establish a community facilities district, the city council shall direct the finance director or another appropriate officer to file or cause to be prepared and filed at or before the time of the hearing, a report with the city clerk-treasurer containing a brief description of the facilities and services proposed to be financed by type and an estimate of the cost of providing those facilities and services, together with an estimate of the costs of any bond issuance and the city's administration of the district. If the purchase of completed facilities or the payment of incidental expenses is proposed, the report shall contain an estimate of the cost of those facilities or incidental expenses. The report shall be made a part of the record of the hearing on the resolution of intention to establish the district. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (2-6), 1989)  
3.36.250 - Required notice of hearing. 
A.  The city clerk-treasurer shall publish a notice of the hearing once in a newspaper of general circulation circulated in the proposed district. Publication shall be complete at least seven days prior to the date of the hearing. 
B.  The notice shall contain all of the following information: 
1.  The text of the resolution of intention to establish the district; 
2.  The time and place of the hearing on the establishment of the district; 
3.  A statement that at the hearing the testimony of all interested persons or taxpayers for or against the establishment of the district, the extent of the district, or the furnishing of specified types of facilities and/or services will be heard. The notice shall also describe, in summary, the effect of protests made by registered voters or landowners against the establishment of the district, the extent of the district, the furnishing of a specified type of facilities or services, or a specified special tax, as provided in Section 3.36.280. 
4.  A description of the proposed voting procedure. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (2-7), 1989)  
3.36.260 - Optional notice of hearing. 
The city council may also direct the city clerk-treasurer to give notice of the hearing by first-class mail to each registered voter and to each landowner within the proposed district. This notice shall be mailed at least ten days before the hearing and shall contain the same information as is required to be contained in the notice published pursuant to Section 3.36.250, except that the entire text of the resolution of intention may be omitted if the date, number and fact of its adoption are shown and the proposed facilities and/or services are briefly described and the proposed amounts and method of apportionment of the special tax are shown. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (2-8), 1989)  
3.36.270 - Protests by interested persons or taxpayers. 
At the hearing, protests against the establishment of the district, the extent of the district, or the furnishing of specified types of facilities or services within the district may be made orally or in writing by any interested persons or taxpayers. Any protests pertaining to the regularity or sufficiency of the proceedings shall be in writing and shall clearly set forth the alleged irregularities and defects. To be counted under Section 3.36.280 any written protest shall be filed with the city clerk-treasurer on or before the time fixed for the hearing. The city council may waive any irregularities in the form or content of any written protest and at the hearing may correct minor defects in the proceedings. Written protests may be withdrawn in writing at any time before the conclusion of the hearing. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (2-9), 1989)  
3.36.280 - Written protest. 
A.  If fifty percent or more of the registered voters, or six registered voters, whichever is more, residing within the territory proposed to be included in the district, or the owners of one-half or more of the area of the land in the territory proposed to be included in the district and not exempt from the special tax, file written protests against the establishment of the district, and protests are not withdrawn so as to reduce the value of the protests to less than a minority, no further proceedings to create the specified community facilities district or to levy the specified special tax shall be taken for a period of six months from the date of the decision of the city council. 
B.  If the majority protests are only against the furnishing of a specified type or types of facilities or services within the proposed district, or against levying a specified special tax, those types of facilities or services or the specified special tax shall be eliminated from the resolution of formation. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (2-10), 1989)  
3.36.290 - Hearing—Continuances and time limitations. 
A.  The hearing may be continued from time to time without further notice under Section 3.36.250 or 3.36.260, but shall be completed within six months of the original hearing date. The city council may modify the resolution of intention by eliminating proposed facilities or services, or by changing the rate or method of apportionment of the proposed special tax so as to reduce the maximum special tax to be levied on all or a portion of the property within the proposed district, or by removing territory from the proposed district. 
B.  At the conclusion of the hearing, the city council may abandon the proposed establishment of the community facilities district or may, after passing upon all protests, determine to proceed with establishing the district, except as provided in Section 3.36.280. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (2-11), 1989)  
3.36.300 - Adoption of resolution of formation—Contents and findings. 
If the city council determines to establish the district, it shall adopt a resolution of formation establishing the district. The resolution of formation shall incorporate by reference all of the information required to be included in the resolution of intention to establish the district specified in Section 3.36.230. If a special tax is proposed to be levied in the district to pay for any facilities and/or services and the special tax has not been eliminated by majority protest pursuant to Section 3.36.280, the resolution shall state that fact and all of the following: 
A.  Determine whether all proceedings were valid and in conformity with the requirements of this chapter, which finding shall be final and conclusive; 
B.  State that the proposed special tax to be levied within the district has not been precluded by majority protest pursuant to Section 3.36.280; 
C.  Identify any facilities and/or services, as may be changed under Section 2.36.280 or 2.36.290, proposed to be funded with the proceeds of the special tax; 
D.  Set forth the proposed rate and method of apportionment of the special tax; 
E.  Set forth the name, address, and telephone number of the office, department, or bureau of the city which will be responsible for preparing annually a current roll of special tax levy obligations by assessor's parcel number and which will be responsible for estimating future special tax levies pursuant to Section 3.36.630; 
F.  State that upon recordation of a notice of special tax lien pursuant to Section 3114.5 of the California Streets and Highways Code, a continuing lien to secure each levy of the special tax shall attach to all nonexempt real property in the district and this lien shall continue in force and effect until the special tax obligation is prepaid and permanently satisfied and the lien canceled in accordance with law or until collection of the tax by the city council ceases; 
G.  Set forth the county of recordation and the book and page in the Book of Maps of Assessments and Community Facilities Districts in the county recorder's office where the boundary map of the proposed community facilities district has been recorded pursuant to Sections 3111 and 3113 of the California Streets and Highways Code; 
H.  Provide for the conduct of the election required under Section 3.36.350; 
I.  At the option of the city council, provide for the establishment of or change in the appropriations limit under Section 3.36.340. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (2-12), 1989)  
3.36.310 - Special tax—Basis for apportionment. 
A tax imposed pursuant to this chapter is a special tax and not a special assessment, and there is no requirement that the tax be apportioned on the basis of benefit to any property. However, a special tax levied pursuant to this chapter may be on or based on benefit received by parcels of real property, the cost of providing facilities and/or services available to each parcel, or any other reasonable basis as determined by the city council. A special tax apportioned on any of these bases shall not be construed to be on or based upon the ownership of real property. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (2-13), 1989)  
3.36.320 - Noncontiguous areas—Alteration of boundaries. 
A.  A community facilities district may include areas of territory that are not contiguous. 
B.  In establishing the boundaries of the district, the city council may alter the exterior boundaries of the district to include less territory than that described in the recorded boundary map but it may not include any territory not described in that map. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (2-14), 1989)  
3.36.330 - District boundaries—Inclusion of lands devoted to agricultural, timber or livestock uses. 
Land devoted primarily to agricultural, timber, or livestock uses and being used for the commercial production of agricultural, timber or livestock products may be included in a community facilities district only if such land is contiguous to other land which is included within the described exterior boundaries of the community facilities district, and only if the legislative body finds that the land will be benefited by any of the types of public facilities and services proposed to be provided within the district. The land may, however, be included in the community facilities district, if the owner requests its inclusion. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (2-15), 1989)  
3.36.340 - Appropriations limit—Establishment, change and adjustment. 
The city council may submit a proposition to establish or change the appropriations limit, as defined by subdivision (h) of Section 8 of Article XIII B of the California Constitution, of a community facilities district to the qualified electors of a proposed or established district. The proposition establishing or changing the appropriations limit shall become effective if approved by the qualified electors voting on the proposition and shall be adjusted for changes in the cost of living and changes in populations, as defined by subdivisions (b) and (c) of Section 7901, except that the change in population may be estimated by the legislative body in the absence of an estimate by the State of California Department of Finance, and in accordance with Section 1 of Article XIII B of the California Constitution. For purposes of adjusting for changes in population, the population of the district shall be deemed to be at least one person during each calendar year. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (2-16), 1989)  
3.36.350 - Special tax levy election—General provisions. 
By resolution, the city council shall submit the levy of any special taxes to the qualified electors of the proposed community facilities district in the next general election or in a special election to be held, notwithstanding any other requirement, including any requirement that elections be held on specified dates, contained in the California Elections Code, at least five days, but not more than one hundred eighty days, following the adoption of the resolution of formation. The legislative body shall provide the resolution of formation, a certified map of sufficient scale and clarity to show the boundaries of the district, and a sufficient description to allow the election official to determine the boundaries of the district to the official conducting the election after the adoption of the resolution of formation, if requested by the official conducting the election. Assessor's parcel numbers for the land within the district shall be included if it is a landowner election or the district does not conform to an existing district's boundaries, if requested by the official conducting the election. If the election is to be held less than one hundred twenty-five days following the adoption of the resolution of formation and the election official is other than the city clerk-treasurer, the concurrence of the election official conducting the election shall be required. However, any time limit specified by this section or requirement pertaining to the conduct of the election may be waived with the unanimous consent of the qualified electors of the proposed district and the concurrence of the election official conducting the election. In the event of such unanimous waiver, the election official shall be the city clerk-treasurer. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (2-17(a)), 1989)  
3.36.360 - Special tax levy election—Voter qualifications. 
Except as otherwise provided in Section 3.36.370, if at least twelve persons, who need not necessarily be the same twelve persons, have been registered to vote within the territory of the proposed community facilities district for each of the ninety days preceding the date of the protest hearing, the vote shall be by the registered voters of the proposed district, with each voter having one vote. Otherwise, the vote shall be by the landowners of the proposed district and each landowner who is the owner of record at the close of the protest hearing, or the authorized representative thereof, shall have one vote for each acre or portion of an acre of land that he or she owns within the proposed community facilities district. The number of votes to be voted by a particular landowner shall be specified on the ballot provided to that landowner. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (2-17(b)), 1989)  
3.36.370 - Special tax levy election—Vote by landowners of proposed district. 
If the proposed special tax will not be apportioned in any tax year on any portion of property in the district in residential use in that tax year, as determined by the legislative body, the legislative body may provide that the vote shall be by the landowners of the proposed district whose property would be subject to the tax if it were levied at the time of the election. Each of these landowners shall have one vote for each acre, or portion thereof, that the landowner owns within the proposed district which would be subject to the proposed tax if it were levied at the time of the election. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (2-17(c)), 1989)  
3.36.380 - Special tax levy election—Ballot distribution and return. 
Ballots for the special election authorized by Section 3.36.350 may be distributed to qualified electors by mail with return postage prepaid or by personal service by the election official. The election official may provide a certificate of the proper mailing or delivery of ballots, which certificate shall constitute conclusive proof of mailing or delivery in the absence of fraud. The voted ballots shall be returned to the election officer conducting the election not later than the time specified in the resolution calling the election. However, if all the qualified voters have voted, the election shall be closed. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (2-17(d)), 1989)  
3.36.390 - Laws governing elections. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the provisions of law regulating elections of the city, insofar as they may be applicable, shall govern all elections conducted pursuant to this chapter. Except as provided in subsection B of this section, there shall be prepared and included in the ballot material provided to each voter an impartial analysis, and arguments and rebuttals, if any. 
B.  Analysis and arguments may be waived with the unanimous consent of all the qualified electors. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (2-18), 1989)  
3.36.400 - Ballot materials for elections. 
A.  If the election is to be conducted by mail or hand-delivered ballot, the election official conducting the election shall provide ballots and election materials pursuant to Sections 3.36.380 and 3.36.390, together with all supplies and instructions necessary for the use and return of the ballot. 
B.  The identification envelope for return of ballots used in landowner elections shall contain the following: 
1.  The name of the landowner; 
2.  The address of the landowner; 
3.  A declaration, under penalty of perjury, stating that the voter is the owner of record or the authorized representative of the landowner entitled to vote and is the person whose name appears on the identification envelope; 
4.  The date of signing and place of execution of the declaration described in subdivision 3 of this subsection; 
5.  The printed name and signature of the voter; 
6.  The address of the voter; 
7.  A notice that the envelope contains an official ballot and is to be opened only by the election official. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (2-19), 1989)  
3.36.410 - Effect of voter approval or disapproval. 
A.  After the canvass of returns of any election pursuant to Section 3.36.350 the city council may levy any special tax as specified in the resolution of formation adopted pursuant to Section 3.36.300 within the territory of the district, if two-thirds of the votes cast upon the question of levying the tax are in favor of levying that tax. 
B.  After the canvass of returns of any election conducted pursuant to Section 3.36.350 the city council shall take no further action with respect to levying the specified special tax within the community facilities district for six months from the date of the election, if the question of levying that specified special tax fails to receive approval by two-thirds of the votes cast upon the question. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (2-20), 1989)  
3.36.420 - Application of California Streets and Highway Code with respect to special taxes—Filing. 
A.  Upon a determination by the city council that the requisite two-thirds of votes cast in an election held pursuant to Section 3.36.350 are in favor of levying the special tax, the city clerk-treasurer shall record or cause to be recorded the notice of special tax lien provided for in Section 3114.5 of the California Streets and Highways Code, whereupon the lien of the special tax shall attach as provided in Section 3115.5 of the California Streets and Highways Code. The notice of special tax lien shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder in each county in which any portion of the district is located. 
B.  Division 4.5 (commencing with Section 3100) of the California Streets and Highways Code applies with respect to any special tax levied pursuant to this chapter. This chapter is a "principal act" as that term is defined in Section 3100 of the California Streets and Highways Code. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (2-21), 1989)  
3.36.430 - Levy and apportionment of special tax. 
A.  Upon approval of a special tax pursuant to Section 3.36.410(A), the special tax may be levied only at the rate and may be apportioned only in the manner specified in the resolution of formation, except as provided in Article III of this chapter, and except that the legislative body may levy the special tax at a rate lower than that specified in the resolution of formation. In addition, the special tax may be levied only so long as it is needed to pay the principal and interest on debt incurred in order to construct facilities under authority of this chapter, or so long as it is needed to pay the costs and incidental expenses of services or of the construction of facilities authorized by this chapter. 
B.  When the city council determines that the special tax shall cease to be levied, the city council shall direct the city clerk-treasurer to record a notice of cessation of special tax which shall state that the obligation to pay the special tax has ceased and that the lien imposed by the notice of special tax lien is extinguished. The notice of cessation of special tax shall identify the book and page of the Book of Maps of Assessment and Community Facilities Districts wherein the map of the boundaries of the district is recorded, and wherein the notice of special tax lien is recorded. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (2-22), 1989)  
Article III. - Changes in Authorized Facilities, Services and Special Taxes 
 
3.36.440 - Elimination of types of facilities and services. 
Except as otherwise provided in this article, the city council may, at any time, after conducting a public hearing, eliminate one or more of the types of facilities and services specified in the resolution of formation to establish the existing district but may not finance any types of facilities and services that were not specified in the resolution of formation. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (3-1), 1989)  
3.36.450 - Resolution of consideration—Criteria for adoption. 
The city council shall not adopt a resolution of consideration to reduce the rate of any special tax or terminate the levy of any special tax if the proceeds of that tax are being utilized to retire any debt incurred pursuant to this chapter unless the city council determines that the reduction or termination of that tax would not interfere with the timely retirement of that debt. Otherwise, the city council may adopt a resolution of consideration when: 
A.  If the city council determines that the public convenience and necessity require any change in the types of authorized facilities or services which should be financed by an established community facilities district, that the rate or method of apportionment of a special tax should be changed, or that a new special tax should be proposed, the city council may adopt a resolution of consideration to alter the types of facilities or services to be financed by the district, to levy a new special tax or special taxes, or, except as provided in subsection B of this section, to alter the rate or method of apportionment of the special tax; or 
B.  If a petition signed by fifty percent or more of the registered voters residing in the district, or by the owners of fifty percent or more of the territory within the district, is filed with the city clerk-treasurer requesting that proceedings be commenced to change the types of facilities or services financed by the district or that the rate or method of apportionment of an existing special tax be changed, or that a new special tax be levied, the city council shall within ninety days thereafter adopt a resolution of consideration in the form specified in Section 3.36.460 to make those changes within the community facilities district. Any petition filed by landowners shall be accompanied by the payment of such fee as the finance director determines is sufficient to compensate the city for all costs incurred in conducting proceedings pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (3-2), 1989)  
3.36.460 - Resolution of consideration—Form. 
The resolution of consideration shall contain the following: 
A.  State the name of the existing district and refer to the resolution of formation for further particulars; 
B.  Generally describe the territory included in the district or make reference to the recorded boundary map thereof; 
C.  Specify the changes in facilities and/or services which the district is authorized to finance; 
D.  Specify any new special taxes which would be levied to pay for new or existing facilities and services and any proposed alteration to the rate or method of apportionment of an existing special tax; 
E.  Fix a time and place for a hearing upon the resolution of consideration which shall not be less than ten or more than sixty days after the adoption of the resolution of consideration. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (3-3), 1989)  
3.36.470 - Notice of hearing. 
The city clerk-treasurer shall give or cause to be given notice of the hearing in the same manner, containing the same information, as applicable, and within the same time as provided for the giving of notice of a hearing on a resolution of intention to establish a community facilities district under Section 3.36.250. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (3-4), 1989)  
3.36.480 - Protests—Elimination from resolution—Continuations of hearing. 
The provisions of Sections 3.36.270 through 3.36.430 shall apply to the proceedings for changes. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (3-5), 1989)  
3.36.490 - Dissolution of districts. 
A.  The legislative body may, by code, dissolve any existing district which it has created upon making all of the following determinations: 
1.  That the district is not obligated to pay any outstanding debt; and 
2.  That the district has no authorization to levy any special tax. 
B.  Upon dissolving a district, the city council shall cause an addendum to be recorded to the Notice of Special Tax Lien recorded pursuant to Section 3114.5 of the California Streets and Highways Code which shall state that the community facilities district and all associated liens, if any, have been dissolved. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (3-6), 1989)  
Article IV. - Annexation of Territory 
 
3.36.500 - Authorization. 
The city council may annex territory to an existing community facilities district as provided in this article. The annexed territory need not be contiguous to territory included in the existing community facilities district. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (3.5-1), 1989)  
3.36.510 - Resolution of intention—Adoption. 
If the city council determines that public convenience and necessity require that territory be added to an existing community facilities district, or if one or more of the voters residing within certain territory or landowners request the city council to include territory within the district, the city council may adopt a resolution of intention to annex the territory. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (3.5-2), 1989)  
3.36.520 - Resolution of intention—Contents. 
The resolution of intention to annex the territory shall do all of the following: 
A.  State the name of the existing community facilities district; 
B.  Generally describe the territory included in the existing district and the territory proposed to be annexed; 
C.  Specify the types of facilities and/or services provided pursuant to this chapter in the existing district and the types of facilities and/or services to be provided in the territory proposed to be annexed; and include a plan for sharing facilities and providing services that will be provided in common within the existing district and the territory proposed to be annexed; 
D.  Specify any special taxes which would be levied within the territory proposed to be annexed to pay for facilities and/or services provided pursuant to this chapter within that territory. A special tax proposed to pay for services to be supplied within the territory proposed to be annexed shall be equal to any special tax levied to pay for the same services in the existing district, except that a higher or lower tax may be levied within the territory proposed to be annexed to the extent that the actual cost of providing the services in that territory is higher or lower than the cost of providing those services in the existing district. A special tax proposed to pay for facilities financed with bonds secured by the existing community facilities district shall be the same as the tax levied in the existing district for that purpose, except that a higher special tax may be levied for that purpose within the territory proposed to be annexed to compensate for the interest and principal previously paid by the existing community facilities district, less any depreciation allocable to the facility as determined by the city council in its sole discretion; 
E.  Specify any alteration in the special tax rate levied within the existing community facilities district as a result of the proposed annexation. The maximum tax rate in the existing community facilities district may not be increased as a result of proceedings pursuant to this article; 
F.  Fix a time and place for a hearing upon the resolution which shall not be less than ten nor more than sixty days after the adoption by the city council of the resolution of intention to annex territory pursuant to Section 3.36.510. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (3.5-3), 1989)  
3.36.530 - Notice of hearing. 
A.  The city clerk-treasurer shall give notice of the hearing in the same manner and within the same time as provided for the giving of notice of a hearing on a resolution of intention to establish a community facilities district, as required by Section 3.36.250. 
B.  The notice shall do all of the following: 
1.  Contain the text of the resolution adopted pursuant to Section 3.36.520; 
2.  State the time and place for the hearing; 
3.  State that at the hearing the testimony of all interested persons for or against the annexation of territory to the community facilities district or the levying of special taxes within the territory proposed to be annexed will be heard. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (3.5-4), 1989)  
3.36.540 - Protests. 
At the hearing, protests against the proposals described in the resolution of intention may be made orally by any interested person. Any protests pertaining to the regularity or sufficiency of the proceedings shall be in writing and shall clearly set forth the irregularities or defects to which objection is made. All written protests shall be filed with the city clerk-treasurer prior to the time fixed for the hearing. The city council may waive any irregularities in the form or content of any written protest and at the hearing may correct minor defects in the proceedings. Written protests may be withdrawn in writing at any time before the conclusion of the hearing. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (3.5-5), 1989)  
3.36.550 - Abandonment of proposal—Required number of written protests. 
If fifty percent or more of the registered voters, or six registered voters, whichever is more, residing within the existing community facilities district, or if fifty percent or more of the registered voters or six registered voters, whichever is more, residing within the territory proposed for annexation, or if the owners of one-half or more of the area of land in the territory proposed to be annexed, file written protests against the proposed addition of territory to the existing community facilities district, and protests are not withdrawn so as to reduce the protests to less than a majority, no further proceedings shall be undertaken for a period of six months from the date of decision of the city council on the issues discussed at the hearing. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (3.5-6), 1989)  
3.36.560 - Continuance and duration of hearing—Submittal of special tax question to electorate. 
The hearing may be continued from time to time, but shall be completed within six months. At the conclusion of the hearing, the legislative body may abandon the proceedings or may, after passing upon all protests, submit the question of levying a special tax within the area proposed to be annexed to the existing community facilities district to the qualified electors of the area proposed to be annexed, in the manner specified for elections in Article II of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (3.5-7), 1989)  
3.36.570 - Addition of territory with full legal effect—Special tax levy. 
After the canvass of returns of any election conducted in accordance with Section 3.36.560, the city council shall determine that the area proposed to be annexed is added to and part of the existing community facilities district with full legal effect, and the city council may levy any special tax within the annexed territory, as specified in the resolution of intention to annex adopted pursuant to Section 3.36.510, if two-thirds of the votes cast on the proposition are in favor of levying the special tax. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (3.5-8), 1989)  
3.36.580 - Failure to receive approval of two-thirds of voters—Prohibition of further action. 
After the canvass of returns of any election conducted in accordance with Section 3.36.560, the city council shall take no further action on annexing the territory proposed to be annexed to the community facilities district for a period of six months from the date of the election if less than two-thirds of the votes cast on the proposition are in favor of levying the special tax. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (3.5-9), 1989)  
Article V. - Procedures for Levying 
 
3.36.590 - Authority. 
After a community facilities district has been created and authorized to levy specified special taxes pursuant to Article II, III or IV of this chapter, the city council may, by code, levy the special taxes at the rate and apportion them in the manner specified in the resolution of formation or consideration, as applicable, adopted pursuant to Article II, III or IV. Any such code, after adoption, shall remain in effect until repealed by a later code. The city council may, by resolution, clarify any aspect of the levy of the special tax as provided by the code. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (4-1) (part), 1989)  
3.36.600 - Exemption of governmental properties and entities from special tax. 
Properties or entities of the state, federal, or other local governments shall, except as otherwise provided in Section 3.36.160, 3.36.170 or 3.36.180, be exempt from the special tax. No other properties or entities are exempt from the special tax unless the properties or entities are expressly exempted in the resolution of formation to establish a district adopted pursuant to Section 3.36.300 or in a resolution of consideration to levy a new special tax or special taxes or to alter the rate or method of apportionment of an existing special tax as provided in Section 3.36.460. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (4-1) (part), 1989)  
3.36.610 - Use of tax proceeds—Collection. 
The proceeds of any special tax may only be used to pay, in whole or part, the cost of providing facilities, services and incidental expenses of the city or the district pursuant to this chapter. The special tax shall be collected in the same manner as ordinary ad valorem property taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedures, sale, and lien priority in case of delinquency as is provided for ad valorem taxes, unless another procedure has been authorized in the resolution of formation establishing the district and adopted by the city council. The tax collector may collect the special tax at intervals as specified in the resolution of formation, including intervals different from the intervals at which the ordinary ad valorem property taxes are collected. The tax collector may deduct the reasonable administrative costs incurred in collecting the special tax. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (4-1) (part), 1989)  
3.36.620 - Tax to be secured by lien. 
All special taxes levied by a community facilities district shall be secured by the lien imposed pursuant to Section 3115.5 of the California Streets and Highways Code. This lien shall be a continuing lien and shall secure each levy of special taxes. The lien of the special tax shall continue in force and effect until the special tax obligation is prepaid, permanently satisfied, and canceled, or until the special tax ceases to be levied by the city council in the manner provided in Section 3.36.430. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (4-1) (part), 1989)  
3.36.630 - Designation of office for special tax computation. 
The city council shall designate an office, department, or bureau of the city which shall be responsible for annually preparing the current roll of special tax levy obligations by assessor's parcel number on nonexempt property within the district and which will be responsible for estimating future special tax levies. The designated office, department, or bureau shall establish procedures to promptly respond to inquiries concerning current and future estimated tax liability. Neither the designated office, department, or bureau, nor the city council, shall be liable if any estimate of future tax liability is inaccurate. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (4-2), 1989)  
3.36.640 - Actions to attack, review, set aside, void or annul levy of special tax. 
Any action or proceeding to attack, review, set aside, void, or annul the levy of a special tax or an increase in a special tax pursuant to this chapter, or bonded indebtedness authorized to be incurred pursuant to this chapter shall be commenced within thirty days after the special tax or the bonded indebtedness, as applicable, is approved by the voters. Any appeal from a final judgment in that action or proceeding shall be perfected within thirty days after the entry of judgment. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (4-3), 1989)  
3.36.650 - Disclosure of special tax. 
A.  If a lot, parcel, or unit of a subdivision is subject to a special tax levied pursuant to this chapter for which a public report is not required pursuant to Article 2 (commencing with Section 11010) of Chapter 1 of Part 2 of Division 4 of the California Business and Professions Code, the subdivider, his or her agent, or representative, shall not sell, or lease for a term exceeding five years, the lot, parcel, or unit, or cause it to be sold or leased for a term exceeding five years, until the prospective purchaser or lessee of the lot, parcel, or unit has been furnished with and has signed a written notice as provided in this section. The notice shall contain the heading "NOTICE OF SPECIAL TAX" in type no smaller than eight-point type, and shall state the following in clear and simple language: 
1.  That the property being purchased is or will be subject to a special tax; 
2.  The maximum annual amount of the special tax, and the number of years for which it will be levied; 
3.  The types of facilities or services to be paid for with the proceeds of the special tax. 
B.  "Subdivision," as used in subsection A of this section, means improved or unimproved land that is divided or proposed to be divided for the purpose of sale, lease, or financing, whether immediate or future, into two or more lots, parcels, or units for residential use and includes a condominium project, as defined by Section 1350, a community apartment project, a stock cooperative, and a limited-equity housing cooperative, as defined in Sections 11004, 11003.2, and 11003.4, respectively, of the California Business and Professions Code. 
C.  If any disclosure required to be made by this section is delivered after the execution of an agreement to purchase, the buyer shall have three days after delivery in person or five days after delivery by deposit in the mail, to terminate his or her agreement by delivery of written notice of that termination to the owner, subdivider, or agent. Any disclosure delivered after the execution of an agreement to purchase shall contain a statement describing the buyer's right, method and time to rescind as prescribed by this subsection. 
D.  The failure of the buyer or lessee to sign the notice shall not invalidate any grant, conveyance, lease, or encumbrance. 
E.  Any person or entity who willfully violates the provisions of this section shall be liable to the purchaser of a lot or unit which is subject to the provisions of this section for actual damages, and in addition thereto, shall be guilty of a public offense punishable by a fine in an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars. In an action to enforce such liability or fine, the prevailing party shall be awarded reasonable attorney's fees. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (4-4), 1989)  
3.36.660 - Manner of fixing and collecting charges. 
For any community facilities district or zone thereof, the city council may fix and collect charges in the same manner as for miscellaneous extended services in county service areas. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (4-5), 1989)  
3.36.670 - Use of charges. 
Any charges collected pursuant to this chapter may only be used for facilities and services authorized by this chapter. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (4-6), 1989)  
3.36.680 - Notice of cancellation of special tax. 
In the event that the special tax is permanently satisfied as to a particular parcel of land, the city clerk-treasurer shall prepare and record in the office of the county recorder of the county in which the parcel of land is located, and the county recorder shall accept for recordation, a notice of cancellation of special tax authorization as to that parcel. The notice of cancellation of special tax authorization shall identify with particularity the special tax being canceled, shall contain the legal description and assessor's parcel number of the particular parcel of land subject to the tax, and shall contain the name of the owner of record of the parcel. The city clerk-treasurer shall mail the original notice of cancellation of special tax authorization to the owner of the property after recording the document. The city clerk-treasurer may specify a charge for the preparation and recordation of this notice. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (4-7), 1989)  
Article VI. - Bonds 
 
3.36.690 - Resolution to incur bonded indebtedness. 
Whenever the city council deems it necessary for an existing or proposed community facilities district to incur bonded indebtedness, it shall, by resolution, set forth all of the following: 
A.  A declaration of the necessity for the indebtedness; 
B.  The purpose for which the proposed debt is to be incurred; 
C.  The amount of the proposed debt; 
D.  The time and place for a hearing by the city council on the proposed debt issue. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (5-1), 1989)  
3.36.700 - Inclusion of certain costs and estimated costs in proposed bonded indebtedness. 
The amount of the proposed bonded indebtedness may include all costs and estimated costs incidental to, or connected with, the accomplishment of the purpose for which the proposed debt is to be incurred, including, but not limited to, the estimated costs of construction or acquisition of buildings, or both; acquisition of land, rights-of-way, water, sewer, or other capacity or connection fees; lease payments for school facilities that are relocated, satisfaction of contractual obligations issued pursuant to this chapter, architectural engineering, inspection, legal, fiscal, and financial consultant fees; environmental review and monitoring costs; bond and other reserve funds; discount fees; interest on any bonds of the district due and payable prior to the expiration of one year from the date of completion of all of the facilities, not to exceed five years; election costs; administrative expenses of the city in administering the district or the levy and collection of the special taxes; and all costs of issuance of the bonds, including, but not limited to, fees for bond counsel, costs of obtaining credit ratings, bond insurance premiums, fees for letters of credit, and other credit enhancements costs, and printing costs. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (5-2), 1989)  
3.36.710 - Notice of hearing on resolution. 
The city clerk-treasurer shall publish a notice of the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation circulated within the district. The notice shall state: 
A.  The time and place of the hearing; 
B.  At that time and place any person interested, including all persons owning property in the district, will be heard upon the proposed debt issue. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (5-3), 1989)  
3.36.720 - Hearing. 
At the time and place fixed for the hearing on the resolution declaring the necessity for incurring the bonded indebtedness or at any time and place to which the hearing is adjourned, the city council shall proceed with the hearing. Said hearing may be consolidated with the hearing referred to in Section 3.36.250 on the formation of the district. 
At the hearing any person interested, including persons owning property within the district, may appear and present any matters material to the questions set forth in the resolution declaring the necessity for incurring the bonded indebtedness. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (5-4), 1989)  
3.36.730 - Improvement area—Resolution—Application of proceedings. 
For purpose of financing of, or contributing to the financing of, specified facilities, the city council may by resolution designate a portion or portions of the district as one or more improvement areas. An area shall be known as "Improvement Area No. _______ of "Community Facilities District _______ of the City of Whittier." After the designation of an improvement area, all proceedings for purposes of a bond election and for the purpose of levying special taxes for payment of the bonds shall apply only to the improvement area for those specified facilities. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (5-5), 1989)  
3.36.740 - Resolution to incur bonded indebtedness—Contents. 
After the city council has held the hearing pursuant to Section 3.36.690(D), if it deems it necessary to incur the bonded indebtedness, it shall by resolution state all of the following: 
A.  That it deems it necessary to incur the bonded indebtedness; 
B.  The purpose for which the bonded indebtedness will be incurred; 
C.  Either of the following in accordance with its previous determination: 
1.  That the whole of the district will pay for the bonded indebtedness, 
2.  That a portion of the district will pay for the bonded indebtedness, which portion shall be described in the resolution of the city council made pursuant to Section 3.36.730; 
D.  The principal amount of debt to be incurred; 
E.  The maximum term of the bonds to be issued, which term shall not exceed fifty years; 
F.  The maximum annual rate of interest to be paid, payable annually or semiannually, or in part annually and in part semiannually, or in such other manner as shall be provided by the city council; 
G.  That the proposition will be submitted to the voters; 
H.  The date of the special community facilities district election (which may be consolidated with a general or special district election, including an election to levy a special tax) at which time the proposition shall be submitted to the voters; 
I.  If the election is not conducted by mail or hand-delivered ballot, the hours between which the polls shall be open; 
J.  If the election is conducted by mail or hand-delivered ballot, the hour when the ballots are required to be received in the office of the election officer conducting the election, and that if all qualified electors have voted, the election shall be closed. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (5-6), 1989)  
3.36.750 - Resolution to incur bonded indebtedness—Notice of election. 
The resolution provided for in Section 3.36.740 shall constitute the notice of such special bond election and such resolution shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation circulating within the district. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (5-7), 1989)  
3.36.760 - Elections pursuant to this article—Laws and rules applicable. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided in this article, the provisions of the California Elections Code relating to the qualifications of electors, the manner of voting, the duties of election officers, the canvassing of returns, and all other particulars in respect to the management of elections insofar as they may be applicable shall govern all elections pursuant to this article, except that voting shall be conducted in the manner specified in Sections 3.36.350 through 3.36.380 of this chapter. 
B.  Propositions relating to the levy of a special tax, incurring of bonded indebtedness, or to establish or change an appropriations limit, or any combination thereof, under this chapter, may be combined into one ballot proposition as determined by the city council. 
C.  If the area designated in the resolution adopted pursuant to Section 3.36.740 does not include the entire community facilities district, a separate ballot shall be prepared for the vote upon the proposition to authorize bonds and to levy a special tax for payment of such bonds and only the voters entitled thereto shall be given such ballots. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (5-8), 1989)  
3.36.770 - Resolution relating to form, execution and issuance of bonds. 
If more than two-thirds of the votes cast at the election are in favor of incurring the indebtedness, the legislative body may, by resolution, at the time or times it deems proper, provide for the following: 
A.  The form of the bonds; 
B.  The execution of the bonds; 
C.  The issuance of any part of the bonds; 
D.  The appointment of one or more banks or trust companies within or without the state having the necessary trust powers as trustee, fiscal agent, paying agent, or bond registrar; 
E.  The execution of a fiscal agent agreement, trust agreement or indenture securing the bonds; 
F.  The pledge or assignment of any revenues of the community facilities district to the repayment of the bonds; 
G.  The investment of any bond proceeds and other revenues, including special tax revenues, by the trustee or fiscal agent in any securities or obligations described in the resolution, fiscal agent agreement, indenture, trust agreement, or other instrument providing for the issuance of the bonds; 
H.  The date or dates to be borne by the bonds and the time or times of maturity of the bonds and the place or places and time or times that the bonds shall be payable; 
I.  The interest, fixed or variable, to be borne by the bonds; 
J.  The denominations, form, and registration privileges of the bonds; 
K.  Any other terms and conditions determined to be necessary by the city council. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (5-9), 1989)  
3.36.780 - Action to foreclose liens—Resolution to pursue foreclosure action. 
A.  As a cumulative remedy, if bonds are outstanding, the city council may, not later than four years after the due date of the last installment of principal thereof, order that any delinquent special taxes levied in whole or in part for payment of the bonds, together with any penalties, interest, and costs, be collected by an action brought in the superior court to foreclose the lien of special tax. 
B.  The city council may covenant for the benefit of bondowners to commence and diligently pursue to completion any foreclosure action regarding delinquent installments of any amount levied as a special tax for the payment of interest or principal of any bonds that are issued. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (5-10), 1989)  
3.36.790 - Credits for delinquent taxes. 
A.  When any foreclosure actions are ordered, the tax collector shall be credited upon the current tax roll with the amount charged on account of the delinquent special taxes to be sued on, including applicable penalties, interest, and costs, and the tax collector shall be relieved of further duty in regard thereto. Any amounts not the subject of a foreclosure action shall remain collectible by the tax collector. 
B.  The tax collector may charge the actual cost incurred in removing these sums from the tax roll. This charge shall be added to the costs a be recovered in the foreclosure action. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (5-11), 1989)  
3.36.800 - Delinquent taxes—Procedures. 
At any time after the tax collector has been relieved of his or her duty to collect sums under Section 3.36.790 and before judgment in a foreclosure action, the city council shall dismiss the action upon payment of all of the following: 
A.  The amount of any delinquent special taxes together with any penalties, interest, and costs accrued thereon to date of complete payment hereunder; 
B.  Costs of suit, including, but not limited to, litigation guarantees provided by title companies with respect to all claims of ownership or interest in the subject property; 
C.  Attorneys' fees authorized by the local agency; 
D.  The tax collector's costs authorized by subsection B of Section 3.36.790. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (5-12), 1989)  
3.36.810 - Foreclosures. 
The foreclosure action shall be brought in the name of the city, and may be brought within the time specified in Section 3.36.780. The complaint may be brief and need only include the following allegations: 
A.  That on a stated date, a certain sum of special taxes, levied against the subject property (describing it) pursuant to this chapter, became delinquent; 
B.  On that date, bonds issued pursuant to this chapter, payable in whole or in part by the subject special taxes, were outstanding (if applicable); 
C.  That the city council has ordered the foreclosure. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (5-13), 1989)  
3.36.820 - Judgments. 
A.  Any judgment shall decree the amount of the continuing lien against each parcel to be foreclosed, and shall order the parcel to be sold on execution as in other cases of the sale of the real property by process of the court. The judgment amount shall include reasonable attorneys' fees to be fixed by the court, together with interest, penalties, and other authorized charges and costs (all calculated up to date of judgment). The foreclosure action shall be governed and regulated by the provisions of this chapter, and also where not in conflict with this chapter, by other provisions of law generally applicable to foreclosure actions. 
B.  Property sold hereunder may not be sold for less than the amount of the judgment plus post-judgment interest and authorized costs without the consent of the owners of fifty-one percent by principal amount of the outstanding bonds. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (5-14), 1989)  
3.36.830 - Errors. 
No special tax installment, interest or penalties thereon, or deed shall be held invalid for any error in computation if the error is found to be comparatively negligible, or is found to be in favor of the owner of the real property affected thereby. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (5-15), 1989)  
3.36.840 - Signature on bonds or coupons—Place bonds are payable. 
The bonds shall be signed by the mayor and countersigned by the city clerk-treasurer. All signatures on the bonds may be printed, lithographed, or engraved. If any officer whose signature appears on the bonds ceases to be that officer before the delivery of the bonds, his or her signature is as effective as if he or she had remained in office. All bonds shall be payable at the office of the city clerk-treasurer or at the office of any agent designated by the city. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (5-16), 1989)  
3.36.850 - Special tax or charge for outstanding bonded debt. 
When the city council fixes and levies special taxes and charges for the community facilities district it shall also fix and levy that amount of special taxes and charges within the community facilities district which is required for the payment of the principal of and interest on any outstanding bonded debt of the community facilities district, including any necessary replenishment or expenditure of bond reserve funds or accumulation of funds for future bond payments. The special tax or charge shall be levied and collected by the same officers and at the same time and in the same manner that all other special taxes and charges are levied and collected for the community facilities district or in any other manner specified by the city council. The special taxes and charges shall not exceed the authority granted by Article II, III or IV of this chapter. All of the collections for payment of principal and interest on bonds shall be paid into the community facilities district bond or similar fund and reserve or other fund for the particular community facilities district and shall be used solely for the payment of the principal of and interest on the outstanding bonds of the community facilities district. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (5-17), 1989)  
3.36.860 - Action to determine validity of bonds or special tax levy. 
An action to determine the validity of bonds issued pursuant to this chapter or the validity of any special taxes levied pursuant to this chapter may be brought pursuant to Chapter 9 (commencing with Section 860) of Title 10 of Part 2 of the California Code of Civil Procedure but shall, notwithstanding the time limits specified in Section 860 of the California Code of Civil Procedure, be commenced within thirty days after the voters approve the issuance of the bonds or the special tax if the action is brought by an interested person pursuant to Section 863 of the California Code of Civil Procedures. Any appeal from a judgment in that action or proceeding shall be commenced within thirty days after entry of judgment. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (5-18), 1989)  
3.36.870 - Sale of bonds. 
The city may sell the bonds so authorized at public or private sale, at the times and in the manner the city council deems appropriate. However, all bonds sold at public sale shall be sold on sealed proposals after advertising for bids by publication of notice of sale, not less than five days prior to the date of sale, in a newspaper of general circulation circulating in the city. If no bids are received or the bids received are not satisfactory as to price or responsibility of the bidders, the city council or its designee may reject all bids received, if any, and either readvertise or sell the bonds at private sale. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (5-19), 1989)  
3.36.880 - Force, value and use of bonds—Exemption from state taxation. 
Any bonds issued by a district organized under the provisions of this chapter are given the same force, value and use as bonds issued by any municipality and shall be exempt from all taxation within the state. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (5-20), 1989)  
3.36.890 - Refunding bonds—Resolution. 
A.  The city council may, by resolution, authorize the issuance of new bonds to refund any or all of the district bonds outstanding or improvement area bonds outstanding that have been issued pursuant to this article. 
B.  The city council may issue refunding bonds without repeating any of the procedures required for the approval of the original bond issue, if the city council determines that the total net interest cost to maturity on the refunding bonds plus the principal amount of the refunding bonds does not exceed the total net interest cost to maturity on the bonds to be refunded plus the principal amount of the bonds to be refunded. Subject to such limitations, the principal amount of the refunding bonds may be more than, less than, or the same as the principal amount of the bonds to be refunded. 
C.  The total authorized amount of the bonded indebtedness of a district or an improvement area therein, as approved by the qualified voters thereof, shall not be reduced by the principal amount of any refunding bonds issued to refund any or all outstanding bonds of the district or improvement area. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (5-21), 1989)  
3.36.900 - Refunding bonds—Resolution for issuance. 
If the city council determines to issue refunding bonds pursuant to this article it shall adopt a resolution providing for their issuance. The resolution shall: 
A.  Describe the bonds being refunded and state the date on which it is anticipated that the refunding will occur; 
B.  Fix the date of the refunding bonds; 
C.  Designate the denomination or denominations of the refunding bonds; 
D.  Fix the minimum rate or rates of interest to be paid on the refunding bonds; 
E.  Fix the maturity dates of the refunding bonds, which may exceed the latest maturity date of the bonds being refunded, provided that the latest maturity date of the refunding bond shall not be in excess of fifty years from the date of issuance of the bonds to be refunded; 
F.  Designate the place or places of payment of principal and interest on the refunding bonds and on the bonds to be refunded; 
G.  Describe the form of the refunding bonds. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (5-22), 1989)  
3.36.910 - Sale of refunding bonds. 
The city council may sell the refunding bonds at public or private sale. The proceeds of any sale of refunding bonds for cash shall be applied only as permitted by this article. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (5-23), 1989)  
3.36.920 - Amount of proceeds and investments. 
The proceeds of the refunding bonds and the earnings thereon shall be in an amount sufficient to meet either the requirements of subsection A or B of this section at the time of issuance of the refunding bonds, as certified by a certified public accountant licensed to practice in this state. 
A.  The proceeds (including any amounts in any reserve fund established for the bonds to be refunded not needed for purposes of the refunding bonds) and investments, together with any interest or other gain to be derived from any such investment, shall be in an amount sufficient to pay the principal, interest, and redemption premiums, if any, on the refunded bonds as they become due or at designated dates prior to maturity and the costs of issuance of the refunding bonds. 
B.  The proceeds (including any amounts in any reserve fund established for the bonds to be refunded not needed for purposes of the refunding bonds) and investments, together with any interest or other gain to be derived from any such investment, shall be in an amount sufficient to pay the principal, interest, and redemption premiums, if any, on the refunding bonds prior to the maturity of the bonds to be refunded or prior to a designated date or dates before the maturity of the bonds to be refunded, the principal and any redemption premiums due on the refunded bonds at maturity or upon that designated date or dates, and the costs of issuance of the refunding bonds. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (5-24), 1989)  
3.36.930 - Refunding bonds—Use of savings—Reduction of tax levy. 
Any savings achieved through the issuance of refunding bonds shall be used to reduce the special taxes which were levied to retire the bonds being refunded. At the time the city council makes a determination to issue the refunding bonds, it shall determine and cause to be made any reductions in the annual tax in the district, which reduction shall be made on a pro rata basis. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (5-25), 1989)  
3.36.940 - Callable bonds. 
Any bonds issued may be made callable in the document providing their terms. When bonds are made callable a statement to that effect shall be set forth on the face of the bonds. Callable bonds may be redeemed on any interest payment date prior to their fixed maturity in the amounts, manner and prices prescribed in the document providing their terms. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (5-26), 1989)  
Chapter 3.40 - MOBILE SOURCE AIR POLLUTION REDUCTION PROGRAM 
Sections: 
 
3.40.010 - Purpose. 
The city, after careful consideration, finds and declares that the imposition of the additional motor vehicle registration fee by the SCAQMD to finance mobile source air pollution reduction programs is in the best interest of the city and promotes the general welfare of its residents. 
(Ord. 2535 § 1, 1991)  
3.40.020 - Intent. 
This chapter is intended to support the SCAQMD's imposition of the vehicle registration fee and to bring the city into compliance with the requirements set forth in Section 44243 of the Health and Safety Code in order to receive fee revenues for the purpose of implementing programs to reduce air pollution from motor vehicles. 
(Ord. 2535 § 2, 1991)  
3.40.030 - Definitions. 
As applied in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall be defined as follows: 
"City" means the city of Whittier. 
"Fee administrator" means the city controller or her designee. 
"Mobile source air pollution reduction program" means any program or project implemented by the city to reduce air pollution from motor vehicles which it determines will be consistent with the California Clean Air Act of 1988 or the plan proposed pursuant to Article 5 (commencing with Section 40460) of Chapter 5.5 of Part 3 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
(Ord. 2535 § 3, 1991)  
3.40.040 - Administration of vehicle registration fee. 
A.  Receipt of Fee. The additional vehicle registration fees disbursed by the SCAQMD and remitted to the city, pursuant to this chapter, shall be accepted by the fee administrator. 
B.  Establishment of Air Quality Improvement Trust Fund. The fee administrator shall establish a separate interest-bearing trust fund account in a financial institution authorized to receive deposits of city funds. 
C.  Transfer of Funds. Upon receipt of vehicle registration fees, the fee administrator shall deposit such funds into the separate account established pursuant to subsection B of this section. All interest earned by the trust fund account shall be credited only to that account. 
D.  Expenditure of Air Quality Trust Fund Revenues. All revenues received from the SCAQMD and deposited in the trust fund account shall be exclusively expended on mobile source emission reduction programs as defined in Section 3.40.030. Such revenues and any interest earned on the revenues shall be expended within one year of the completion of the programs. 
E.  Audits. The city consents to an audit of all programs and projects funded by vehicle registration fee revenues received from the SCAQMD pursuant to Section 44223 of the Health and Safety Code. The audit shall be conducted by an independent auditor selected by the SCAQMD as provided in Sections 44244 and 44244.1(a) of the Health and Safety Code. 
(Ord. 2535 § 4, 1991)  
Chapter 3.44 - PENALTY FOR DELINQUENT PAYMENTS ON ACCOUNTS RECEIVABLE 
Sections: 
 
3.44.010 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, "miscellaneous accounts receivables" are comprised of billings for: damages to city property, landfill and roll-off charges, false alarm, police emergency response, para-police and crossing guard services, police report requests, reimbursement for vandalism, miscellaneous police services related to juvenile arrests, replacement and repair of parkway trees, rental of city properties, reimbursements from the state or other government agencies, excavation permits, construction meter rentals and water usage, public nuisances, unpaid sewer, weed abatement and parking assessment charges, and such other new charges that are sent to the city controller's office for inclusion in the miscellaneous accounts receivable billing system. 
(Ord. 2574 § 1 (part), 1992)  
3.44.020 - Delinquency penalty and interest. 
Should any person, firm or corporation fail to pay their accounts when due, the city council, through the adoption of a resolution, shall establish a penalty and interest charge on such account, to be imposed after the due date thereof until the account plus penalty and interest are paid in full. 
(Ord. 2574 § 1 (part), 1992)  
Chapter 3.46 - VIDEO FRANCHISE FEES, CUSTOMER SERVICE, AND OTHER VIDEO-RELATED MATTERS 
Sections: 
 
3.46.010 - Regulation of state video franchises and city video franchises. 
Pursuant to the Digital Infrastructure and Video Competition Act of 2006 ("Act") California Public Utilities Code 5800 et seq., effective January 1, 2007, the California Public Utilities Commission ("PUC") has been given exclusive authority to grant state video franchises ("state franchises"). Under the Act the city of Whittier (the "city") acquires certain rights and responsibilities with respect to state video franchise holders. These include the receipt of a franchise fee and a fee for public, educational and government ("PEG") purposes, both based on a percentage of the gross revenues of state franchise holders, as well as the establishment and enforcement of penalties for violations of customer service rules. 
(Ord. 2912 § 2 (part), 2008)  
3.46.020 - State video franchise fees. 
A.  Any state video franchise holder ("state franchisee") operating within the boundaries of the city of Whittier shall pay a fee to the city equal to five percent of the gross revenue of that state franchisee. 
B.  Any state franchisee operating within the boundaries of the city of Whittier shall pay an additional fee to the city equal to one percent of the gross revenue of that state franchisee, which fee shall be used by the city for PEG purposes consistent with state and federal law. 
C.  The city's PEG fee shall continue to apply to any new or existing franchisee operating in the city and shall automatically be reauthorized upon the expiration of any existing or future state video franchise(s) held by any state-franchised video service provider operating within the city. The PEG fee shall so renew until such time that the city council takes formal affirmative action to cease the renewals. 
D.  Gross revenue, for the purposes of (a) and (b) above, shall be defined as set forth in California Public Utilities Code section 5860. 
E.  The fees established by this section shall be remitted quarterly to the Director of administrative services and must be received not later than 45 days after the end of the preceding calendar quarter. The fee payment shall be accompanied by a summary that describes all sources of the gross revenues upon which the fee is based, which summary must be verified by a responsible financial officer or employee of the video service provider. 
(Ord. 2912 § 2 (part), 2008) 
(Ord. No. 3079 , § 2, 11-28-17)  
3.46.030 - Audit authority. 
Not more than once annually, the city may examine and perform an audit of the business records of a state franchisee to ensure compliance with the computation and payment of the fees in Section 3.46.020. 
(Ord. 2912 § 2 (part), 2008)  
3.46.040 - Customer service penalties under state franchises. 
A.  The holder of a state franchise shall comply with all applicable state and federal customer service and protection standards pertaining to the provision of video service. 
B.  The city manager, or his/her designee, shall monitor the compliance of state franchisee(s) with respect to state and federal customer service and protection standards. The city manager, or his/her designee, shall provide the state franchisee(s) written notice of any material breaches of applicable customer service standards, and shall allow the state franchisee(s) thirty days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material breach. Material breaches not remedied within the thirty-day time period shall be subject to the following penalties by the city manager, or his/her designee. 
1.  For the first occurrence of the violation, a fine of five hundred dollars shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed one thousand five hundred dollars for each violation. 
2.  For a second violation of the same nature within twelve months, a fine of one thousand dollars shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed three thousand dollars for each violation. 
3.  For a third or further violation of the same nature within twelve months, a fine of two thousand five hundred dollars shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed seven thousand five hundred dollars for each violation. 
C.  A state franchisee may appeal a penalty assessment to the city council within sixty days. The city council's decision on the imposition of a penalty shall be final. 
(Ord. 2912 § 2 (part), 2008)  
3.46.050 - City response to state franchise applications. 
A.  Applicants seeking a state franchise within the boundaries of the city of Whittier must concurrently provide complete copies to the city of any application or amendments to applications filed with the PUC. One complete copy must be provided to the city manager. 
B.  The city manager shall provide any appropriate comments to the PUC regarding an application or an amendment to an application for a state franchise. 
(Ord. 2912 § 2 (part), 2008)  
3.46.060 - PEG channel capacity. 
A state franchisee that uses the public rights-of-way shall designate sufficient capacity on its network to enable the carriage of at least three PEG access channels. 
A.  PEG access channels shall be for the exclusive use of the city or its designees to provide public, educational, or governmental programming. 
B.  Advertising, underwriting, or sponsorship recognition may be carried on the PEG access channels for the purpose of funding PEG-related activities. 
C.  The PEG access channels shall be carried on the basic service tier. If the technology used eliminates the basic service tier, then all PEG access channels shall be placed on the video service provider's system in a manner equivalent to local over-the-air broadcast stations. 
D.  To the extent feasible, the PEG access channels shall not be separated numerically from other channels carried on the basic service tier, and the channel numbers for the PEG access channels shall be the same channel numbers used by the incumbent cable operator unless prohibited by federal law. 
E.  After the initial designation of PEG access channel numbers, the channel numbers shall not be changed without the prior written consent of the city, unless the change is required by federal law. 
F.  Each PEG access channel shall be capable of carrying a National Television System Committee (NTSC) television signal, as provided in Public Utilities Code Section 5870b. 
(Ord. 2912 § 2 (part), 2008)  
3.46.070 - Interconnection. 
Where technically feasible, state franchisees shall negotiate in good faith to interconnect their networks for the purpose of providing PEG access channel programming. Interconnection may be accomplished by direct cable, microwave link, satellite, or other reasonable method of connection. State franchisees shall provide interconnection of the PEG access channels on reasonable terms and conditions and may not withhold the interconnection. If state franchisees cannot reach a mutually acceptable interconnection agreement, the city may require the incumbent state franchisee to allow the new state franchisee to interconnect its network with the incumbent's network at a technically feasible point on the new state franchisee's network as identified by the new state franchisee. If no technically feasible point for interconnection is available, the new state franchisee shall make an interconnection available to the channel originator and shall provide the facilities necessary for the interconnection. The cost of any interconnection shall be borne by the state franchisee requesting the interconnection unless otherwise agreed to by the parties. 
(Ord. 2912 § 2 (part), 2008)  
3.46.080 - Emergency alert system and emergency overrides. 
A state franchisee must comply with the emergency alert system requirements of the federal communications commission in order that emergency messages may be distributed over the state franchisee's network. 
(Ord. 2912 § 2 (part), 2008)  
Chapter 3.48 - DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES 
Sections: 
 
3.48.010 - General findings. 
The City Council of the City of Whittier, California, finds as follows: 
A.  The provision of new and expanded facilities and infrastructure is necessary to protect and promote the health, safety and welfare of all the citizens of the city of Whittier by reducing the adverse effects of urbanization and development. 
B.  It is necessary to enact and implement certain development impact fees to assure that all new development within the city pays its fair share of the costs of providing necessary public facilities and infrastructure to accommodate such new development. 
C.  A proper funding source for the costs associated with new development is a specific development or facilities fee for each type of facility related to the specific need created by the development and reasonably related to the relative cost of providing such necessary public facilities. 
D.  The City of Whittier Library Facilities and Collection and Park-Related Facilities Master Facilities Plan and Development Impact Fee Calculation and Nexus Report ("development impact fee report") justifies the imposition of each development fee on new construction by analyzing the master facility plan as defined herein, assigning the costs on a fair-share basis to the various types of new development, and assigning the resulting fee per dwelling unit, based on the anticipated burden of such new dwelling unit on city facilities and infrastructure and the need created by such dwelling unit for new and expanded facilities and infrastructure. 
E.  The primary purpose of the fees is to mitigate the impact on city facilities and infrastructure caused by increased demand for facilities and infrastructure from persons generated by new development. 
F.  The fees will be used to finance public facilities and infrastructure, specifically library, public use facilities, aquatics center, and parkland acquisition and facilities improvements. 
G.  The use of the fees to fund such public facilities and infrastructure is reasonably related to the impacts of residential development on the city as more fully described in the development impact fee report. 
H.  The need for development impact fees to fund such public facilities and infrastructure is reasonably related to impacts on the city of residential development and other development as more fully described in the development impact fee report. 
I.  To assure fair and legally sound implementation of the development impact fees established in this chapter, such fees shall be reviewed from time to time, but not more than once annually, and shall be set by resolution of the city council following due notice and hearing. 
J.  To assure fair implementation of the development impact fees established in this chapter, the city must have the latitude to defer or waive such fees in special cases, after notice and hearing, where better or fairer financing arrangements would result from such deferral, or where imposition of such fees would cause inequities. 
K.  To assure fair implementation of the development impact fees established by this chapter, provisions must be made for extending such fees to subsequently annexed land that benefit from the public facilities funded by these fees. 
L.  The provisions of this chapter are in addition to all other provisions of the Whittier Municipal Code and all new residential, as defined in this chapter, and shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter and to all other provisions of the Whittier Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2953, § 3(Exh. A), 5-25-10)  
3.48.020 - Purpose and applicability. 
The city council declares the purpose of this chapter is to provide for the means to finance adequate infrastructure and other public improvements and facilities made necessary by the impacts created by new development in the city of Whittier in order to promote the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city. This chapter shall apply solely to construction of new dwelling units, as applicable, within the city (i.e., the "affected territory" as defined herein). 
(Ord. No. 2953, § 3(Exh. A), 5-25-10)  
3.48.030 - Definitions. 
A.  The "development impact fee report" is the City of Whittier Library Facilities and Collection and Park-Related Facilities Master Facilities Plan and Development Impact Fee Calculation and Nexus Report and any subsequent amendments thereto. This document, dated April 6, 2009, was prepared by Revenue & Cost Specialists and summarizes the needed facilities mentioned herein, their estimated costs and sets forth the required nexus findings. In addition, this document summarizes the needed facilities mentioned herein, their estimated costs and sets forth the required nexus findings. Subsequent amendments to the development impact fee report must be adopted by city council resolution at a properly noticed public hearing in compliance with state law. 
B.  "Affected territory" means the corporate boundaries of the city of Whittier as these may be changed from time to time. 
C.  "Dwelling unit" means a building or portion thereof designed exclusively for residential occupancy by one family for living and sleeping purposes, including detached dwellings (detached residential) multiple-family dwellings (attached residential and manufactured/mobile housing placed on a permanent foundation on an individual residential lot. 
D.  "Effective date" means the date that the fees in this chapter are eligible for collection, that date being thirty days after the adoption of a city council resolution setting the fee 
E.  "Mobilehome" means a detached mobilehome located in a designated mobilehome park. 
F.  "Master facilities plan" describes each of the facilities mentioned herein and their estimated costs. This document, dated April 6, 2009, is included in the development impact fee report and was prepared by Revenue & Cost Specialists. 
G.  "New development and/or new construction" means new construction of new residential dwelling unit(s). 
H.  "Residential development project" means construction of one or more dwelling units. 
(Ord. No. 2953, § 3(Exh. A), 5-25-10; Ord. No. 3094 , § 3, 10-9-18)  
3.48.040 - Library, computer stations and collection items—Findings. 
The city council finds as follows: 
A.  The library facilities, computer stations and library collections are important quality of life amenities that are necessary to serve the residents of the city. As the city increases in population, the library facilities, computer stations and library collections will become inadequate and/or overcrowded for their intended use, thus requiring construction, addition of computer stations and/or purchase of additional books and other collection items. 
B.  Pursuant to Article 11, Section 7 of the California Constitution, the city is empowered to enact measures that protect the health, safety and welfare of its citizens. 
C.  Provisions for library facilities, computer stations and library collections are identified in the master facilities plan, as amended, found in the development impact fee report, as amended and are necessary to provide adequate library facilities, computer stations and library collections within the affected territory. 
D.  The development impact fee report, as amended describes in detail the library facilities, computer stations expansion and collection needs for the affected territory and estimates of the costs of the facility, computer stations and collection expansion. 
E.  The entire affected territory will derive benefit from the expansion of the library facilities, computer stations and collections and should be assessed per the provisions of this chapter and pay a fair share of the cost thereof based on the benefit derived therefrom. 
F.  After consideration of the development impact fee report, as amended and the addendum thereto and testimony at public hearings duly held, the city council hereby approves the development impact fee report, as amended and based thereon finds that new residential development in the affected territory will create library facilities, computer stations and library collection impacts which the construction and/or purchase of additional library facilities, computer stations and library collections funded by this chapter will offset. 
G.  The city council also finds that the costs of the library facilities, computer stations and library collections funded by this chapter are apportioned relative to the anticipated impacts created by residential and other new development within the affected territory, and that the fees are fairly apportioned on individual dwelling units throughout the affected territory on the basis of benefits conferred on property proposed for residential development and the need for such facilities created by the proposed new development. 
H.  The facts and evidence establish that there is a reasonable relationship between the need for the described library facilities, computer stations and library collections and the needs created by the types of development on which the fee will be imposed, and that there is a reasonable relationship between the fee's use and the types of development for which the fee is charged. This reasonable relationship is described in more detail in the development fee impact report, as amended. 
I.  The city council also finds that the cost estimates set forth in the development impact fee report, as amended are reasonable and will not exceed the reasonably estimated total of these costs. 
J.  The library and collection items fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall be used only to finance library, books, computer stations and other collections expansion described or identified in the city of Whittier library facilities and collection section of the master facilities plan, as amended. 
K.  Notwithstanding the forgoing, the herein findings, the amount of fees to be imposed and the purposes for which the fees may be used to finance; may be updated and revised by the city council with an amendment to the development impact fee report. Such amendment must be adopted by resolution at a properly noticed public hearing in compliance with state law. 
(Ord. No. 3094 , § 4, 10-9-18) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3094 , § 4, adopted Oct. 9, 2018, amended § 3.48.040 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 3.48.040 pertained to library and collection items—findings and derived from Ord. No. 2953, § 3(Exh. A), adopted May 25, 2010.  
3.48.050 - Public use facilities—Findings. 
The city council finds as follows: 
A.  The development of residential property in the affected territory will create a need for increased public use facilities. As a result, additional public use facilities will be needed to maintain the current level of service. 
B.  Pursuant to Article 11, Section 7 of the California Constitution, the city is empowered to enact measures that protect the health, safety and welfare of its citizens. 
C.  The provision of public use facilities is identified in the City of Whittier Public Use Facilities section of the master facilities plan and is necessary to provide adequate public use facilities within the affected territory. 
D.  The development impact fee report describes in detail the current city standard for number of public use facilities per person, the number of persons an average single family, multiple family or mobilehome park residence generates, the public use facilities required to service new development, and estimates of the costs of public use facilities to maintain the current level of service. 
E.  The entire affected territory will derive benefit from the public use facilities and should be assessed per the provisions of this chapter and pay a fair share of the cost thereof based on the benefit derived therefrom. 
F.  After consideration of the development impact fee report and testimony at a public hearing duly held, the city council hereby approves the development impact fee report and based thereon finds that new development in the affected territory will create needs for public use facilities that the acquisition of the public improvements funded by this chapter will meet. 
G.  The city council also finds that the costs of public use facilities funded by this chapter are apportioned relative to the anticipated impacts created by new development within the affected territory, and that the fees are fairly apportioned on individual dwelling units throughout the affected territory on the basis of benefits conferred on property proposed for new development and the need for such facilities created by the proposed new development. 
H.  The facts and evidence establish that there is a reasonable relationship between the need for the described public facilities and the needs created by the types of new development on which the fee will be imposed, and that there is a reasonable relationship between the fee's use and the types of new development for which the fee is charged. This reasonable relationship is described in more detail in the development impact fee report. 
I.  The city council also finds that the cost estimates set forth in the development impact fee report are reasonable and will not exceed the reasonably estimated total of these costs. 
J.  The public use facilities fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall be used only to finance additions to the public use facilities described or identified in the City of Whittier Public Use Facilities section of the master facilities plan. 
(Ord. No. 2953, § 3(Exh. A), 5-25-10)  
3.48.060 - Aquatics center facilities—Findings. 
The city council finds as follows: 
A.  The development of residential property in the affected territory will create an increased need for aquatics center facilities. As a result, improvement to the aquatics center facilities will be needed to maintain the current level of service. 
B.  Pursuant to Article 11, Section 7 of the California Constitution, the city is empowered to enact measures that protect the health, safety and welfare of its citizens. 
C.  The provision of aquatics center facilities is identified in the City of Whittier Aquatics Center section of the master facilities plan and is necessary to provide adequate aquatics center facilities within the affected territory. 
D.  The development impact fee report describes in detail the current city standard for aquatics center facilities per person, the number of persons an average single family, multiple family or mobilehome park residence generates, the aquatics center facilities required to service new development, and estimates of the costs for improvements to the aquatics center facilities to maintain the current level of service. 
E.  The entire affected territory will derive benefit from the aquatics center facilities and should be assessed per the provisions of this chapter and pay a fair share of the cost thereof based on the benefit derived therefrom. 
F.  After consideration of the development impact fee report and testimony at a public hearing duly held, the city council hereby approves the development impact fee report and based thereon finds that new development in the affected territory will create needs for aquatics center facilities that the acquisition of the public improvements funded by this chapter will meet. 
G.  The city council also finds that the costs of aquatics center facility improvement funded by this chapter are apportioned relative to the anticipated impacts created by new development within the affected territory, and that the fees are fairly apportioned on individual dwelling units throughout the affected territory on the basis of benefits conferred on property proposed for new development and the need for such facilities created by the proposed new development. 
H.  The facts and evidence establish that there is a reasonable relationship between the need for the described public facilities and the needs created by the types of new development on which the fee will be imposed, and that there is a reasonable relationship between the fee's use and the types of new development for which the fee is charged. This reasonable relationship is described in more detail in the development impact fee report. 
I.  The city council also finds that the cost estimates set forth in the development impact fee report are reasonable and will not exceed the reasonably estimated total of these costs. 
J.  The aquatics center facilities fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall be used only to finance improvements to the community aquatics center facilities described or identified in the City of Whittier Aquatics Center section of the master facilities plan. 
(Ord. No. 2953, § 3(Exh. A), 5-25-10)  
3.48.070 - Park land acquisition and facilities improvements—Findings. 
The city council finds as follows: 
A.  The development of residential and other property in the affected territory will create a need for the acquisition of park land and construction of recreation improvements to maintain the current level of service. 
B.  Pursuant to Section 66000, et seq., of the Government Code and the city's police powers, the city may impose by ordinance a requirement for the payment of fees to pay for the actual or estimated costs of constructing planned park and recreation facilities. 
C.  Pursuant to Article 11, Section 7 of the California Constitution, the city is empowered to enact measures that protect the health, safety and welfare of its citizens. 
D.  Park land acquisition and construction of recreation improvements are essential to the city of Whittier to mitigate the negative effects of increasing urban development and to promote the health and welfare of the citizens. 
E.  The provision of additional park acquisition and recreation improvements is identified in the City of Whittier Parkland Acquisition and Facilities Improvement section of the master facilities plan and is necessary to provide adequate parks and recreation improvements within the affected territory. 
F.  The development impact fee report describes in detail the current city standards for parks and recreational facilities, the cost for park land acquisition and construction of recreation improvements and the cost thereof per new single family, multiple family, and mobilehome park residential unit. 
G.  The entire affected territory will derive benefit from the parks and recreation facilities and should be assessed per the provisions of this chapter and pay a fair share of the cost thereof based on the benefit derived therefrom. 
H.  After consideration of the development impact fee report and testimony at a public hearing duly held, the city council hereby approves the development impact fee report and based thereon finds that new development in the affected territory will create needs for park acquisition and recreation improvements that the construction and acquisition of the public improvements funded by this chapter will meet. 
I.  The costs of the park land acquisition and construction of recreation improvements funded by this chapter are apportioned relative to the anticipated impacts created by new development within the affected territory, and that the fees are fairly apportioned on individual dwelling units throughout the affected territory on the basis of benefits conferred on property proposed for new development and the need for such facilities created by such proposed new development. 
J.  The facts and evidence establish that there is a reasonable relationship between the need for the described public facilities and the needs created by the types of new development on which the fee will be imposed, and that there is a reasonable relationship between the fee's use and the types of new development for which the fee is charged. This reasonable relationship is described in more detail in the development impact fee report. 
K.  The cost estimates set forth in the development impact fee report are reasonable and will not exceed the reasonably estimated total of these costs. 
L.  The park land acquisition and facilities improvement fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall be used only to finance the acquisition of parkland and construction of facility improvements described or identified in the City of Whittier Parkland Acquisition and Facilities Improvement section of the master facilities plan. 
(Ord. No. 2953, § 3(Exh. A), 5-25-10)  
3.48.080 - Imposition and payment of fees. 
A.  Each owner of a lot or parcel of property within the affected territory shall pay to the city prior to the issuance of a building permit for the construction of any residential development project as defined herein, the following fees: 
1.  The library and collection fee, as established by resolution of the city council, to fund the cost of expanding the library facilities, books and other collections to provide for the increase in services required as described in the master facilities plan. 
2.  The public use facilities fee, as established by resolution of the city council, to fund the cost to improve and renovate community and other park facilities in the master facilities plan. 
3.  The aquatics center facilities fee, as established by resolution of the city council, to fund the cost of renovations to the pool facility as described in the master facilities plan. 
4.  The park land acquisition and facilities improvements fee, as established by resolution of the city council, to fund park land acquisition and improvements to park facilities as described in the master facilities plan. 
B.  The fees authorized by this section shall be cumulative such that each owner of a lot or property shall be charged each applicable fee. Moreover, the amount of each of these fees shall not exceed the fair share of the estimated cost of constructing and/or acquiring the corresponding facilities described in the development impact fee report. The amount of each fee shall be reviewed and revised by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2953, § 3(Exh. A), 5-25-10)  
3.48.090 - Accounting and disbursement of fees. 
A.  Each of the fees paid pursuant to Section 3.48.080 shall be placed in a separate fund, each of which may be further segregated by specific projects. These funds shall be known, respectively, as: 
1.  The library and collection fee fund. 
2.  The public use facilities fee fund. 
3.  The aquatics center facilities fee fund. 
4.  The park land acquisition and facilities development fee fund. 
B.  These funds, and interest earned thereon, shall be expended solely for construction and/or acquisition of the corresponding public facilities as shown in the master facilities plan, or for reimbursement for construction and/or acquisition of those public facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2953, § 3(Exh. A), 5-25-10)  
3.48.100 - Development impact fee credits. 
A.  The owner of a parcel of property otherwise required to pay a fee under Section 3.48.080 shall receive a credit for the corresponding development impact fee when that owner constructs or donates a facility or a portion thereof, identified in the master facilities plan, regardless of how it may be financed, that serves the owner's parcel or parcels. The development impact fee credit shall offset, on a proportionate basis, without interest, the corresponding development impact fee to be paid pursuant to this chapter. The facility must be built in compliance with all applicable laws governing the construction of public improvements in the city. 
B.  The amount of the development impact fee credit shall equal the city's most recent estimated cost of constructing and/or furnishing the facility, or the portion of the facility actually completed or purchased, by contract or utilizing city forces. 
C.  The owner of a parcel of property may be further entitled to a development impact fee credit where the city determines, on a case-by-case basis, that the construction of the facility, or a portion thereof, will be necessary to provide basic services to the entire affected territory even though it does not directly serve the owner's project or is of greater capacity than that required to serve the owner's project adequately. 
D.  The amount of the development impact fee credit shall be determined after inspection and acceptance of the facility at the time of payment of the corresponding development impact fee. 
E.  If an owner pays the development impact fee assessed under Section 3.48.080 and later elects, after city approval, to accelerate the development by constructing or purchasing facilities for the project, the owner may apply for and receive a refund, up to the amount of the development impact fee, for such facilities after those facilities are certified by the city as complying with the appropriate master facilities plan, city ordinances, and all other applicable laws. 
F.  To the extent that an owner is granted a development fee credit, such owner shall not be entitled to a future reimbursement for such facility except as provided in Section 3.48.110. 
G.  A development impact fee credit is an obligation of the city that runs with the land and inures to the benefit of each successor in interest of the original landowner until full credit has been received. 
H.  A developer may also be entitled to a credit if the city and developer have executed an agreement which specifically exempts the developer from the payment of one or more of the fees enacted under this chapter. The availability of the credit and its amount shall be determined by the city on a case-by-base basis based on the provisions of the applicable agreement. 
(Ord. No. 2953, § 3(Exh. A), 5-25-10)  
3.48.110 - Reimbursement. 
A.  The owner of a parcel of property otherwise required to pay a development impact fee under Section 3.48.080 will be entitled to enter into a reimbursement agreement to be reimbursed from subsequently collected development impact fees the direct and verifiable costs of installing or furnishing public improvements, or portions thereof, identified in the appropriate master facilities plan where all of the following conditions are satisfied: 
1.  The owner has constructed a public improvement, or portion thereof, that is identified in the appropriate master facilities plan. 
2.  The city required that the public improvement be constructed to contain supplemental size, capacity, number or length for the benefit of property not within the owner's project. 
3.  The city approved, prior to construction or furnishing, the proposed budget for the project and finds any change to that budget is fair and reasonable. 
4.  The public improvement, or portion thereof, has been dedicated to the city for public use. 
5.  The public improvement, or portion thereof, has been built in compliance with all applicable laws governing the construction of public works or public improvements. 
B.  The city shall not reimburse the owner for costs related to financing any public facility. 
C.  An owner shall only be entitled to reimbursement to the extent that any public facility project benefits property not within the owner's project. Thus, an owner may receive a development impact fee credit as provided in Section 3.48.100 for the portion of a public facility that serves the owner's project and reimbursement for the oversized or extra-capacity or extended portion of a public facility that benefits subsequently developed property. 
D.  In no event shall an owner receive a development fee impact credit and/or reimbursement in excess of the city's most recent estimated cost of constructing the facility, or the portion of the facility actually completed, by contract or by utilizing city forces. 
E.  Any reimbursement agreement entered into under this section shall require the city, for a period of up to fifteen years, to reimburse the owner from the proceeds of the development impact fees collected from new projects that directly benefit from the facilities financed by the development impact fee or fees and which are the subject of the reimbursement agreement. Reimbursement shall only be made from fees collected to fund improvements which are of the same type as the improvement constructed by the owner, and from no other source. The terms of the reimbursement shall be set forth in the reimbursement agreement. 
(Ord. No. 2953, § 3(Exh. A), 5-25-10)  
3.48.120 - Administrative review. 
A.  The planning commission is empowered to implement Section 3.48.100 Findings regarding credits must be based on evidence submitted by the property owner substantiating the owner's contention that a credit should be given. 
B.  The planning director shall prescribe the form and scope of applications under this section and the necessary accompanying data. 
C.  The planning commission may adopt rules to implement procedures to carry out its responsibilities under this section. The city council may establish, by resolution, processing fees to carry out the provisions of this section. 
D.  Appeals of decisions by the planning commission shall be made to the city council pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 18.56.055 of the Whittier Municipal Code. An appeal shall be accompanied by the filing fee established by city council resolution. 
(Ord. No. 2953, § 3(Exh. A), 5-25-10)  
3.48.130 - Deferrals, waivers and reductions. 
The city council is empowered to grant deferral, waiver or reduction of any fee imposed by this chapter upon request. Such deferral, waiver or reduction may only be granted after notice and hearing if, in the opinion of the city council, properly supported by specific findings, deferral would allow a better or fairer financing arrangement to be developed and imposed, or where waiver or reduction is required because imposition of such fee or fees in full would cause inequities. Findings must be based on written and other evidence submitted by the property owner substantiating the owners contention that the fee should be deferred, waived or reduced. For deferrals, findings must include facts supporting such deferral including, without limitation, findings that (1) other properties to be benefited by any fee will not be burdened by the review and delay in fee imposition, or, (2) alternative financing methods involving more than one owner have been proposed for review, or (3) delay will result in a more fair funding arrangement. In the case of waiver or reduction, findings must include facts supporting, including, without limitation, that the owner will receive insufficient or no benefit from the fee imposed and would therefore be required, if the fee were imposed in full, to pay more than his fair share for the benefit received. 
(Ord. No. 2953, § 3(Exh. A), 5-25-10)  
3.48.140 - Application to subsequently annexed land. 
As areas not presently situated within the city boundaries seek to annex to the city, the city council shall determine the benefit to such land areas of the public facilities and infrastructure funded by this chapter. The city council shall impose development impact fees, in whole or in part, as established by this chapter, upon such annexed areas to the extent necessary to assure that such areas pay their fair share of the actual costs of all necessary public facilities and infrastructure benefiting their projects, unless the city council determines that such an imposition would cause inequities or that a better or fairer financing arrangement can and should be developed and imposed. 
(Ord. No. 2953, § 3(Exh. A), 5-25-10)  
Chapter 3.52 - COMMUNITY BENEFIT DISTRICTS 
 
3.52.010 - Title; authority and purpose. 
(a)  This chapter shall be known as the "Whittier Community Benefit District Procedural Ordinance" and may be cited by that name. 
(b)  This chapter is adopted pursuant to Section 200 of the City Charter, which provides that, subject only to restrictions and limitations set forth in the State Constitution and the City Charter, the city shall have the power to make and enforce all laws and regulations in respect to municipal affairs. The creation of an assessment district to fund maintenance, services and improvements of a local nature is a quintessential municipal affair. The purpose of this chapter is to provide a procedure for the establishment of assessment districts. 
(Ord. No. 3056 , § 3, 9-13-16)  
3.52.020 - Nonexclusive procedure. 
This chapter provides a procedure for the establishment of assessment districts that is separate from, and alternative to, other procedures under state or municipal law. This chapter does not prohibit the city council from establishing an assessment district or conducting proceedings for such district under any other procedure authorized by law. 
(Ord. No. 3056 , § 3, 9-13-16)  
3.52.030 - Establishment of district. 
The city council may establish a community benefit district and levy assessments in connection with such a district pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 3056 , § 3, 9-13-16)  
3.52.040 - Incorporation of state law. 
This chapter incorporates the Property and Business Improvement District Law of 1994 (Streets and Highways Code §§ 36600 et seq.) ("PBID law"), as such law may be amended from time to time. In connection with such incorporation, all references in the PBID Law to a "district" or a "property and business district" shall be interpreted as references to a community benefit district. Except where a provision of the PBID Law is inconsistent with a provision of this chapter, all provisions of the PBID law shall apply to the establishment and operation of any Community benefit district established pursuant to this chapter. In the event of a conflict between the provisions of this chapter and those of the PBID law, the provisions in this chapter shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 3056 , § 3, 9-13-16)  
3.52.050 - Relationship of assessment to zoning. 
Notwithstanding the requirements of section 36632 of the PBID law, any parcel of real property, regardless of the zoning of such parcel, may be included in a community benefit district and subject to an assessment in connection therewith, so long as such parcel specially benefits from the services and improvements funded by that district. 
(Ord. No. 3056 , § 3, 9-13-16)  
3.52.060 - Assessment against real property. 
Only assessments against real property may be levied in connection with a community benefit district. 
(Ord. No. 3056 , § 3, 9-13-16)  
3.52.070 - Initiation of proceedings. 
In lieu of the requirements of Section 36621(a) of the PBID law, the city council may initiate proceedings to form a community benefit district upon the submission of a written petition, signed by property owners in the proposed district who will pay at least thirty percent of the assessments proposed to be levied in connection with such district. The amount of assessment attributable to property owned by the same property owner that is in excess of twenty percent of the amount of all assessments proposed to be levied, shall not be included in determining whether the petition is signed by property owners who will pay more than thirty percent of the total amount of assessments proposed to be levied. 
(Ord. No. 3056 , § 3, 9-13-16)  
3.52.080 - Formation costs. 
If so provided in the engineer's report for a community benefit district, the assessment levied in connection with such a district may include amounts sufficient to recover the costs incurred in forming the district, including: 
1.  The costs of preparation of the management plan and engineer's report required by state law; and 
2.  The cost of preparing, circulating and submitting the petition to the city council seeking establishment of the district; and 
3.  The costs of printing, advertising and the giving of published, posted or mailed notices; and 
4.  Compensation of any consultant, engineer or attorney employed to render services in proceedings under this chapter or the PBlD law; and 
5.  Costs incurred by the city for public hearings, notices, ballots and other proceedings required by law for approval of a new or increased assessment. 
The engineer's report shall specify the formation costs eligible for recovery through assessments, the schedule for recovery of those costs, and the basis for determining the amount of the additional assessment for recovery of costs, including the maximum amount of the additional assessment, expressed either as a dollar amount, or as a percentage of the underlying assessment. 
(Ord. No. 3056 , § 3, 9-13-16)  
3.52.090 - Advancement of costs. 
The city council may, in the resolution of intention to establish a community benefit district, provide that if the district is established, funds may be advanced from the city's general fund to permit the operation of the District prior to the city's collection of the assessment. Such advance shall occur only after the establishment of the district, and no advance shall be made if the district is not established. Any such advance may not exceed the total anticipated assessment proceeds for the first year of the assessment. Any such advance must be recovered from assessment proceeds as provided in the resolution of intention, along with interest calculated at a rate set forth in the resolution of intention. The duration of any such advance shall not exceed five years. 
(Ord. No. 3056 , § 3, 9-13-16)  
3.52.100 - Duration. 
The duration of a new community benefit district shall be no greater than specified in the resolution of intention for the district, and may be permitted to run into perpetuity. This section is intended to supplant any shorter limitation set forth in the PBID law on the duration of assessments levied in connection with an assessment district. 
(Ord. No. 3056 , § 3, 9-13-16)  
3.52.110 - Renewal. 
A community benefit district may be renewed for a period of not to exceed the period specified in the resolution of intention for the district by following the procedures set forth in the PBID law. 
(Ord. No. 3056 , § 3, 9-13-16)  
3.52.120 - Disestablishment. 
The city council may, on its own initiative, at any time, adopt a resolution of intention to disestablish a community benefit district and shall adopt such a resolution if, during the annual thirty (30) day period set forth in section 36670(a)(2) of the PBID law, the city council receives a written petition requesting disestablishment signed by property owners who pay at least thirty percent of the assessments levied in connection with the district. This section provides an alternative method for the initiation of proceedings to disestablish a community benefit district and shall not be interpreted to preempt the existence of other methods set forth in section 36670 of the PBID law. A resolution of intention adopted pursuant to this section shall have the same effect, and trigger the same notice and hearing requirements, as a resolution of intention otherwise adopted pursuant to section 36670 of the PBID law. 
(Ord. No. 3056 , § 3, 9-13-16)  
3.52.130 - Validity. 
As provided under Section 36633 of the PBID Law, the validity of an assessment levied under this Chapter shall not be contested in any action or proceeding unless the action or proceeding is commenced within thirty days after the resolution of formation levying the assessment is adopted. Any appeal from a final judgment in an action or proceeding shall be perfected within thirty days after the entry of judgment. 
(Ord. No. 3056 , § 3, 9-13-16)  
Title 5 - BUSINESS LICENSES, TAXES AND REGULATIONS 
Chapters:  
Chapter 5.04 - LICENSING REGULATIONS 
Sections: 
 
5.04.010 - Required. 
A.  There are imposed upon the businesses, trades, professions, callings and occupations specified in this chapter license taxes for revenue purposes only in the amounts prescribed in this chapter, and it is unlawful for any person to transact and carry on any business, trade, profession, calling or occupation in the city without first having procured a license from the city so to do or without complying with any and all applicable provisions of this chapter. A license certificate from the city issued as provided in this chapter shall authorize the person to whom issued, by himself or, unless otherwise expressly provided in this chapter, by bona fide employees in the regular course of their employment, to engage in, carry on or conduct in the city the business, trade, calling, profession, exhibition or vocation for which issued during the life of the license, and no person as principal, agent, officer, clerk or employee, for himself or for another person, shall carry on or conduct in the city any business, trade, calling, profession, exhibition or vocation named in this chapter without such a license and certificate therefor issued as provided in this chapter at a time other than authorized in the license certificate; provided, however, that no personal or written demands or notices from the city to persons required to be licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall be necessary to incur the penalties of this chapter. 
B.  Any person required to procure a license by this chapter who fails, neglects or refuses to take out such a license or who carries on or attempts to carry on any business in the city for which a license is required, without first procuring the license, shall be liable to an action in the name of the city as plaintiff in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of license tax imposed by this chapter on the trade, calling, profession or occupation, together with costs of suit. 
(Prior code §§ 6100, 6100.1)  
5.04.020 - Application. 
A.  Before any license is issued to any person, the person shall make written application therefor to the city clerk-treasurer. The application must state the nature or kind of business, trade, occupation or calling for which the license is required, the place where the business, trade, occupation or calling will be carried on or conducted, the name of the owner of the business, trade, occupation or calling, and must be signed by the applicant. In cases where the business, trade, occupation or calling is not to be conducted or carried on at a permanent place of business in the city, then the application shall state the residence of the owners of the business, trade, occupation or calling. 
B.  No license shall be issued to any person conducting or carrying on any business, trade, occupation or calling under a fictitious name unless an affidavit is filed in the office of the city clerk-treasurer showing the true name of the owners of the business; provided, however, the license may be issued in the true names of the owners of the business, trade, occupation or calling without the filing of the affidavit. 
(Prior code § 6100.3)  
5.04.030 - Issuance. 
A.  Upon application therefor as provided in this chapter, it shall be the duty of the city clerk-treasurer to prepare and issue a license under this chapter and to state in each license the amount of tax therefor, the period of time covered thereby, the name of the person to whom issued, the business, trade, calling, profession or occupation licensed and the location of place of business where the business, trade, calling, profession or occupation is to be carried on. 
B.  All licenses issued under and by virtue of this chapter shall be signed by the city clerk-treasurer and attested with the seal of the city. 
C.  Any license applied for under Section 5.04.100, and exempt from tax, shall be issued in the same form and manner as other licenses but shall bear the words "Exempt from License Tax" over the signature of the city clerk-treasurer and shall be countersigned by the city tax and license collector or his deputy. 
(Amended during 1983 codification; prior code § 6100.6)  
5.04.040 - Separate license for each location. 
A separate license must be obtained for each branch establishment or separate place of business in which the business, trade, calling or occupation is carried on and each license shall authorize the party obtaining it to carry on, pursue, or conduct only the businesses, trades, callings or occupations described in the license and which are indicated thereby. 
(Prior code § 6100.8)  
5.04.050 - Posting or exhibition. 
A.  Every person having a license under the provisions of this chapter shall keep the license posted or exhibited while in force in some conspicuous part of the place of business. Every peddler or solicitor or any other person carrying on a trade, business, calling, profession or occupation not having a permanent place of business in the city and licensed under this chapter shall carry his license with him at all times while engaged or operating within the city. 
B.  Any person, resident or nonresident of the city, who engages in the act of peddling, vending and/or soliciting for which a license is required shall obtain from the city clerk-treasurer an identification badge with his picture attached and the city seal affixed thereto. A fee to cover the processing cost shall be paid in full at the time application for license is made. 
C.  All persons having a license shall produce or exhibit it when applying for a renewal and whenever requested to do so by the city tax and license collector or any police officer of the city. 
(Ord. 2455 § 3, 1989; Ord. 2401 § 3, 1987; amended during 1984 codification; prior code § 6100.9)  
5.04.060 - Transferability. 
A.  Licenses shall be nontransferable, except in cases where the licensee sells his entire business as a corporation. Before any such license is transferred, the person applying for the transfer shall make application for a license as provided in this chapter. No license shall be valid for any other location other than that specified in the license without a written endorsement of the city clerk-treasurer thereon. 
B.  The city clerk-treasurer shall make a charge of two dollars for each duplicate license issued to replace any license issued under the provisions of this chapter which has been lost or destroyed. 
(Ord. 2397 § 1, 1986; Ord. 2396 § 1, 1986; prior code § 6100.18)  
5.04.070 - Term and payment dates. 
A.  All license taxes shall be paid in advance, in the legal currency of the United States to the city clerk-treasurer. 
B.  In all cases where the term "city clerk-treasurer" is used in this chapter, the term "city clerk-treasurer" means and includes the city treasurer. 
C.  The monthly license tax provided in this chapter shall be due and payable to the city on the first day of every calendar month, in advance, from all persons who have for the previous month been licensed to carry on the same business, trade, calling or occupation, the license tax shall be due and payable by such persons before commencing to carry on the business, trade, calling or occupation. 
D.  The quarterly license tax provided in this chapter shall be due and payable to the city on the first day of the month and shall expire ninety days from that date; provided, however, that any person desiring to do so may pay for and procure a license for one year at the time the first quarterly license tax becomes due and payable under the provisions of this chapter. 
E.  The daily and weekly license taxes provided in this chapter shall be due and payable to the city in advance. 
F.  The semiannual license tax provided in this chapter shall be due and payable to the city at the time specified in this chapter respectively or when not so specified on the first day of January and July of each year, but the first semiannual license issued to any person as provided in this chapter shall be issued for the unexpired period of the half year except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter. 
G.  The annual license taxes provided in this chapter for gross receipts shall be due and payable to the city on the first day of February of each year, but the first annual license shall be issued for the unexpired period of the year, except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter. All other annual license taxes shall be for a term twelve months from issue. 
H.  No greater or less amount of money shall be charged or received for any license than is provided in this chapter and no license shall be sold or issued for any period of time than is provided in this chapter. 
I.  The license taxes provided in this chapter, whether for monthly, quarterly, semiannual or annual licenses, shall be due and payable to the city in advance on the dates provided in this section, at the office of the city tax and license collector. 
J.  Where a license for revenue purposes has been issued to any business by the city and the tax paid therefor under the provisions of any ordinance heretofore enacted and the term of the license has not expired, then the license tax prescribed for the business by this chapter shall not be payable until the expiration of the term of the unexpired license. 
(Amended during 1983 codification; prior code § 6100.2) 
(Ord. No. 2916, § 2, 11-18-08)  
5.04.080 - Statements required. 
A.  In all cases where the amount of the license tax to be paid by any person is based upon the amount of receipts or sales or of business transacted, or upon the number of persons employed, or upon the number of wagons or other vehicles used, or upon the amount of the maximum admission fee charged, or upon the number of tables used for any game, or upon the number of rooms in any building, the person shall, before obtaining a license for his business, file with the city clerk-treasurer for his guidance in ascertaining the amount of license tax to be paid, a written statement sworn to before some officer authorized to administer oaths, showing the total amount of receipts or sales or of business transacted during the fiscal year of the person next preceding the date of the statement and /or during the calendar year next preceding the date of the statement or the average daily number of persons employed by the person during the license period next preceding the date of the statement, or the number of wagons or other vehicles used or the amount of the maximum admission fee charged, or the number of tables used for any game by the person, or the number of rooms contained in the building at the date of the statement; provided, however, that where the quarterly or yearly license tax to be paid under any section or this chapter is based upon the gross quarterly or annual receipts, commissions or fees received or collected, only one such statement need be filed during any calendar year, which statement shall be filed at the time the first license is procured, and the first license tax to be paid shall be determined by and be based upon the statement filed at the time the first license is procured. 
B.  The statement shall not be conclusive upon the city or upon any officer thereof as to the matters therein set forth, and it shall not prejudice the rights of the city to recover any tax or amount that may be ascertained to be due from the person in addition to the amount shown by the statement to be due in case the statement should be found to be incorrect. The correctness of all such statements shall be subject to verification by the tax and license collector, or his properly authorized deputies, who are authorized and empowered to inspect and audit the books and records of any and all persons licensed to carry on any trade, calling, profession or business specified in this chapter. 
1.  Gross Receipts. Defined. "Gross receipts" as used in this section, except as otherwise specifically provided, means the total amount of revenue received as the sale prices of all sales and the total amount charged or received for the performance of any action, service or employment of whatever nature it may be, for which a charge is made or credit allowed, when such service, act or employment is done as a part of or in connection with the sale of materials, goods, wares and merchandise, or the performance of services; "gross receipts" includes all receipts, cash, credits and property of any kind or nature, and any amount for which a credit is allowed by the seller to the purchaser without any deduction therefrom on account of the cost of the property sold, the cost of the materials used, labor or service costs, interest paid or payable, or losses or other expenses whatsoever; "gross receipts" further includes commissions received for the sale of real property and the annual gross receipts, fees or commissions of every person, firm or corporation conducting, managing, carrying on, or engaged in any business or profession relating thereto; but "gross receipts" does not include cash discounts allowed and taken on sales and any sales tax paid to the state, a municipality, or public entity. 
2.  Examination, Audit and Inspection of Financial Books and Records. 
a.  The city clerk-treasurer and his authorized personnel, license inspectors, and police officers are authorized to examine, audit and inspect any financial books and records of any licensee, applicant for a license, or person engaged in business as may be necessary to verify or ascertain the amount of license tax due from the licensee, applicant or person in the specific classification. 
b.  All licensees, applicants for licenses, and persons engaged in business are required to permit such an examination of their financial books and records for the purposes set forth in this code. Any failure or refusal to permit the authorized city employee to examine the books or records of the business by the licensee shall constitute good cause for the suspension, cancellation or revocation of their license. This penalty shall be accumulative and in addition to any other penalty or remedy provided for by law, whether criminal or civil. 
c.  If any person fails to furnish any information or records required by this chapter upon demand by the city clerk-treasurer, his authorized personnel, license inspectors and police officers; the city clerk-treasurer, his authorized personnel, license inspectors and police officers may issue a subpoena demanding that such person supply the requested information or records. The subpoena shall specifically identify the information or records sought, and indicate the place, date and time at which the information or records must be presented. If any person fails to comply with a regularly issued subpoena, the city clerk-treasurer, his authorized personnel, license inspectors or police officer may apply to a court of appropriate jurisdiction for an order requiring compliance with the subpoena. 
C.  If any person required by this chapter to make any such statement fails to do so, the person shall be required to pay a license at the maximum rate prescribed in this chapter for the profession, trade, calling or business carried on by the person and shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter and be punishable therefor as provided in this code; provided, however, that in any case where the first license is to be issued for a newly established business, a minimum license tax shall be paid until the close of the year and a statement is filed, and no statement need be made at the time the first license is issued for any such newly established business. 
(Ord. 2672 §§ 1, 2, 1995; prior code § 6100.4)  
5.04.081 - Audits. 
A.  The initial inquiry of a business targeted for an audit shall give the licensee fifteen days to comply with the audit request. Licensee may choose to comply with the audit by any of the following options: 
1.  The business can afford a financial statement certified by a certified public accountant (C.P.A.) that the gross receipts reported for the previous tax year were true and correct; 
2.  The licensee can submit a copy of the business' tax return for the period in question; or 
3.  The licensee can make an appointment with the tax and license collector's office for the collector to inspect licensee's books. The audit can be either at the licensee's business or at the City Hall. 
B.  After subsection A of this section is completed, if the collector finds a discrepancy between the new information and the amounts previously reported on the business license application (including renewal applications), the tax and license collector shall notify the licensee of the error. The licensee will have fifteen days to pay the unreported tax. Additionally, the licensee must provide documentation for the previous three tax years as provided in subsection A of this section. 
C.  If a licensee does not respond by the requested date, a second notice will be given. This second notice will allow fifteen days for the licensee to answer. This notice shall request the same payment and information which has been previously unanswered by the licensee. 
D.  If there is no reply to the second notice, a final notice will be sent to the licensee. The licensee will have fifteen days to answer this notice. 
E.  If the licensee still does not reply, then, the city, at its discretion, may request from the State Franchise Tax Board an abstract of the income tax records of the licensee for the last three tax years. These records, when received, will be used for the audit of the business tax of the licensee. 
(Ord. 2672 § 3, 1995)  
5.04.090 - Collector duties. 
A.  All licenses issued as provided in this chapter and upon which a tax is required shall be paid to the city tax and license collector. 
B.  It shall be the duty of the city tax and license collector to keep a list of all delinquent license taxes and license taxes that are payable under this chapter, upon the same coming to his knowledge and he shall immediately proceed to collect the license taxes, in his discretion, by suit or otherwise. 
(Prior code § 6100.7)  
5.04.100 - Exemptions. 
A.  No license tax shall be required of or from the following: 
1.  Those exempt from municipal taxation by virtue of the Constitution and laws of the state or of the United States, including but not limited to "residential facilities" serving six or fewer persons or "alcoholism or drug abuse recovery or treatment facilities" serving six or fewer persons, as those terms are defined in California Health and Safety Code Sections 1566.2 and 11834.22, respectively, or successor provisions thereto; 
2.  Any institution or organization which is conducted, managed or carried on wholly for the benefit of charitable purposes and from which profit is not derived, either directly or indirectly by any individual; provided that the applicant furnishes conclusive proof to the city clerk-treasurer that such is the case; 
3.  Any enterprise or entertainment when the receipts derived therefrom are to be appropriated to any church or school or to any religious, benevolent or charitable purpose within the city; 
4.  Any person peddling, exclusively, any fruit or vegetables, or other products raised upon his lands; provided, however, that the person shall furnish conclusive proof to the city clerk-treasurer that the products were raised by him on his lands before the issuance of license exempt from tax, and any person so peddling shall carry the license with him; 
5.  Any doctor, lawyer, architect, dentist or other professional person, excepting, however, any broker or salesman, not having a fixed place of business within the city who is called occasionally to come to the city to render services; 
6.  Any commercial traveler or selling agent, selling goods or merchandise to dealers for the purpose of resale, whether selling for present or future delivery by samples or otherwise, not including any agent or salesman who makes any deliveries at the time of sale; 
7.  Any person transacting or carrying on any business, trade, profession, calling or occupation with gross receipts of less than two thousand dollars per calendar year working exclusively for the city and whose only transaction or carrying on of any business, trade, profession, calling or occupation in the city is pursuant to a contract with the city. 
B.  Provided, however, that nothing in this section or any subsection of this section shall exempt any person, institution or organization from complying with any of the regulatory measures or provisions of this chapter or of any other ordinance of the city, save and except the payment of license taxes required thereby. 
C.  Any license exempt from tax is nontransferable. 
(Ord. 2897 § 1, 2008; Ord. 2872 § 1, 2006; prior code § 6100.5)  
5.04.110 - Delinquency penalty. 
A.  Should any person, firm or corporation fail to pay a license tax when due as provided in this chapter, the city tax and license collector shall impose the following penalties until the tax and penalty is paid: 
One month past due 	10% penalty 
Two months past due 	25% penalty 
Three months past due 	50% penalty 
Four months past due 	75% penalty 
Five or more months past due 	100% penalty 
 
B.  All penalties shall be paid at the time the amount of the license tax is paid and the tax and license collector is authorized to bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to collect the tax and penalty. The action shall be brought in the name of the city and any judgment for the tax shall include a judgment for the penalties as assessed by the tax and license collector in accordance with this section. 
(Ord. 2551 § 1 (part), 1991; Ord. 2397 § 1, 1986; Ord. 2396 § 1, 1986; prior code § 6100.7.1)  
5.04.120 - License tax for specific businesses. 
A.  The amount of license tax to be paid to the city by any person engaged in or carrying on any profession, trade, calling, occupation or business designated in this section is fixed and established as provided in this chapter, and the license tax shall be paid by every person engaging in, carrying on or maintaining any such profession, trade, occupation or business in the city. 
B.  For every person engaged in carrying on or maintaining the profession, trade, occupation, calling or business: 
1.  Advertising Agent or Agency. Placing or buying advertising space of or acting as an advertising counsel for another person, for a fee, other than as a regular employee exclusively engaged by one person, thirty-two dollars per year; 
2.  Advertising, Outdoor. Outdoor advertising, or sniping, fifty dollars per year, payable annually in advance. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the term "outdoor advertising" means the business of painting of signs or advertisements on exterior walls of buildings or the erection and maintenance of advertising structures, electric or sky signs, by one person, and maintenance of advertising structures, electric or sky signs, by any person. The term "sniping" means the business of advertising by posting, pasting, sticking, tacking, hanging, affixing or placing of cloth, paper or cardboard signs, cards or posters, or tin signs to or upon fences, posts, trees, buildings, or structures or surfaces other than advertising structures with or without the written consent of the owner, holder, lessee, agent or trustee thereof on which any sniping is done. 
Provided, that nothing in this subdivision shall apply to legal notices or any other sign, lawfully erected, giving notice of any meeting to be held on the premises where the sign is erected or any real estate sign advertising either the property upon which it stands, or referring to any person having the leasing of the property; provided, however, that the real estate sign has a surface not greater than twenty square feet; provided, further, that nothing contained in this subdivision shall apply to any person posting, sticking, tacking, affixing, painting or erecting any business sign on the premises or buildings occupied and used in the business of the person, and which sign advertises the goods, wares, merchandise or business of the person only. It is provided further that any advertising structure or sign shall conform to and comply with the regulatory ordinances of the city now in effect or which may hereafter be adopted; 
3.  Advertising, Soliciting. Soliciting advertising other than newspapers or advertising agencies regularly licensed under this chapter, fifty dollars per year or fraction thereof; 
4.  Advertising, Stereoptican, etc. Operating for advertising purposes, a stereoptican, biograph, moving picture or like machine upon which is operated any musical or sound device or speaking designed to attract attention for advertising purposes, or any similar device, twenty-five dollars per month or fraction thereof for each machine or similar device; provided, however, that this subdivision shall not apply to theaters or moving picture shows regularly licensed under this chapter; 
5.  Advertising Vehicles. Operating or driving any advertising truck, van, automobile or other vehicle in or upon the streets of the city, for each vehicle so used, the sum of ten dollars per day. 
Nothing contained in this subdivision shall prevent the placing of business notices upon ordinary business vehicles so long as the vehicles are engaged in the usual business or regular work of the owner and not used for advertising; provided, however, that no musical or sound device, or speaking shall be allowed upon or in conjunction with any vehicle used for advertising purposes within the city; 
6.  Amusements, Baseball, Football, Boxing or Wrestling. Conducting, managing or carrying on any professional game or exhibition mentioned in this subdivision, the license tax shall be in the amount as set forth in this subdivision: 
a.  Any professional baseball or football game to which an admission fee is charged, or for which remuneration is received, ten dollars per day, 
b.  Any professional boxing or wrestling exhibition to which an admission fee is charged, or for which remuneration is received, fifteen dollars per exhibition. 
The above games and exhibitions shall be subject to and governed by the regulatory ordinances of the city now in effect or which may hereafter be adopted; 
7.  Amusements, Circuses, Menageries, Tent Shows, Theatricals, Vaudeville. 
a.  Conducting, managing or carrying on a circus or other similar exhibition, twenty-five dollars per day; for every sideshow conducted in conjunction therewith, ten dollars per day; for every parade conducted by or under the same management as a circus or similar exhibition where the circus or similar exhibition is conducted outside the city, twenty-five dollars per day, 
b.  Conducting, managing or carrying on any carnival or other similar exhibition consisting of five or less concessions, twenty-five dollars for the first day and twelve dollars and fifty cents for each additional day; for each concession in excess of five being a part of the carnival, five dollars for the first day and two dollars and fifty cents for each additional day, 
c.  Conducting, managing or carrying on any lecture or traveling theatrical performance under or surrounded or partially enclosed by canvas such as comedy, spoken drama, opera or concerts, twenty-five dollars for the first day and twelve dollars and fifty cents for each additional day; for any of the performances held in any public hall, clubroom, assembly hall clubroom, assembly hall or theater, where movable scenery and theatrical appliances are used, whether or not an admission fee is charged, two dollars per day. The holder of a theater license shall not be required to procure an additional license to conduct, maintain or carry on any theatrical or vaudeville performance when the performance is conducted at any such theater so licensed, 
d.  Conducting, managing or carrying on a trained animal show, to which an admission fee is charged or collection taken, twenty-five dollars per day; 
8.  Amusements, General. Conducting, managing or carrying on any general amusement business, game, exhibition or any machine or device not provided for in this chapter for which any fee, charge or collection is taken or offering is accepted, five dollars per day. 
Nothing contained in this subdivision or in any section of this chapter shall authorize the holder of any license provided for in this subdivision to conduct, maintain or carry on any other business in connection with the exhibition or show without first obtaining a license so to do as provided in this chapter, in the event that a license to conduct the business is required under the provisions of this chapter; 
9.  Amusements, Jukeboxes. Conducting, managing or operating jukeboxes, devices for the playing of records or music automatically upon the deposit of a coin, slug or other device, thirty-two dollars per year for each such instrument or machine; 
10.  Amusement Machines. Operating or exhibiting any kinetoscope, biograph, projectoscope, or any other instrument or machine of like character and exhibiting, showing or letting the use of any microscope, lung tester, muscle tester, galvanic battery, automatic photograph machine or machine or instrument of like character, not licensed under this chapter, one dollar per month for each such instrument or machine; provided, however, that if the person conducts, manages or carries on the business of operating a place known as an arcade wherein five or more of the instruments or machines are operated or exhibited, the license shall be twenty-five dollars per quarter, or for any portion thereof, of the arcade; 
11.  Rental of Dwelling Units. Except as may be exempted in Section 5.04.100, every person engaging in the business of renting any dwelling unit, including but not limited to a single-family dwelling, an apartment, duplex unit, triplex or boardinghouse unit shall pay a license tax of fifty dollars for the first year and a license tax based on gross rental receipts each year thereafter; the minimum license tax shall be fifty dollars per year for the first twenty thousand dollars of gross annual receipts of business; on the next thirty thousand dollars of gross annual receipts of business, at the rate of one dollar per thousand dollars thereof; on the next one hundred fifty thousand dollars of gross annual receipts of business, at the rate of seventy cents per thousand dollars thereof; on the next three hundred thousand dollars of gross annual receipts of business, at the rate of fifty cents per thousand dollars thereof; on the next five hundred thousand dollars of gross annual receipts of business, at the rate of thirty-five cents per thousand dollars thereof; on all gross annual receipts of business over one million dollars at the rate of twenty cents per thousand, or major fraction thereof. 
All business licenses for rental of dwelling units shall expire April 30th each year except those established on a calendar year basis at the time of adoption of the ordinance codified in this subsection which licenses shall continue to expire December 31st each year until change of ownership of the business; 
12.  Auctions. See Sales, Auction and Auctioneers; 
13.  Automobile Parking. Maintaining any automobile storage or parking place in or upon any lot or parcel of land but maintaining no building or other structure upon the lot or parcel of land in which are kept or stored any such automobiles, one dollar per space per year. 
For operating any auto park temporarily or occasionally, where a fee is charged, five dollars per day for each day the auto park is operated, the daily payments to be in lieu of the license fee provided for in this subdivision. Operating any auto park for one day or part thereof shall constitute doing business within the meaning of this subdivision; 
14.  Barbershop. Conducting and operating a barbershop, as defined by the Business and Professions Code of the State of California, seventy-five dollars per year for the first chair and fifteen dollars per year for each additional chair operated therein. For every manicurist or person shining or polishing shoes employed in connection with or operating in any barbershop there shall be paid an additional license of fifteen dollars per year for each person so employed; 
15.  Cosmetological Establishment. Conducting or operating a cosmetological establishment, as defined by the Business and Professions Code of the State of California, seventy-five dollars per year for the first operator and fifteen dollars per year for each additional operator employed therein. For every manicurist or person shining or polishing shoes employed in connection with or operating in any beauty shop there shall be paid an additional license of fifteen dollars per year for each person so employed; 
16.  Cleaning and Dyeing. Operating a cleaning and dyeing plant or factory, forty-eight dollars per year; 
17.  Cleaning and Dyeing Solicitors. Engaging in the business of soliciting or delivering garments, fabric, substances or articles either to or from any plant or factory not having a fixed place of business in the city, whether the business is carried on directly or whether the business is carried on through an agent in the city, thirty-two dollars per year; 
18.  Contractor and/or Subcontractor and Builder-Owner Engaged in Building or Demolition. 
a.  Any contractor, independent contractor, or builder-owner shall obtain a business license before engaging in any construction or the erection, alteration, repair, removal, or demolition of any structure or building in the city. The license tax will be one hundred dollars per year or thirty-five dollars per quarter; provided, however, that any person licensed under this subdivision shall conform to and be governed by the regulatory provisions of this code now in effect or which may hereafter be adopted; 
b.  As used in this section, a contractor shall mean any person who is licensed as a contractor by the State of California and who undertakes to or offers to undertake to or purports to have the capacity to undertake to or submits a bid to, or does himself or by others, construct, alter, repair, add to, subtract from, improve, move, wreck or demolish any building, highway, road, railroad, or excavation; 
c.  As used in this section, an independent contractor shall mean any person other than a state licensed contractor, who is engaged to aid in the business of any other person and receives remuneration either through commission or in any manner other than through regular wages, salary or a direct participation in the profits of the business; 
d.  As used in this section, a builder-owner shall mean any person employing subcontractors, specialty contractors, or workers under his or her supervision and direction by the hour or day, for the purpose of constructing improvements on real property owned by him or her within the city; such person shall be taxed herein the same as a contractor unless his or her only building activity is constructing on his or her property a single family dwelling unit or addition thereto which will be used in whole or in part for the purpose of his or her own occupancy for a period of not less than one year; 
19.  Financial Institution. Conducting, managing or carrying on the business of lending money upon the security of any real or personal property or personal security or by purchasing personal property and agreeing to resell the property to the vendor or his assignee at prices previously agreed upon, one hundred twenty dollars per year; 
20.  Junk Dealer or Dealers in Old and Used Articles. Collecting, buying or selling at either retail or wholesale or otherwise dealing in junk and/or rubbish, manure, waste material, refuse, oil and other material of such consistency, and/or any old or used rags, sacks, bottles, cans, papers, metals, jewelry, precious or semiprecious metals, rubber, bric-a-brac, cordage, truck or automobile parts, truck or automobile accessories, and other like articles whether they can be sold or otherwise disposed of in the condition or state of repair as collected or whether they are collected, bought or sold or otherwise disposed of for the purpose of being treated, repaired or prepared so as to be used again in some other form, one hundred dollars per year or fraction thereof; provided, however, that no license issued under the provisions of this subdivision shall be deemed or construed to authorize or permit the removal or collection of garbage as defined in this code, or the collection of dead animals; provided, further, that any person, whether acting as principal or agent, collecting or dealing in any of the articles enumerated in this subdivision and operating under a license provided for in this subdivision shall conform to and be governed by the regulatory provisions of this code; 
21.  Laundry, Collection and Delivery, Solicitors or Transient Collectors. Delivering, operating or maintaining a wagon, truck or other vehicle for the collection or delivery of laundry to or from a fixed place of business in the city, whether the vehicle is used to collect laundry direct from customers, or through an agent, or from other wagons operated by the same or some other person, and of maintaining or operating a wagon, truck or other vehicle for the purpose of soliciting, collecting or delivering laundry and not having a fixed place of business in the city, whether the wagon or vehicle is used to collect laundry direct from customers or through an agent or from some other vehicle operated by the same or some other person, for the wagon, truck or vehicle, one hundred dollars per year, and for each additional truck, wagon or vehicle, ten dollars per year; provided, however, that any person operating and paying a license under this subdivision may carry on the business outlined in subdivision 22 of this subsection without paying the fee provided for in that subdivision; 
22.  Linen Supply, Linen Supply Solicitors and Collectors. Maintaining or operating a wagon, truck or vehicle for the purpose of leasing, renting or otherwise furnishing clean or laundered table linens, towels, aprons, dresses, uniforms, jackets, overalls and articles of like nature for a fee or service charge, whether from a fixed place of business in or outside the city, and of maintaining or operating a wagon, truck or vehicle, whether permanent or transient and whether the vehicle is used to carry on the business direct with the customers or through an agent, or from other wagons operated by the same or some other person, for the first such wagon, truck or vehicle, fifty dollars per year and for each additional vehicle, ten dollars per year; provided, however, that any person operating and paying a license under this subdivision may carry on the business outlined and set forth in subdivision 21 of this subsection without the necessity of paying the fee provided in that subdivision; 
23.  Manufacturing-Processing Industry. Every manufacturing plant, processing plant and industrial business shall pay an annual business license fee as follows: for the business and for one employee a combined fee of twenty-five dollars per year; for the next twenty-four employees in any such business an additional fee at the rate of two dollars per year per employee; for all employees over twenty-five an additional fee at the rate of one dollar per employee per year; the fees shall be based on the average yearly employees; 
24.  Merchandise Clubs. A watch, jewelry, clothing or other merchandise club, one hundred dollars per month; 
25.  Milk Wagons or Trucks. A milk wagon or other vehicle operating from a dairy plant or farm having no fixed place of business within the city, for the purpose of selling or delivery of dairy products at retail, for each such wagon or vehicle, twelve dollars per year; 
26.  Automobile Retail Sales—New and Used. Selling at retail any automobiles or conducting, maintaining or carrying on any operations generally identified with the retail automobile sales business, the business license tax shall be computed at the rate of twenty cents for each one thousand dollars of gross annual receipts of business done by the business with a minimum license tax of one hundred dollars and a maximum tax of six hundred dollars. 
In computing the gross annual receipts of business which may be used as the basis for a license fee as provided in this subdivision, the gross annual receipts may be computed for such purpose by deducting from the gross amount thereof the total value of any merchandise, except money bills or notes, received in trade at the same value it was so received; 
27.  Newspapers, Magazines, Foreign. Acting as agent for or selling or delivering newspapers or magazines capable of being entered as second class matter under the provisions of the United States Post Office regulations and federal statutes, not printed or published within the city, to regular customers or bona fide subscribers, the sum of twenty-four dollars per year; 
28.  Oil Wells. Maintaining, pumping or operating, or causing to be maintained, pumped or operated, any well or wells for the purpose of producing oil, gas or other hydrocarbon substances, within the city limits, one hundred dollars per year or fraction thereof, for each well maintained, pumped or operated within the city and any such well shall be considered maintained and the license tax of one hundred dollars per year or fraction thereof due and payable until the derrick is razed, all buildings, boilers, machinery and improvements used in connection therewith removed from the premises and all oil and oil in sumps removed and sumpholes cleaned, all excavation filled, embankments razed and the surface of the ground completely reconditioned; 
29.  Peddlers, Vendors and Solicitors. 
a.  Peddler Defined. For the purpose of this chapter, a "peddler" is defined to be any person not having a fixed place of business in the city who sells, offers for sale, or takes orders for any goods, wares or merchandise; or who contracts for a service to be performed in the future, from residence to residence, store to store, or from a stand or parcel of land adjoining any public property; and, who for the purpose of carrying on such business may hire, lease or occupy any room, building or structure for the exhibition or sale of such goods, wares or merchandise. 
b.  Peddler Tax. A peddler of goods, wares or merchandise in the manner prescribed above not otherwise provided for in this chapter shall pay a license tax of one hundred dollars per month, forty dollars per week, or fifteen dollars per day. Issuance of the license is subject to Chapter 5.16 of this code which limits an individual's ability to engage in business during special events. 
c.  Vendor Defined. For the purpose of this chapter, a "vendor" is defined to be any person who solicits, displays, sells or offers for sale, barter or exchange, any goods, wares or merchandise, including any food, either prepared or pre-packaged, produce or beverages, from a vehicle. 
d.  Vehicle Defined. For the purpose of this chapter, "vehicle" means any vehicle as that term is defined in the California Vehicle Code. 
e.  Vendor Fees. 
(i)  Any person or entity owning, operating, or otherwise controlling any business involved in the vending of goods, wares or merchandise from such vehicle shall pay a license fee of fifty dollars per year for each vehicle. 
(ii)  Any person who is not otherwise licensed under this chapter and who desires to sell goods, wares or merchandise during a special event, including but not limited to a parade or festival, shall pay a license tax of fifteen dollars per day. Issuance of the license is subject to Chapter 5.16 of this code which limits an individual's ability to engage in business during special events. 
f.  Regulations Pertaining to Vendors. 
(i)  Any person offering for sale any food items for which a health permit is required by law must show proof of having obtained such a permit when application for license is made. 
(ii)  No vending from such vehicle shall be permitted within twenty-five feet of any intersection of two or more public streets. 
(iii)  No vending from such vehicle shall be permitted for a period of time in excess of thirty minutes in any one location, and the vehicle must be moved a distance of not less than two hundred feet between consecutive stops at which vending occurs. 
(iv)  No vehicle shall be parked, stopped or left standing in any manner which blocks or impedes pedestrian traffic in any public right-of-way and/or vehicular access to any driveway or restricts the free movement of other vehicles upon the public street. 
(v)  Vending upon the public streets shall be permitted only after the vehicle has been brought to a complete stop and parked adjacent to the curb in a lawful manner. 
(vi)  Each vehicle shall be equipped with a trash receptacle of a size adequate to accommodate all trash and refuse generated by such vending. 
(vii)  Any use of amplified sound-making devices, including vehicle horns to advertise, draw attention to, or announce the presence of any such vehicle, shall comply with the limitations and provisions set forth in Chapter 9.20 of this code. 
(viii)  Vending Prohibited in Specified Places. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 5.04.120, no person, firm or corporation shall sell, peddle, hawk, vend, solicit, barter or exchange any goods, wares, merchandise, foodstuffs, edibles, liquids, ice cream, confectionery or other products or offer to do any of the foregoing, upon any public right-of-way adjacent to or within one thousand feet of any public or private school building or the grounds thereof during any day school is in session. Special event permits may be issued by the city treasurer to allow such activities when special events occur within the prescribed area that are determined by the city treasurer to not be an unreasonable risk to children or other persons attending the special event. 
g.  Solicitor Defined. For the purpose of this chapter, a "solicitor" is defined to be any person not having a fixed place of business in the city who engages in the act of soliciting or canvassing opinions, preferences, endorsements and/or contributions from persons within the city from residence to residence, store to store, or from a stand or parcel of land adjoining any public property. 
h.  Solicitor Tax. A solicitor engaged in business in the manner prescribed above not otherwise provided for in this chapter, shall pay a license tax of one hundred dollars per month, forty dollars per week, or fifteen dollars per day. Issuance of the license is subject to Chapter 5.16 of this code which limits an individual's ability to engage in business during special events. 
i.  Fingerprinting. 
(i)  Any person, resident or nonresident of the city who engages in the act of peddling goods or merchandise from residence to residence and/or store to store must be fingerprinted and picture taken by the police department before a license may be issued. 
(ii)  Any person, resident or nonresident of the city who engages in the act of peddling as defined in Section 5.04.120(B)(29)(a), vending as defined in Section 5.04.120(B)(29)(c), or soliciting as defined in Section 5.04.120(B)(29)(g) must be fingerprinted and provide two passport photographs before a license may be issued. A fee to cover the processing cost shall be paid in full at the time application for the license is made. An identification badge will be issued at the time the license is issued and shall expire simultaneously with the expiration of the business license. No license under this subdivision may be issued until a report from the department of justice on fingerprints is filed with the city clerk-treasurer department. 
(iii)  Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit persons from distributing handbills door-to-door within the city without being fingerprinted, obtaining a badge or obtaining a permit; 
j.  Exemptions. It is also provided in this subdivision that any person, whether acting as principal or agent, who or which claims exemption from municipal taxation for peddling or soliciting or by reason of interstate commerce and/or nonprofit status, shall make application to the city clerk-treasurer for a license exempt from tax as provided for in this chapter and shall furnish conclusive proof in support of any claim for exemption. Any person licensed under this subdivision shall first comply with the provisions of subdivision 29i of this subsection. 
30.  Pest Control Business. Carrying on the business of pest control, the sum of fifty dollars per year; 
31.  Redeeming Stamps, Coupons, etc. Redeeming any stamps, coupons, tickets, cards or other devices issued for or with the sale of goods, wares or merchandise, which stamps, coupons, tickets, cards or other devices so issued shall entitle the purchaser receiving them to procure from the person any goods, wares or merchandise free of charge upon the presentation of one or any number of such stamps, coupons, tickets, cards or other devices, ten dollars per quarter or fraction thereof; 
32.  Retail Businesses or Other Businesses, Trades, Occupations or Callings Not Otherwise Licensed. Selling at retail any goods or conducting or maintaining or carrying on any trade, occupation, calling or business not otherwise specifically licensed by some other section or subsection of this chapter, including a business which rents, leases, operates or maintains any vending machine not otherwise licensed under this chapter and not prohibited by law, the minimum license tax shall be fifty dollars per year for the first twenty thousand dollars of gross annual receipts of business made or done by the business, trade, occupation or calling; on the next thirty thousand dollars of gross annual receipts of business, at the rate of one dollar per thousand dollars thereof; on the next one hundred-fifty thousand dollars of gross annual receipts of business, at the rate of seventy cents per thousand dollars thereof; on the next three hundred thousand dollars of gross annual receipts of business, at the rate of fifty cents per thousand dollars thereof; on the next five hundred thousand dollars of gross annual receipts of business, at the rate of thirty-five cents per thousand dollars thereof; on all gross annual receipts of business over one million dollars at the rate of twenty cents per thousand, or major fraction thereof. 
In computing the gross annual receipts of business which may be used as the basis for a license tax as provided in this subdivision, the gross annual receipts may be computed for the purpose by deducting from the gross amount thereof the total value of any merchandise, except money bills or notes, received in trade at the same value as it was so received; 
33.  Sales, Auction or Auctioneer. Selling real estate, livestock or any goods, wares or merchandise at public auction, twenty-five dollars per day. (See also Chapter 5.08) 
a.  Acting as an auctioneer or person engaged in the auctioning of goods, wares, merchandise, livestock or real estate, ten dollars per day. 
b.  Nothing in this subdivision shall apply to the sale of farm products and farm implements and household goods and furniture sold at the residence of the owner, if the owner first has obtained from the city clerk-treasurer a license which is exempt from tax to conduct the sale; 
34.  Sales, Bankruptcy, Closing-Out, Removal, etc. Advertising or conducting any sale of goods, wares or merchandise that is represented as or held out as bankrupt sale, creditor's sale, adjuster sale, insolvent sale, liquidation sale, assignee's sale, insurance sale, mortgage sale, executor's sale, jobber's sale, manufacturer's sale, trustee's creditor sale, closing-out sale of goods, wares or merchandise damaged by fire or smoke or water or otherwise, any kind of a closing-out sale, or as a sale conducted by a merchant's association or board of trade or other apparent body of creditors, fifty dollars per quarter or any fraction thereof; provided, however, that any sale enumerated or classified under this subdivision and carried on or conducted in the city shall be governed by and subject to the regulatory provisions of this code, now in force or which may hereafter be adopted. 
For a supplemental license under this subdivision as provided and governed by the regulatory provisions of this code, any city ordinance now in effect or which may hereafter be adopted pertaining to the sales included in this subdivision, ten dollars per day for each additional day; 
35.  Sales, Regulation of Special Sales Including Bankruptcy, Closing-Out, Removal, etc. The purpose of this subdivision of this subsection is to safeguard the public and encourage competition among business houses by prohibiting unfair, dishonest, deceptive, fraudulent and disciplinary practices by which fair and honest competition is destroyed or prevented, and by which members of the public are injured. 
a.  Definitions. Whenever used in this subdivision, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
i.  "Publish, publishing, advertisement, advertising" means any and all means of conveying to the public notice of sale or notice of intention to conduct a sale, whether by word of mouth, by newspaper advertisement, by magazine advertisement, by handbill, by written notice, by printed notice, by printed display, by billboard display, by poster, by radio or television announcement and any and all means including oral, written or printed. 
ii.  "Sale" means the sale of or an offer to sell to the public, goods, wares and merchandise of any and all kinds and descriptions on hand and in stock in connection with a declared purpose, as set forth by advertising, on the part of the seller that the sale is anticipatory to the termination, closing, liquidation, revision, windup, discontinuance, conclusion or abandonment of the business in connection with the sale. It also includes any sale advertised to be a "fire sale," "adjustment sale," "creditor's sale," "trustee's sale," "liquidation sale," "reorganization sale," "alteration sale," "executor's sale," "administrator's sale," "insolvent sale," "insurance salvage sale," "mortgage sale," "assignee's sale," "adjustor's sale," "receiver's sale," "loss-of-lease sale," "wholesaler's close-out sale," "creditor's committee sale," "forced-out-of-business sale," "removal sale," and any and all sales advertised in such manner as to reasonably convey to the public that upon the disposal of the stock of goods on hand the business will cease and be discontinued. 
The tax and license collector is authorized to supervise and regulate the sales as defined in subparagraph (i) of this subdivision. 
b.  Application for License. Application for a license required under this subdivision shall be filed with the tax and license collector and shall be verified and set forth the following information: 
i.  A description of the place where the sale is to be held; 
ii.  The nature of the occupancy, whether by lease or sublease, and the effective date of termination of the occupancy; 
iii.  The means to be employed in publishing the sale, together with the proposed content of any advertisement; 
iv.  An itemized list of the goods, wares and merchandise to be offered for sale; 
v.  The place where the stock was purchased or acquired, and if not purchased, the manner of the acquisition; provided, however, stock purchased or acquired within thirty days of the date application is made for the sale shall not be added to the stock for sale unless satisfactory proof is given to the tax and license collector that the stock was not purchased or acquired for the purpose of the sale; 
vi.  The name of the owner of the goods, wares and merchandise to be offered for sale; and if the sale is to be conducted by a person not the owner of the goods, then the name of the person conducting the sale; 
vii.  Any additional information as the tax and license collector may require. 
c.  Term of License. Upon the filing of the application, the tax and license collector, after investigation thereof and determining that the provisions of this subdivision have been complied with, shall issue the license for a period not to exceed ninety days. If the tax and license collector determines that the provisions of this subdivision have not been complied with, the application must be denied. 
d.  Renewals of License. Upon satisfactory proof by the licensee that the stock itemized in the original application has not been disposed of, the tax and license collector may renew the license for one additional thirty-day period. The proof shall contain an itemized list of stock on hand and shall be verified. The tax and license collector shall cause it to be examined and investigated and if satisfied as to the truth of the statement, he may issue a renewal license for the period not to exceed thirty days. 
e.  Display of License. Upon commencement of any such sale the license therefor shall be conspicuously displayed near the entrance to the premises. 
f.  License Not Transferable. Any license issued pursuant to the provisions of this subdivision shall not be transferable. 
g.  Stock Records. Suitable books and records shall be kept by the licensee and shall be available at all reasonable times to the tax and license collector or his representatives. The licensee shall permit an examination of all merchandise on the premises for comparison with the stock list for which the license was issued. 
h.  No Additional Goods. No goods, wares or merchandise shall be permitted to be offered for sale at the place of business where the sale is to be conducted other than those items listed in the inventory filed with the application for the license. 
i.  Exemptions. The following persons shall be exempt from the provisions of this subdivision: 
i.  Persons acting pursuant to an order of the process of a court of competent jurisdiction in disposing of goods, wares and merchandise the subject of the court's jurisdiction; 
ii.  Sheriffs and marshals acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public officers; 
37.  Shoe Shining. A shoe shining or shoe polishing stand, two dollars per quarter for each person employed or working therein; 
38.  Sponging and Pressing. Sponging and pressing clothing but conducting no plant or factory in connection therewith, thirty-two dollars per year; 
39.  Spraying or Fumigating. Commercial spraying, fumigating or eradicating or controlling plant diseases, insect and other animal pests or noxious weeds, the sum of twelve dollars and fifty cents per quarter. 
Provided, that no license shall be granted an applicant unless the applicant holds a certificate of qualification as prescribed by the law of the state and the rules of the county horticultural commissioner; provided further, that no license shall be granted an applicant unless the applicant holds a certificate from the water superintendent showing that he has complied with the rules and regulations of the water department relative to the use of city water and city hydrants; provided further, that any license granted under this subdivision may be revoked by the council as provided in this chapter upon proof that the licensee has violated any state law, ordinance, rule of the county horticultural commissioner or rule of the water superintendent pertaining to business under this classification; 
40.  Swap Meets. Advertising, conducting, maintaining, promoting or carrying on a swap meet, one thousand dollars per year per operator plus one dollars per day per exhibitor for each day the swap meet is conducted. 
A swap meet includes and is defined as an event at which two or more exhibitors display, sell, exchange, offer for sale or exchange any property; and at which a fee is charged as general admission to the place or location where the event is held and/or a fee is charged for the privilege of exhibiting property at the event. An operator is defined as any person conducting or operating the business of a swap meet on any premises in the city, excluding swap meet exhibitors. Exhibitor is defined as any person exhibiting, displaying, selling, exchanging, offering for sale or exchange any tangible property at a swap meet; 
41.  Taxi and Transportation of Passengers. See Chapter 5.60; 
42.  Taxicabs. See Chapter 5.60; 
43.  Transient Merchant or Itinerant Vendor. An itinerant vendor or transient merchant, five dollars per day or fraction thereof. Any person licensed under this subdivision shall first comply with the provisions of subdivision 29b of this subsection; 
45.  Transportation of Property. Running, driving or operating any automobile, truck or vehicle used for the transportation of baggage, express, freight, household goods, merchandise, lumber, gravel, sand, bricks or any other materials and which vehicle receives or discharges baggage, express, freight, household goods, merchandise, lumber, gravel, sand, brick or any other materials at points within or without the city, for each such vehicle, fifty dollars per year; 
47.  Wholesale Business. Carrying on a business consisting of selling at wholesale any goods, wares or merchandise or produce, together with every other association of persons maintaining a place of business where the products of its members are received and prepared for shipment or sale, not otherwise specifically licensed by any other subsection or subdivision of this chapter, the minimum license tax shall be twenty dollars per year for the first twenty-five thousand dollars of gross annual receipts made or done by the business, trade, occupation or calling; on the next fifty thousand dollars of gross annual receipts made or done by the business, trade, occupation or calling, at the rate of sixty cents per thousand dollars thereof; on the next one hundred thousand dollars of gross annual receipts made or done by the business, trade, occupation or calling, at the rate of twenty-five cents per thousand dollars thereof; on the next one hundred fifty thousand dollars of gross annual receipts made or done by the business, trade, occupation or calling, at the rate of twenty cents per thousand dollars thereof; on the next two hundred fifty thousand dollars of gross annual receipts made or done by the business, trade, occupation or calling, at the rate of ten cents per thousand dollars thereof; and on the next five hundred thousand dollars and over of gross annual receipts made or done by the business, trade, occupation or calling, at the rate of five cents per thousand dollars thereof; 
48.  Business and Services. Each person carrying on, operating or engaging in any business, profession, occupation or service enumerated in this subdivision, either as an individual, copartner, member of an association or any employee, for each person so engaged in such business, profession or occupation, the sum of seventy dollars per year for each business: appraiser, assayer, auditor, bond broker, booking agent, collection agent, commercial artist, consultant, detective, designer, drugless practitioner, employment agency, engraver, insurance adjuster, interpreter, investigator, instructor, laboratory technician, landscape gardener, lapidary, lithographer, massage parlor, and/or masseur, midwife, naturopath, optician, physician therapist, piano tuner, public stenographer, real estate broker, salesman*, service vehicle, sign painter, stock broker, tutor and upholsterer; 
Note— Business license tax is not applicable to real estate salesmen (07-09). 
a.  Businesses and Professions. Each person carrying on, operating or engaging in any business, profession or occupation enumerated in this subdivision, either as an individual, copartner, member of an association or any employee, for each firm so engaged, the sum of one hundred dollars per year for businesses with one professional employee, the sum of two hundred dollars per year for businesses with two professional employees or the sum of three hundred dollars per year for businesses with more than two professional employees plus twenty-five dollars per professional employee over two: architect, accountant, attorney at law, bacteriologist, certified public accountant, chemist, chiropractor, civil engineer, chemical engineer, dentist, electrical engineer, entomologist, geologist, horticulturist, mechanical engineer, ophthalmologist, optometrist, osteopath, physician, podiatrist, psychologist, psychiatrist, radiologist, surgeon and veterinarian; 
49.  Fortunetelling. 
a.  The term "fortunetelling" means the telling of fortunes, forecasting of futures, or furnishing any information not otherwise obtainable by the ordinary processes of knowledge, by means of any occult or psychic power, faculty or force, clairvoyance, clairaudience, cartomancy, phrenology, spirits, mediumship, seership, prophecy, augury, astrology, palmistry, necromancy, mind reading, telepathy, or other similar practice, craft, art, science, cards, talisman, charm, potion, magnetism, magnetized article or substance, crystal gazing, or magic of any kind or nature, or engaging in, practicing or carrying on any art, profession or business, 
b.  Fingerprinting. As outlined in Section 9.36.040, every person desiring a permit shall file an application with the license processor in addition to being fingerprinted and photographed by the police department. An application fee of one hundred dollars to cover the processing cost shall be paid in full at the time application for permit is made. No permit under this subsection may be issued until a police report on fingerprints is filed with the city clerk-treasurer's office, 
c.  Bond. As outlined in Section 9.36.060 each applicant must post with the city clerk-treasurer a surety bond in the principal sum of five thousand dollars executed as surety by a good and sufficient corporate surety authorized to do surety business in this state and as a principal by the applicant which shall have been approved by the city manager as to form, 
d.  Fee. Each person desiring to practice any of the professions, arts, or businesses included in Section 9.36.010 shall have a license issued by the license processor. The issuance or renewal of such license, which shall be required annually, may be issued only after payment of one hundred fifty dollars, 
e.  Permit — Refusal — Appeal. As outlined in Section 9.36.090, any applicant who is denied a permit by the license processor may appeal such denial to the city manager or designee of the city manager pursuant to provisions of this chapter. Such appeal shall be accompanied by an appeal fee of fifty dollars. 
(Ord. 2897 § 2, 2008; Ord. 2868 § 1, 2005; Ord. 2834 §§ 1, 2, 2003; Ord. 2714 § 1, 1997; Ord. 2711 §§ 6—9, 1997; amended during 2/94 supplement; Ord. 2594 § 1, 1993; Ord. 2564 § 1, 1992; Ord. 2559 §§ 1, 2, 1991; Ord. 2551 § 1, 1991; Ord. 2527 § 1, 1991; Ord. 2455 §§ 1, 2, 1989; Ord. 2401 § 1, 1987; Ord. 2397 §§ 3, 4, 5, 6, 1986; Ord. 2397 §§ 3, 4, 5, 6, 1986; Ord. 2373 § 1, 1986; amended during 1984 codification; prior code § 6100.11)  
5.04.125 - Rules and regulations—Apportionments. 
The city clerk-treasurer may make such rules and regulations as are not inconsistent with the provisions of this article as may be necessary or desirable to aid in the enforcement of the provisions of this article. When, by reason of the provisions of the Constitution of the United States or the Constitution of California, the business tax imposed by this article cannot be enforced without there being an apportionment according to the amount of business done in the City of Whittier, or in the State of California, as the case may be, the city clerk-treasurer may make such rules and regulations for the apportionment of the tax as are necessary or desirable to overcome the constitutional objections. Such rules and regulations shall be approved by the city attorney prior to becoming effective. 
(Ord. No. 2931, § 1, 8-11-09)  
5.04.130 - Lighting. 
Every person maintaining, operating, owning, managing or controlling any store, merchandise establishment, or any other place of business or office in the city where money, goods or merchandise are stored, kept or sold shall keep one or more lights burning during the night hours in the business house in a place best adapted to light the entire establishment, the light or lights to be of sixteen candlepower or more. 
(Prior code § 6110)  
5.04.140 - Error not to affect collection and zoning conformance required. 
In no case shall any error made by the city clerk-treasurer or any deputy in preparing a license, stating the amount of the tax therefor, prejudice the collection by the city of the amount actually due under this chapter for the carrying on of any business, trade or occupation, nor shall the issuance of a license by the city clerk-treasurer or deputy authorize the carrying on of any business, trade or occupation in any zone or location contrary to the provisions of the zoning ordinances of the city now in effect or which may hereafter be adopted. 
(Prior code § 6100.17)  
5.04.150 - Refunds. 
No refund shall be made on any license issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter unless the conducting, managing or carrying on of the business as provided in the license becomes unlawful, either by act of the council or by act of some legislative body having jurisdiction therein, or where payments thereon have been erroneously made by the licensee. 
(Prior code § 6100.16)  
5.04.160 - Inspection and enforcement. 
A.  All police officers of the city are appointed inspectors of licenses and in addition to their several duties as such officers may examine any place of business and person liable to pay a license tax, for the purpose of ascertaining whether a business license as required in this chapter has been obtained and is being exhibited, and shall have and exercise the power: 
1.  To make arrests for the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter; 
2.  To enter free of charge, at any time any place of business for which a license is required by this chapter and to demand the exhibition of the license for the current year by any person engaged or employed in the transaction of the business and if the person then and there fails to exhibit the license, the licensee shall be liable to the penalty provided in this code for a violation of this chapter. 
B.  The police officers shall notify the city tax and license collector of any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Amended during 1984 codification; prior code § 6100.10)  
5.04.170 - Conviction not to exempt from payment. 
The conviction and punishment of any person for transacting any business, trade, occupation or calling without a license shall not excuse or exempt the person from the payment of any license due or unpaid at the time of the conviction, or the collection thereof in a court of competent jurisdiction, and nothing in this chapter shall prevent a criminal prosecution for any violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 6100.15)  
5.04.180 - Violation designated. 
The engaging in, carrying on or conducting of any business, trade, calling, profession, exhibition or vocation in the city for which a license certificate is required under the provisions of this chapter, without having procured such a license certificate therefor, constitutes a distinct and separate offense for each and every day that the business, trade, calling, profession, exhibition or vocation is engaged in, carried on or conducted. 
(Prior code § 6100.13)  
5.04.190 - Penalty for violation. 
No person, whether acting as principal, agent, officer, clerk or employee shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 6100.14)  
Chapter 5.06 - UPTOWN WHITTIER BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT AREA 
Sections: 
 
5.06.010 - Establishment of area. 
Pursuant to Section 36500 et seq., of the Streets and Highways Code of the State of California, a business improvement area designated as "Uptown Whittier Business Improvement Area of the City of Whittier" was created and established by Ordinance No. 2300 and is amended. 
(Ord. 2604 § 1 (part), 1993)  
5.06.020 - Description of area. 
That portion of the city of Whittier, county of Los Angeles, state of California, bounded and described as follows: 
Beginning at the centerline intersection of Friends Avenue, 50 feet wide, and Penn Street, 60 feet wide; thence west along said centerline of Penn Street to the centerline of Washington Avenue, 50 feet wide; thence south along said centerline of Washington Avenue to a line parallel with and lying 80 feet southerly of said centerline of Penn Street; thence west along said parallel line to the centerline of the alley west of Milton Avenue; thence north along said alley centerline to a line parallel with and lying 140 feet southerly of the centerline of Philadelphia Street, 80 feet wide; thence west along last said parallel line to a line parallel with and lying 125 feet westerly of the centerline of Pickering Avenue, 70 feet wide; thence north along last said parallel line 140 feet to said centerline of Philadelphia Street; thence west along last said centerline of Philadelphia Street 10 feet; thence north parallel to said centerline of Pickering Avenue to a line parallel with and lying 120 feet northerly of said centerline of Philadelphia Street; thence east along last said parallel line to the centerline of the alley west of Milton Avenue; thence north along last said alley centerline and its northerly prolongation to the centerline of the alley north of Hadley Street; thence east along last said alley centerline to the northerly prolongation of the easterly line of lot 12 block 19 of Harvey and Ricker's Addition, as per map recorded in Book 26, pages 67 and 68 of Miscellaneous Records of said county; thence south along said easterly line of said Lot 12 and its southerly prolongation, which is a line parallel with and lying 175 feet westerly of the centerline of Friends Avenue, to a line parallel with and lying 170 feet northerly of said centerline of Philadelphia Street; thence east along last said parallel line to the centerline of the alley east of Painter Avenue; thence south along last said alley centerline and its southerly prolongation to a line parallel with and lying 140 feet southerly of said centerline of Philadelphia Street; thence west along last said parallel line to the centerline of the alley west of Friends Avenue; thence south along last said alley centerline to the westerly prolongation of the northerly line of Lot 7 Block 31, Map of Whittier, as per map recorded in Book 21 pages 55 and 56 of Miscellaneous Records of said County; thence east along the northerly line of said Lot 7 and its westerly and easterly prolongations to said centerline of Friends Avenue; thence south along last said centerline of Friends Avenue to the point of beginning. 
(Ord. 2831 § 1, 2003; Ord. 2604 § 1 (part), 1993)  
5.06.030 - Benefit zones. 
Two benefit zones are established as follows: 
A.  Diamond Area Benefit Zone. The boundaries of the Diamond Area Benefit Zone are as follows: 
Greenleaf Avenue: North to South, between Hadley Street and Wardman Street; Philadelphia Street: East to West, between Bright Avenue and Comstock Avenue. 
B.  Silver Area Benefit Zone. The boundaries of the Silver Area Benefit Zone shall include all businesses in the Uptown Whittier Business Improvement Area other than those included in the Diamond Area Benefit Zone. 
(Ord. 2831 § 2, 2003; Ord. 2604 § 1 (part), 1993)  
5.06.040 - Classifications of businesses and bases of assessment. 
Annual Benefit Assessment 
Assessment Chart 
Classification 	Diamond Area 
Benefit Zone 	Silver Area 
Benefit Zone 
Classification A 	$130.00 plus $0.15 per square foot of gross leasable area of the business (see definition below), not to exceed $2,500 	$130.00 plus $0.10 per square foot of gross leasable area of the business (see definition below), not to exceed $2,500 
Classification B 	$130.00 plus $0.20 per square foot of gross leasable area of the business (see definition below), not to exceed $2,500 	$130.00 plus $0.15 per square foot of gross leasable area of the business (see definition below), not to exceed $2,500 
Classification C 	$750.00 	$750.00 
Classification D 	$100.00 	$100.00 
Classification E 	$130.00 	$130.00 
 
A.  Definition of Terms. Gross leasable area is defined as the total floor area designed for the occupancy and exclusive use of tenants, including basements, storage space, patios and mezzanines. It is measured from the center of joint partitioning to the outside wall surfaces. 
B.  Diamond Area Benefit Zone. The boundaries of the Diamond Area Benefit Zone are as follows: Greenleaf Avenue: North to South, between Hadley Street and Wardman Street. Philadelphia Street: East to West, between Bright Avenue and Comstock Avenue. 
C.  Silver Area Benefit Zone. The boundaries of the Silver Area Benefit Zone shall include all businesses in the Uptown Whittier Business Improvement Area other than those included in the Diamond Area Benefit Zone. 
D.  Classifications. The five classifications of businesses and bases for determining assessments are as follows: 
1.  Classification A includes retail businesses defined as any business that pays sales tax to the California State Board of Equalization. Examples of retail businesses include but are not limited to retail sales, hotels/motels, theaters, printing businesses, barber shops, and beauty shops. Food establishments are not included in this classification. 
2.  Classification B includes food establishments defined as restaurants, bars, cafes, coffee houses, or any business that serves food, coffee, or alcohol. 
3.  Classification C includes all financial institutions. 
4.  Classification D includes all nonprofit institutions. 
5.  Classification E includes other businesses defined as service businesses, professionals, insurance brokers and agents and all other businesses not otherwise classified herein. 
(Ord. 2904 § 1, 2007: Ord. 2831 § 3, 2003; Ord. 2636, § 1, 1994; Ord. 2604 § 1 (part), 1993)  
5.06.050 - Payment of assessment. 
A.  The charges assessed shall be due and payable and shall be paid at the same time and in the same manner that business licenses taxes imposed by the city code are due and payable. Any business not subject to the city business license tax code shall make its initial assessment payment within thirty days of receiving notice from the city and annually thereafter in the same month the initial assessment was due. 
B.  No business license shall be issued pursuant to the Whittier Municipal Code unless the assessment imposed is paid together with the business license tax payable pursuant to the code; and a business license shall be considered unpaid and penalties shall be assessed upon the total amount at the rate specified in the Municipal Code, until such time as both the business license tax and the charges imposed hereunder are paid in full. 
C.  Where one owner has multiple businesses in the same class or combinations of two or more of the above classes, all of which are at the same location, the total charge for that location under this chapter shall be the highest charge of any one of those businesses when considered individually according to their classifications herein. 
D.  Where multiple owners have businesses in the same class or combination of two or more of the above classes, all of which are at the same location, the total charge to each owner under this chapter shall be the highest charge of any one of the individual owner's businesses at the location when considered according to their classification herein. 
E.  No person shall fail or refuse to pay the assessment fee herein imposed. 
(Ord. 2604 § 1 (part), 1993)  
5.06.060 - Charge transferability. 
There shall be no additional assessment for any business which transfers the same business to any location within the business improvement area. 
(Ord. 2604 § 1 (part), 1993)  
5.06.070 - Statement of charge due. 
A written statement, on such forms as may be required or furnished by the city treasurer, shall be filed when the charges are paid. 
(Ord. 2604 § 1 (part), 1993)  
5.06.080 - Voluntary contribution. 
Any business may make voluntary contributions to business improvement area for the purposes provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 2604 § 1 (part), 1993)  
5.06.090 - Use of revenues. 
Uses of revenues derived from charges imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be limited to uses authorized by Section 36500 et seq., of the Streets and Highways Code. 
(Ord. 2604 § 1 (part), 1993)  
5.06.100 - Fund. 
There is created a special fund designated as uptown Whittier business improvement area fund into which all revenues derived from charges and contributions under this chapter shall be placed and such funds shall be used only for the purposes specified in this chapter. 
(Ord. 2604 § 1 (part), 1993)  
5.06.110 - Expenditures. 
The city council shall annually approve a budget to include an estimate of expenditures to be made from the uptown Whittier business improvement area fund to carry out the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2604 § 1 (part), 1993)  
5.06.120 - Penalties. 
A.  Should any person, firm or corporation fail to pay an assessment when due as provided in this chapter, the city tax and license collector shall impose the following penalties until the assessment and penalty is paid: 
	
One month past due 	10% penalty 
Two months past due 	25% penalty 
Three months past due 	50% penalty 
Four months past due 	75% penalty 
Five or more months past due 	100% penalty 
 
B.  All penalties shall be paid at the time the amount of the license tax and assessment is paid and the tax and license collector is authorized to bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to collect the tax and penalty. The action shall be brought in the name of the city and any judgment for the tax shall include a judgment for the penalties as assessed by the tax and license collector in accordance with this section. 
C.  The city tax and license collector will remit all penalties collected to the Whittier uptown association. 
(Ord. 2851 § 1, 2004)  
Chapter 5.12 - BINGO GAMES 
Sections: 
 
5.12.010 - Games of chance restricted. 
Nothing contained in this chapter is intended to or shall be construed to prohibit a nonprofit organization from conducting a fundraiser using controlled games as a funding mechanism to further the purposes and mission of the nonprofit organization, provided that the nonprofit organization complies with the requirements of Section 19986 of the Business & Professions Code. "Nonprofit organization" shall have the same meaning as the definition in subdivision (h) of Section 19986 of the Business & Professions Code. 
(Prior code § 4150) 
(Ord. No. 2965, § 2, 4-12-11)  
5.12.020 - Bingo games authorized. 
Nothing contained in this chapter is intended to or shall be construed to prohibit playing, maintaining or operating of any bingo game if it is played, maintained or operated in accordance with all provisions of Section 326.5 of the Penal Code and this code. 
(Ord. 2290 § 1, 1982: prior code § 4151)  
5.12.030 - License—Required. 
No person shall maintain or operate a bingo game, as the term "bingo" is defined in this chapter, unless a license for the game has been obtained pursuant to this chapter and is in full force and effect, and the game is maintained or operated in compliance with the provisions of Section 326.5 of the Penal Code and each term and condition of the license issued therefor. No person shall play in a bingo game unless a license for the game has been issued pursuant to this chapter and is in full force and effect. 
(Prior code § 4151.1)  
5.12.040 - License—Application—Required. 
Eligible organizations under Section 326.5 of the Penal Code desiring to obtain the license to conduct bingo games in the city shall file an application in writing therefor in the office of the chief of police on a form to be provided by him. The license issued shall be for a term of one year from the date of issuance, subject to renewal and annual fees. 
(Prior code § 4151.2)  
5.12.050 - License—Application—Contents. 
The application for license shall contain the following: 
A.  The name of the applicant organization and a statement that applicant is an eligible organization; 
B.  The name and signature of at least two officers of the organization which will conduct the bingo game; 
C.  The particular property within the city, including street number owned or leased by the applicant, used by the applicant for an office or for performance of the purposes for which the applicant is organized, on which property bingo games will be conducted, together with the occupancy capacity of the place; 
D.  Acknowledgement of applicant of the requirement to notify the chief of police in writing of the location, time and date of any bingo game at least forty-eight hours in advance of the operation; 
E.  Acknowledgement by the applicant that current and accurate records shall be kept of all bingo games and the records shall be available for on-site inspection at any time or the applicant may be required to submit the records for audit by the chief of police upon his request. All such records shall be maintained for a period of not less than three years; 
F.  That the applicant agrees to conduct bingo games in strict accordance with the provisions of Section 326.5 of the Penal Code and this chapter as they may be amended from time to time and agrees that the license to conduct bingo games may be revoked by the chief of police or his designated representative upon violation of any of the provisions; 
G.  The application shall be signed by the applicant or a duly authorized officer of the applicant under penalty of perjury; 
H.  The annual license fee fixed by the city council shall accompany the application; 
I.  The applicant shall also submit, with its application, evidence that the applicant is an organization which qualifies, pursuant to subsection (a) of Section 326.5 of the Penal Code. 
(Prior code § 4151.3)  
5.12.060 - License—Applicant investigation. 
Upon receipt of the completed application and the fee, the chief of police shall refer it to interested departments of the city for investigation as to whether or not all the statements in the application are true and whether or not the property of the applicant qualifies and the extent to which it qualifies, as property on which bingo games may lawfully be conducted, as to fire, zoning and other applicable restrictions. 
(Prior code § 4151.4)  
5.12.070 - License—Contents. 
Upon being satisfied that the applicant is fully qualified, under the law, to conduct bingo games in the city, the chief of police shall issue a license to the applicant which shall contain the following information: 
A.  The name and nature of the organization to whom the license is issued; 
B.  The address where bingo games are authorized to be conducted; 
C.  The occupancy capacity of the room in which bingo games are to be conducted; 
D.  The date of the expiration of the license; 
E.  Such other information including conditions as may be necessary or desirable for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 4151.5)  
5.12.080 - License—Fee and renewal. 
A license fee of fifty dollars is fixed and imposed upon each organization authorized under this chapter for each year or any portion thereof during which a license is in effect pursuant to this chapter. The license fee shall not be apportioned or prorated for any period of less than a year. A license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be renewable, in the absence of revocation or grounds for revocation, during the thirty-day period prior to its expiration. The licensee may apply for renewal on a form prescribed by the chief accompanied by payment of the annual license fee. If it appears that there are grounds for revocation, the license renewal may be denied; provided, however, that the procedure specified in Section 5.12.130 with respect to revocation shall be followed in connection with denial of renewal on such grounds. A license not so renewed shall expire automatically at the end of the license year. The amount of the license fee is found to be not more than the actual cost to the city of issuing a license under this chapter. Where an applicant is denied, one-half of the fee shall be refunded to the applicant. 
(Prior code § 4151.18)  
5.12.090 - License—Term. 
Licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance. 
(Prior code § 4151.16)  
5.12.100 - License—Nontransferable. 
No license issued under this chapter shall be transferable. 
(Prior code § 4151.17)  
5.12.110 - License—Denial. 
If the chief of police or his designated representative finds that the issuance of a bingo game license is prohibited by the provisions of this chapter or Section 326.5 of the Penal Code or that the issuance will endanger or jeopardize the public peace, safety, health and general welfare, he shall decline to issue the license. 
(Prior code § 4151.6)  
5.12.120 - License—Determination notice. 
Within ten days after reaching a determination with reference to a license application, or suspension of a license, the chief of police shall give written notice of his decision to the applicant. 
(Prior code § 4151.7)  
5.12.130 - Appeal. 
A.  Any applicant aggrieved by the decision of the chief of police with reference to the issuance, conditional issuance or denial of a license shall have the right of appeal, within ten consecutive calendar days after the giving of written notice of the chief's action. The appeal shall be in writing, briefly stating therein the basis for the appeal, and shall be filed with the city manager. Upon receipt of the letter of appeal the city manager shall immediately set the matter for an informal hearing before him, or his authorized representative, and shall give the appealing party at least five consecutive calendar days' written notice of the time and place of the hearing. 
B.  At the time and place set for the hearing upon the appeal, the city manager shall give the appealing party and any other interested party a reasonable opportunity to be heard. In all such cases the burden of proof to show that the action of the chief of police was arbitrary, capricious or in excess of his authority shall be upon the appealing party. The determination of the city manager shall be final and conclusive. 
(Prior code § 4151.8)  
5.12.140 - License—Suspension. 
A.  The chief of police shall suspend any license issued under this chapter if he finds that the licensee or the licensee's agent and/or employees have been or are violating any conditions of approval imposed upon the license; or violating any provision of this code or other applicable law; or that the continued operations under the license would endanger, jeopardize or disrupt the public peace, safety, health or general welfare; or any other cause, as set forth in this chapter. 
B.  The determination of the chief with regard to matters of suspension shall be appealable to the city manager in the time and manner set forth in Section 5.12.130. 
C.  The chief, in the case of the suspension, shall serve the licensee with a written order of suspension, which shall state the reasons for the suspension. The order shall be effective immediately upon having been personally served, or forty-eight hours after it has been deposited in the course of transmission with the United States Postal Service, postage prepaid, properly addressed. 
D.  Immediately upon such an order becoming effective, the licensee shall cease all operations authorized under the license. Where an appeal is timely filed, no further operations shall be deemed authorized pursuant to the license until the appeal is finally determined. 
E.  The order of suspension shall be deemed a revocation of a license unless the licensee within ten consecutive calendar days after the order is personally served or is deposited in the course of transmission in the United States Postal Service, files an appeal from the order, in the manner prescribed in this chapter. 
F.  Where an appeal is taken, the city manager shall act upon it in the time and manner set forth in Section 5.12.130. The action of the city manager shall be final and conclusive. 
G.  Any organization whose license is finally revoked may not apply for a license to conduct bingo games in the city for a period of one year from the date of the revocation; provided, however, if the ground for revocation is cancellation of the exemption granted under Section 326.5 of the Penal Code, the organization may again apply for a license upon proof of reinstatement of the exemption. 
(Prior code § 4151.9)  
5.12.150 - Exclusive operation. 
A bingo game shall be operated and staffed only by members of the organization to which a permit is issued. The members shall not receive a profit, wage or salary from any bingo game. Only the organization to whom a permit is issued shall operate the games or participate in the promotion, supervision or any other phase of the game. 
(Prior code § 4151.11)  
5.12.160 - Hours of operation. 
Bingo games shall only be conducted between the hours of eleven a.m. to twelve midnight and for no more than four consecutive hours during the permitted times. Bingo shall not be conducted more than six times in any calendar month. 
(Prior code § 4151.10)  
5.12.170 - Maximum prizes. 
The total value of prizes awarded during the conduct of any bingo game shall not exceed two hundred fifty dollars in cash or kind, or both, for each separate game held. 
(Ord. 2394 § 1, 1986; prior code § 4151.12)  
5.12.180 - Deposit and account of profits. 
All profits derived from a bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be combined with any other fund or account. The organization shall keep full and accurate records of the income and expenses received and disbursed in connection with its operation, conduct, promotion, supervision and any other phase of bingo games which are authorized by this chapter. The city by and through its authorized officers shall have the right to examine and audit the record at any reasonable time and the organization shall fully cooperate with the city in making the records available. 
(Prior code § 4151.13)  
5.12.190 - Alcoholic beverages prohibited. 
No person shall consume or have in his possession at any location where a bingo game is being conducted any alcoholic beverage. 
(Prior code § 4151.15)  
5.12.200 - Minors prohibited. 
No person under the age of eighteen years shall be allowed to participate in any bingo game. 
(Prior code § 4151.14)  
5.12.210 - Enjoinment of violation. 
The city may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin a violation of Section 326.5 of the Penal Code or of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 4151.19)  
Chapter 5.16 - SPECIAL EVENTS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY 
Sections: 
 
5.16.010 - Permit—Required. 
A.  All assemblages, public meetings, and other special events including festivals, ceremonies, addresses, speeches, exhibits, performances, plays, circuses, musical events, athletic events and other similar temporary uses of public streets are prohibited unless a properly issued special events permit has first been obtained pursuant to this chapter. 
B.  "Street" means and includes any publicly maintained or owned street, road, highway, alley, sidewalk, parkway, bridge, culvert, drain, right-of-way and any facility or other area in the city necessary for the construction, improvement and maintenance of streets and roads. 
C.  A special events permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall control over any business licenses issued pursuant to Chapter 5.04. Only those vendors who have received prior written approval from the special events permit holder will be allowed to operate within the prescribed special event venue area. The written approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. The special events permit holder may charge a reasonable registration fee of all vendors who desire to operate within the prescribed special event venue area. 
(Ord. 2711 § 2, 1997: Ord. 2577 § 17, 1992; Ord. 2281 § 1 (part), 1982; prior code § 4260-A (part))  
5.16.020 - Permit—Approval procedure. 
A.  Applications for special events permits shall be initially filed with the city clerk. The application shall then be referred to the police chief, public works director, parks director, planning director, building and safety director, county fire chief, and community services director, who shall review the application and recommend conditions to the city council or city manager so that the proposed special event will not constitute a threat to the public health, safety or welfare. Unless a waiver is granted by the city council, an application for a special events permit shall be on file with the city at least forty-five days before a scheduled event. The city council may also authorize the city manager to manage the approval of special events. 
B.  The city council or city manager shall thereafter approve the special events permit upon finding that: 
1.  That the event will be conducted by a nonprofit organization which has its principal office or place of business within the city; and 
2.  That the event is conducted for the purpose of promoting the city, its residents, and/or businesses operating within the city; and 
3.  That the conduct of the event will be consistent with the preservation of the public peace, health and safety; and 
4.  That the conduct of the event within the prescribed special event venue area will not result in an unreasonable interference with the use of adjacent real properties. 
C.  Unless a waiver is granted by the city council or city manager, a special events permit shall not be exempt from the provisions of Chapters 9.12 and 10.52, Section 12.44.050 or Title 18. 
D.  Upon approval of the city council or city manager, the permit shall thereafter be issued only after all applicable fees are paid, bonds posted and insurance certificates and endorsements in the proper amount and form are on file with the city. 
(Ord. 2711 § 3 (part), 1997) 
(Ord. No. 2958, §§ 2 and 3, 10-12-10; Ord. No. 3087 , § 1, 7-10-18)  
5.16.030 - Permit conditions. 
Conditions shall be imposed by the city council or city manager on any special events permit whenever the public health, safety or welfare so require. The conditions may include the following: 
A.  That the special event shall only take place within a prescribed geographical area with set boundaries. The special events permit holder shall post signs at designated entry points which clearly and conspicuously indicate the boundaries of the special event venue area; and 
B.  That the special events permit holder shall provide security and/or traffic directional measures for the special event; and 
C.  That the special events permit holder shall provide sanitation, trash collection and disposal measures for the special event; and 
D.  The duration and hours of operation of the event; and 
E.  The location of temporary buildings and structures, including any stages or vendor's booths; and 
F.  That all applicable fees are paid, bonds and policies of liability insurance in an amount satisfactory to the city are obtained. 
(Ord. 2711 § 4 (part), 1997) 
(Ord. No. 3087 , § 1, 7-10-18)  
5.16.040 - Permit application. 
All applications for a special events permit shall be on a form provided by the city and shall provide the information necessary for city staff to make their recommendations to the city council or city manager, including the following: 
A.  The applicant's identity and the identity of a responsible natural person who will serve as the liaison between the applicant and the city for the purpose of communications; and 
B.  A diagram of the proposed special event venue area that clearly delineates the geographical boundaries of the event and indicates the location of any temporary buildings and structures, including any stages or vendor's booths; and 
C.  A description of the type of special event to be held; and 
D.  The expected number of participants, employees, agents, representatives, contractors, assistants and spectators to be involved in the special event; and 
E.  All security devices and directional devices which are proposed to be employed; and 
F.  The duration and hours of operation of the special event; and 
G.  All water and sanitation facilities, which will be provided. 
(Ord. 2711 § 5, 1997) 
(Ord. No. 3087 , § 1, 7-10-18)  
5.16.050 - Permit—Suspension—Grounds. 
The chief of police shall have the power to suspend, and shall suspend, any permit if he finds that the permittee has: 
A.  Violated any condition of approval imposed upon the permit; or 
B.  Violated any provisions of law; or 
C.  Is, by the actual conduct of the activity, threatening the preservation of the public peace, safety or general welfare, or unreasonably interfering with the use and enjoyment of other property in the immediate vicinity of the activity. 
D.  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, no person shall, in any public street within the city to which this section relates, have in his or her possession any open container utilized for any food or beverage, which container is made of glass or metal. 
(Ord. 2711 § 3 (part), 1997; Ord. 2326 § 1, 1984; Ord. 2281 § 1(part), § 4260-A(part))  
5.16.060 - Permit—Suspension—Notice. 
The chief of police shall give the permittee written notice of the suspension. Immediately upon the giving of the notice of the order of suspension all activities under the permit shall forthwith cease, and the decision of the chief of police with reference to a suspension shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. 2711 § 4 (part), 1997; Ord. 2281 § 1(part), 1982: prior code § 4260-A(part))  
Chapter 5.20 - FALSE ALARMS*[1] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3008 § 1, adopted August 13, 2013, repealed the former Chapter 5.20, §§ 5.20.010—5.20.130, and enacted a new Chapter 5.20 as set out herein. The former Chapter 5.20 pertained to communications devices and derived from Ord. 2378, § 1(part), 1986; Ord. 2413, § 2, 1987; Ord. 2476, §§ 1 and 2, 1989; Ord. 2622, § 1(part), 1994. 
 
5.20.010 - Purpose. 
The public has purchased alarm systems which either mechanically malfunction or are not operated properly by their users, causing an increase in false alarm reports which require an immediate response from the police department, thus needlessly diverting limited police resources. The purpose of this chapter is to set forth regulations governing the use of alarm systems, require permits therefor, establish fees, and provide penalty for violations of provisions of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 3008, § 1, 8-13-13 )  
5.20.020 - Definitions. 
Unless the context or subject matter otherwise requires, terms defined herein shall have the following meaning when used in this chapter: 
A.  "Alarm company" means any person that engages in business or accepts employment to install, maintain, alter, sell, monitor, service, respond to or cause others to respond to an alarm device located in the city. This includes an alarm company that is located outside the limits of the city which monitor alarms installed within the limits of the city. 
B.  "Alarm permit" means a permit issued by the city allowing the operation of an alarm system within the city. 
C.  "Alarm signal" means a detectable signal; audible or visual, generated by an alarm system. 
D.  "Alarm system" means any system, device or mechanism which, when activated, transmits a telephonic, wireless, electronic, video, cell, internet, radio, wireless based transmission system or other form of message to an alarm company, or some other number, or emits an audible or visible signal that can be heard or seen by persons outside a protected premises or protected property, or transmits a signal beyond a protected premises or protected property in some other fashion. The definition of "alarm system"" includes, but is not limited to, a manual alarm, a remote alarm and/or an outdoor alarm system. A fire alarm system solely designed to detect a fire condition and actuate an alarm or warning of fire is not included within this definition. 
E.  "Alarm user" means any person owning, leasing or operating an alarm system, or on whose property or premises an alarm system is maintained for the protection of such property or premises. 
F.  "Cancellation" means the process where response is terminated when the alarm company (designated by the alarm user) notifies the police department that there is not an existing situation at the alarm site requiring police response after an alarm dispatch request. 
G.  "City" means the city of Whittier. 
H.  "Chief of police" means the Chief of the Whittier Police Department, or his/her designee. 
I.  "Day" means business day. 
J.  "False alarm" means an alarm signal activated willfully, unintentionally, negligently or inadvertently; due to mechanical or electrical malfunction; due to improper installation or maintenance; or due to weather conditions, necessitating a response and arrival by the police department that was not cancelled by the alarm user or his/her agent before law enforcement personnel arrive at the alarm location. An alarm is false within the meaning of this chapter when, upon inspection by the police department, evidence indicates that no unauthorized entry, robbery, or other such crime was committed or attempted in or on the property or premises which would have activated a properly functioning alarm system. 
K.  "Fire alarm system" means a system consisting of a control unit and a combination of electrical interconnected devices solely designed and intended to detect a fire condition and to actuate an alarm or warning of fire in a building or structure by either manual or automatic activation, or both. 
L.  "Hearing officer" shall have the same meaning as set forth in Section 1.09.020 of the Whittier Municipal Code. 
M.  "Manual alarm" means any system, device, or mechanism, manually activated by a person to alert others that a crime, attempted crime, or other emergency at a protected premises or protected property is occurring, is about to occur, or has occurred, which, when activated, transmits a telephonic, wireless, electronic, video, cell, internet, radio, wireless based transmission system or other form of message, or emits an audible or visible signal that can be heard or seen by persons outside the protected premises or protected property, or transmits a signal beyond the protected premises or protected property. 
N.  "Notice" means written notice, given by personal service upon the addressee, or given by the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the person to be notified at his last known address. Service of such notice shall be effective upon the completion of personal service or upon the placing of the same in the custody of the United States Postal Service. 
O.  "Outdoor alarm system" means a manual or remote alarm system designed to cover an outdoor area not secured by a structure, building or facility. 
P.  "Person" means any individual, sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation, limited liability company, trust, incorporated or unincorporated entity, or other entity or group of persons, but excludes the United States, the State of California, and any political subdivision or municipal corporation thereof. 
Q.  "Police department" or "police" means the Whittier Police Department, and includes other law enforcement agencies assisting the Whittier Police Department. 
R.  "Protected premises" means any structure, building, or facility, or portion thereof, protected by an alarm system. 
S.  "Protected property" means the outdoor areas of real property that are not secured by a structure, building, or facility which are protected by an alarm system. 
T.  "Remote alarm" means any system, device, or mechanism for detection and reporting of any unauthorized entry, attempted entry or property damage upon real property protected by an alarm system which is not manually activated by a person and which, when activated, transmits a telephonic, wireless, electronic, video, cell, internet, radio, wireless based transmission system or other form of message, or emits an audible or visible signal that can be heard or seen by persons outside the protected premises or protected property, or transmits a signal beyond the protected premises or protected property. As used in this chapter, alarms on automatic teller machines (ATMs) are included in this definition. 
U.  "Responsible person" means each and all of the following: (1) any person actually in charge of the protected premises or protected property from which a false alarm originates; and (2) the owner, tenant or other person lawfully occupying the protected premises or protected property from which a false alarm originates. 
V.  "Runaway alarm" means an alarm system that produces repeated alarm signals that do not appear to be caused by separate human action. 
W.  "SIA Control Panel Standard CP-01" means the American National Standard Institute (ANSI) approved Security Industry Association (SIA) CP-01 Control Panel Standard, as may be updated from time to time, that details recommended design features for security system control panels and their associated arming and disarming devices to reduce false alarms. 
X.  "Verify" means an attempt by the alarm company to determine whether an alarm signal is valid before requesting law enforcement dispatch by one or more of the following: 
1.  Enhanced Call Verification (ECV) commonly referred to as two-call verification. Where the alarm monitoring centers make two calls to two different numbers (one typically a cell phone) prior to calling the authorities in an effort to determine the cause of the alarm and whether or not dispatch is required. 
2.  Video Verification - Where the alarm monitoring center views priority video software connected to the premises to confirm there is an emergency prior to calling the authorities in an effort to determine the cause of the alarm and whether or not dispatch is required. 
3.  Audible Verification - Where the alarm monitoring center listens in on the premises to determine if there is an emergency prior to calling the authorities in an effort to determine the cause of the alarm and whether or not dispatch is required. 
( Ord. No. 3008, § 1, 8-13-13 )  
5.20.030 - Alarm permit required. 
No person shall install, maintain, operate, or use an alarm system without first applying and receiving an alarm permit therefor in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. If an alarm user has one or more alarm systems protecting two or more separate premises having different addresses and/or tenants, a separate alarm permit shall be required for each premises and/or tenant. Alarm subscriber will have thirty days after alarm is installed to obtain an alarm permit. 
( Ord. No. 3008, § 1, 8-13-13 )  
5.20.040 - Exemptions. 
No alarm permit shall be required for any of the following: 
A.  Alarm systems installed on property owned, leased or controlled by municipal, county, state or federal government agencies. 
B.  Audible alarms affixed to motor vehicles. 
( Ord. No. 3008, § 1, 8-13-13 )  
5.20.050 - Alarm permit procedures. 
A.  Applications for all alarm permits required hereunder shall be filed with the police department. The chief of police shall prescribe the form of the application and request such information as is necessary to evaluate and act upon the permit application. 
B.  When the possession of the premises at which an alarm system is maintained is transferred, the person obtaining possession of the property shall file an application for an alarm permit within thirty days of obtaining possession of the property. Alarm permits are not transferable. 
C.  The chief of police shall issue an alarm permit as requested, unless he/she determines that the applicant has had an alarm permit revoked by the city within one year prior to the date of the application. 
( Ord. No. 3008, § 1, 8-13-13 )  
5.20.060 - Notice of change. 
Whenever any change occurs relating to the written information required by Section 5.20.050 (governing application forms) of this chapter, the applicant or permittee shall give written notice thereof to the police department within twenty days after such change or at any hearing conducted under this chapter if such hearing is conducted before said notice has been given. 
( Ord. No. 3008, § 1, 8-13-13 )  
5.20.070 - Revocation of alarm permits. 
A.  Any alarmed premises which have seven or more false alarms within a three hundred sixty-five-day period shall subject the alarm user to revocation of the alarm permit. Alarm permit revocation will result in a termination of police response to alarm calls at the premises. 
B.  If, at any time, it shall come to the attention of the chief of police that the holder of an alarm permit issued under this chapter has violated any provisions of this chapter, rules, or regulations made, pursuant to this chapter, the chief of police may revoke the alarm permit. 
C.  If an alarm permit is to be revoked, as provided hereunder, the chief of police shall give the permittee fifteen days' notice of the chief of police's intention to revoke the alarm permit by personal service or by mail addressed to permittee at the address set forth on the alarm permit application. Upon failure of the permittee to take corrective action, as set forth by the chief of police in the notice of intent to revoke, and provide proof thereof to the chief of police or to pay the false alarm prevention fine, the alarm permit shall be revoked. If an alarm permit is revoked, the chief of police shall provide notice to the permittee that the alarm permit has been revoked via personal service or by mail addressed to permittee at the address set forth on the alarm permit application. Said notice shall also provide that the permittee may appeal the revocation to the hearing officer. 
( Ord. No. 3008, § 1, 8-13-13 )  
5.20.080 - Appeal of revocation. 
A.  In the event a notice of revocation is given, the permittee may appeal the revocation by filing a statement with the police department setting forth the facts and circumstances regarding the actions of the chief of police. The hearing officer shall cause the appeal to be placed on the next available date on the hearing officer's calendar and notify the appellant. The hearing officer shall receive evidence, both oral and written, at such hearing and may affirm, overrule or modify the action of the chief of police. The permittee will be notified of the decision of the hearing officer by mail or personal service and the hearing officer's decision shall be final. The right to appeal to the hearing officer from an action of the chief of police shall terminate upon the expiration of fifteen days following deposit of the notice of revocation in the United States Post Office or personal service of said notice. 
B.  All fees paid by permittee, as provided by this chapter, shall be forfeited in the event of revocation. Enforcement of a revocation notice, pursuant to Section 5.20.070, shall be stayed during the pendency of an appeal therefrom which is properly and timely filed. 
( Ord. No. 3008, § 1, 8-13-13 )  
5.20.090 - Duties of the alarm user. 
A.  An alarm user shall respond or cause a representative to respond to the alarm system's location, to render service or repairs to the alarm system, within one hour of being notified by the police department of an alarm activation or a need for service. 
B.  An alarm user shall obtain a new alarm permit if there is a change in address, ownership or possession of the protected property or premises. 
C.  Ninety days after enactment of this chapter, an alarm user shall, on all new and up-graded installations, use only alarm control panel(s) which, at a minimum, meet SIA Control Panel Standard CP-01 or its equivalent. 
( Ord. No. 3008, § 1, 8-13-13 )  
5.20.100 - Duties of the alarm company. 
A.  Alarm company must have a city of Whittier business license. 
B.  Alarm company must have an alarm company operator license issued by the Department of Consumer Affairs Bureau of Security and Investigation Services from the state of California. 
C.  Every alarm company representative that enters a residence to sell an alarm system must have an alarm agent license issued by the Department of Consumer Affairs Bureau of Security and Investigation Services from the state of California. 
D.  Prior to activation of an alarm system, the alarm company shall provide instructions explaining the proper operation of the alarm system to the alarm user and written information of how to obtain service from the alarm company for the alarm system. 
E.  Prior to contacting the police department and requesting that the police respond to a remote alarm system activation, an alarm company shall attempt to verify that the alarm signal is not a false alarm. 
F.  An alarm company requesting that the police respond to an alarm system activation shall provide the Whittier Police Communications Center with any available information about the location and nature of the alarm. 
G.  An alarm company shall immediately contact the Whittier Police Communications Center to cancel a police response following a determination that response is unnecessary. 
( Ord. No. 3008, § 1, 8-13-13 )  
5.20.110 - Use of alarm systems—Restricted. 
A.  No person shall install, maintain, operate or use an alarm system that emits an audible sound or visible signal that can be heard or seen by persons outside of a protected premises or protected property where such emission does not automatically cease within ten minutes of its activation. 
B.  No person shall install, maintain, operate or use an alarm system which, upon activation, emits a sound similar to sirens in use on emergency vehicles or for civil defense purposes. 
C.  No person shall install, maintain, operate or use an alarm system which automatically dials the police department. 
D.  No person shall activate a manual alarm unless the person who activates the alarm has a good faith belief, at the time the person activated the alarm, that a crime, attempted crime, or other emergency at the protected premises or protected property was occurring, was about to occur or had occurred. 
( Ord. No. 3008, § 1, 8-13-13 )  
5.20.120 - False alarm—Prevention fine. 
A.  When emergency alarms, messages, signals or notices are received by the police department that evidence a failure to comply with the requirements of this chapter, or an alarm permit issued hereunder, the chief of police is authorized to demand that the owner or lessee of the alarm system initiating such alarms, messages, signals or notices, or his or her representative, disconnect the alarm system until it is made to comply with said requirements. 
B.  No person shall install, maintain, operate, or use an alarm system that generates a false alarm. There is hereby imposed and assessed upon a responsible person a fine for each false alarm call in excess of one in any twelve-month period, which fine shall be determined by resolution of the city council. The fine will be paid to the city controller for deposit into the general fund. 
C.  The fine imposed, pursuant to this chapter, shall be a debt owed, jointly and severally, by the responsible persons, as defined in this chapter, to the city. Any such responsible persons owing money, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, shall be jointly and severally liable in an action brought in the name of the city for recovery of such amount, together with reasonable attorneys' fees. 
D.  The police department may provide an educational program for the prevention of false alarms. 
1.  The police department shall allow an alarm user to attend any established false alarm prevention program designated by the chief of police. 
2.  Each alarm user who attends a false alarm prevention program shall be responsible for paying all provider fees associated with the program. 
3.  If the alarm user successfully completes the false alarm prevention program, the police department shall issue the person a certificate. The certificate may be used in lieu of one payment for one fine assessed, pursuant to this section, provided that the certificate is submitted within one year of its issuance. 
4.  An alarm user who attends a false alarm prevention program provided pursuant to this section is not eligible to attend another program within one year from the time in which the person last attended the program. 
E.  An alarm permit may be revoked, as provided in Section 5.20.070, in addition to the payment of the prevention fine, as provided in this section, or in the event of failure to pay the false alarm fine. 
( Ord. No. 3008, § 1, 8-13-13 )  
5.20.130 - Repair. 
After any false alarm caused by a malfunction of the alarm system, an alarm system user shall cause the alarm system to be repaired so as to eliminate such malfunction before reactivating the alarm. A person shall not reactivate such alarm until such repairs have been made. 
( Ord. No. 3008, § 1, 8-13-13 )  
5.20.140 - Testing alarm. 
A.  An alarm user shall notify the Whittier Police Communications Center prior to any service, test, repair maintenance, adjustment, alterations, or installations of systems which would normally result in a police response, which might activate a false alarm. Any alarm activated where such prior notice has been given shall not constitute a false alarm. 
B.  No person shall activate an alarm for the purpose of ascertaining the time it takes from when the alarm is activated until the arrival of a police officer (response time). Any person activating an alarm to ascertain response time is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as set forth in Whittier Municipal Code Section 1.08.010. 
( Ord. No. 3008, § 1, 8-13-13 )  
5.20.150 - No duty or obligation. 
Nothing in this chapter imposes or creates any express or implied duties or obligations on the part of the city, its police department or any other governmental agency to respond to an alarm activation of any sort, whether verified or not. Any and all liability of consequential damage resulting from the failure to respond to an alarm activation of any sort is hereby disclaimed and governmental immunity, as provided by law, is retained by the city. 
( Ord. No. 3008, § 1, 8-13-13 )  
5.20.160 - Enforcement provisions. 
The chief of police shall have broad discretion to promulgate, execute and enforce policies, procedures and directives as may, in his/her discretion, be necessary to implement the provisions of this chapter. Such powers shall include, but are not limited to, the power to promulgate, execute and enforce a policy regarding dispatch of police to alarm signals, as well as the discretion to discontinue police response to alarm signals due to the alarm user's failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter or to properly repair alarm systems deemed to constitute runaway alarms. 
( Ord. No. 3008, § 1, 8-13-13 )  
5.20.170 - Violation of chapter; penalties. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an infraction. 
( Ord. No. 3008, § 1, 8-13-13 )  
Chapter 5.28 - DRIVE-IN RESTAURANTS 
Sections: 
 
5.28.010 - Drive-in restaurant defined. 
A "drive-in restaurant" for the purposes of this chapter is defined as a restaurant use which has facilities to allow patrons to consume prepared food at an area outside an enclosed building; and/or has facilities which would allow the service of prepared foods directly to a patron while that patron is in a motor vehicle, whether or not for consumption on the premises. 
(Amended during 1983 codification: prior code § 6270)  
5.28.030 - Disposal of refuse. 
Each drive-in restaurant shall, at least once in each twenty-four-hour period, dispose of all paper, cups, plates, napkins, garbage and other waste material accumulated upon the premises. It shall be the duty of the owner, manager or person in charge of the drive-in restaurant to keep the premises in and about the restaurant, including the adjoining parking area, at all times free from rubbish, waste products and debris including napkins, straws, paper cups, plates, bottles, cans and other similar waste products. 
(Prior code § 6270.1)  
5.28.040 - Littering prohibited. 
No person shall place, throw or deposit any food, beverage, paper, bottles, cans or similar waste materials upon the premises of any drive-in restaurant, or in the parking area adjacent thereto, unless the waste material is placed in a waste receptacle which shall be conveniently provided upon the premises or parking area. 
(Prior code § 6270.4)  
Chapter 5.40 - UNATTENDED DONATION/COLLECTION BOXES 
 
5.40.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of these regulations is to promote the health, safety, and/or welfare of the public by providing minimum blight-related performance standards for the operation of unattended donation/collection boxes (UDCBs). This includes establishing criteria to ensure that material is not allowed to accumulate outside of the UDCBs, the UDCBs remain free of graffiti and blight, UDCBs are maintained in sanitary conditions, and residents and/or users are fully informed of those who operate the UDCBs so that they can be contacted if there are any blight-related questions or concerns. 
(Ord. No. 3084 , § 3, 1-23-18)  
5.40.020 - Conflicting provisions. 
Where a conflict exists between the regulations or requirements in this chapter and applicable regulations or requirements contained in other chapters of the Whittier Municipal Code, the applicable regulations or requirements of this chapter shall prevail 
(Ord. No. 3084 , § 3, 1-23-18)  
5.40.030 - Violation. 
Failure to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter is declared to be prima facie evidence of an existing violation, a continuing blight and a declared public nuisance and shall be abated by the director in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Any person in violation will be subject to administrative penalties, citations, civil action and/or other legal remedies. 
(Ord. No. 3084 , § 3, 1-23-18)  
5.40.040 - Responsibility. 
The parcel owner and the UDCB operator (operator) have joint and several liability for blight-related conditions and/or compliance with this chapter, including fees, administrative citations, civil actions, and/or legal remedies relating to a UDCB. The parcel owner remains liable for any violation of duties imposed by this chapter even if the parcel owner has, by agreement, imposed on the operator and/or a tenant or lessee the duty of complying with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 3084 , § 3, 1-23-18)  
5.40.050 - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
"Accessory activity" means an activity that is incidental to, and customarily associated with, a specified principal activity. 
"Agent" means a person who is authorized by the owner to act on their behalf to be the applicant for a UDCB permit. To be considered an agent, a person must be given express written authorization from the owner to apply specifically for a UDCB permit. A person who is only given general authorization to act on the behalf of an owner for various activities and transactions in regards to a property is not considered an agent. 
"Blight" means property which is not kept clean and sanitary and free from all accumulations of offensive matter or odor including, but not limited to, overgrown or dead or decayed trees, weeds or other vegetation, rank growth, dead organic matter, rubbish, junk, garbage, animal intestinal waste and urine, and toxic or otherwise hazardous liquids and substances and material. For the purposes of this section the term "rubbish" shall include combustible and noncombustible waste materials, and the term shall also include the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke, and other combustible material; and the term shall also include paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, hay, straw, tin cans, metal, mineral matter, glass, crockery, and dust. 
"Building official" means the building official and his or her successor in title and his or her designees. 
"Director" means the director of community development and his or her successor in title and his or her designees. 
"Donated/collected material" means salvageable personal property, such as clothing and books and household items that is collected for periodic transport off-site for processing or redistribution or both. 
"Owner" or "property owner" means the owner of real property on which a UDCB is or is proposed to be placed, as defined in Section 18.06.334 of this code. 
"Parcel owner" means the owner of fee simple interest in the real property on which a UDCB is or is proposed to be placed. 
"Principal activity" means an activity that fulfills a primary function of an establishment, institution, household, or other entity. 
"Principal building" means a main building that is occupied a principal activity. 
"UDCB operator" or "operator" means a person or entity who utilizes or maintains a UDCB to solicit donations/collections of salvageable personal property. 
"UDCB permit" means the city of Whittier's annually renewable permit required to place, operate, maintain, or allow a UDCB within the Whittier city limits. 
"Unattended donation/collection boxes" or "UDCBs" means unstaffed drop-off boxes, containers, receptacles, or similar facility that accept textiles, shoes, books and/or other salvageable personal property items to be used by the operator for distribution, resale, or recycling. 
"Unpermitted UDCB" means a UDCB established either without a UDCB permit or with a UDCB permit that was issued in error or on the basis of incorrect or incomplete information supplied, or in violation of any law, ordinance, rule, or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 3084 , § 3, 1-23-18)  
5.40.060 - Permit required for UDCBs. 
A.  With the exception of UDCBs described in Subsection B, below, it is unlawful to place, operate, maintain or allow a UDCB on any real property unless the owner/agent and/or operator first obtain an annually renewable UDCB permit from the city. A separate UDCB permit is required for each UDCB unless a second UDCB is required for overflow items per Subsection 5.40.120(H), in which case the permit for the first UDCB can include the second UDCB on a parcel 
B.  UDCBs that are enclosed within a principal building on a property owned or leased by the bin operator shall not require a UDCB permit. UDCBs that are accessory to a principal activity on a property owned or leased by the bin operator shall meet all other requirements of this chapter except the requirements contained in Subsection 5 40 120(A), (B) and/or (C). 
C.  The UDCB permit applicant shall be the UDCB operator and the permit may not be transferred, conveyed or otherwise assigned to another person or entity. 
D.  Decisions regarding UDCB permit applications shall be made by the director and the director shall be considered the investigating official acting for the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 3084 , § 3, 1-23-18)  
5.40.070 - Application requirements. 
The UDCB permit application shall be made on a development review application form provided by the community development department. All applications shall be filed with the community development department and shall include: 
A.  A signed agreement stating that the owner/agent and operator will abide by all the processes and requirements described in this chapter and an expedited code enforcement process; 
B.  A non-refundable development review application fee in an amount set by the fee schedule; 
C.  For permit applications for existing UDCBs, a signed affidavit, under penalty of perjury, stating that the UDCB existed at the proposed location prior to the adoption of Ordinance No. 3084 on January 23, 2018; 
D.  A signed authorization from the owner/agent to allow placement of the UDCB; 
E.  A signed acknowledgement of responsibility from the owner/agent and the operator for joint and several liability for violations of conditions or regulations, and/or blight relating to the UDCB; 
F.  Proof of general liability insurance of at least $1,000,000.00 covering the applicant's UDCB and naming the city of Whittier as an additional insured; 
G.  For nonprofit operators, evidence that the nonprofit has been registered as a non-profit organization with the city of Whittier, is recognized by the Internal Revenue Service as such, and complies with California Welfare and Institutions Code Section 148 et seq. as it may be amended; 
H.  For for-profit operators, proof of an active business tax certificate with the city of Whittier; 
I.  The name, address, email, website (if available) and telephone number of the UDCB operator and owner, including twenty-four-hour contact information; 
J.  A vicinity map showing 1) the proposed location of the UDCB; and 2) the distance between the site and all existing UDCBs within one thousand feet of the proposed UDCB location; 
K.  Photographs of the location and adjacent properties; 
L.  A site plan containing: 
1.  Location and dimensions of all parcel boundaries; 
2.  Location of all buildings; 
3.  Proposed UDCB location; 
4.  Distance between the proposed UDCB and parcel lines buildings; and 
5.  Location and dimension of all existing and proposed driveways, garages, carports, parking spaces, maneuvering aisles, pavement and striping/marking; 
M.  Elevations showing the appearance, materials, and dimensions of the UDCB, including the information required in this chapter to be placed on the UDCB and notice sign; 
N.  A description and/or diagram of the proposed locking mechanism of the UDCB; 
O.  A maintenance plan (including graffiti removal, pick-up schedule, and litter and trash removal on and around the UDCB) that is sufficient to prevent/eliminate blight-related conditions; and 
P.  Any other reasonable information regarding time, place, and manner of UDB operation, placement, and/or maintenance that the director requires to evaluate the proposal consistent with the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 3084 , § 3, 1-23-18)  
5.40.080 - UDCB permit expiration and renewal. 
A.  Unless renewed as described in Subsection B, below, each UDCB permit shall expire and become null and void annually on the anniversary of its date of issuance. 
B.  A UDCB operator may apply for permit renewal by submitting a renewal application to the community development department at least one month prior to the expiration of the active UDCB permit. The UDCB permit renewal application shall be made on a form provided by the community development department. All applications shall be filed with the community development department and shall include: 
1.  A signed agreement stating that the owner/agent and operator will abide by all the processes and requirements described in this chapter and an expedited code enforcement process; 
2.  Photographs of the existing UDCB; 
3.  A non-refundable application fee in an amount set by the fee schedule; 
4.  A signed authorization from the owner/agent to allow placement of the UDCB; 
5.  A signed acknowledgement of responsibility from the owner/agent and the operator for joint and several liability for violations of conditions or regulations, and/or blight relating to the UDCB; 
6.  Proof of general liability insurance of at least $1,000,000.00 covering the applicant's UDCB and naming the city of Whittier as an additional insured; 
7.  For nonprofit operators, evidence that the nonprofit has been registered as a non-profit organization with the city of Whittier, is recognized by the Internal Revenue Service as such, and complies with California Welfare and Institutions Code Section 148 et seq. as it may be amended; 
8.  For for-profit operators, proof of an active business tax certificate with the city of Whittier; 
9.  Name and telephone number of any entity that may share or profit from items collected via the UDCB; 
10.  The name, address, email, website (if available) and telephone number of the UDCB operator and owner, including twenty-four-hour contact information; and 
11.  Any other reasonable information regarding time, place, and manner of UDB operation, placement, and/or maintenance that the director requires to evaluate the proposal consistent with the requirements of this chapter. 
C.  The director shall either approve or deny the renewal of a UDCB permit within sixty days of receipt of the complete renewal application and payment of the renewal fee. The failure of the community development department to act within this timeframe shall constitute approval of the UDCB permit renewal. 
D.  The director shall approve the renewal of a UDCB permit if he or she finds that no circumstances existed during the term of the UDCB permit or existed at any time during the review of the application for renewal that are inconsistent with any criteria required for approval of a new UDCB permit as specified in Section 5.40.090 or that would justify the revocation of the UDCB permit as specified in Subsection 5.40.170(G). 
E.  See Section 5.40.110 for the appeal and petition processes for UDCB permit decisions, including decisions regarding renewal. 
(Ord. No. 3084 , § 3, 1-23-18)  
5.40.090 - Requirements for the approval and renewal of a UDCB permit. 
The director shall not issue a UDCB permit or renewal unless each of the following is true: 
A.  The applicant has submitted a complete and accurate application accompanied by the applicable fee; 
B.  There are no open citations, zoning violations, unpaid fines or unresolved violations or complaints related to any UDCB managed by the proposed operator; 
C.  All existing unpermitted UDCBs that are managed by the proposed operator have been removed; 
D.  Reserved. 
E.  Any verified blight on the subject property has been abated and any case of a complaint to the city regarding blighted conditions on the subject property has been closed, and 
F.  The proposal is consistent with all the requirements of this chapter. 
G.  For renewals, the site does not have a history of being an attractive nuisance even if incidents of blight were abated For the purpose of this subsection, "history of attractive nuisance" means at least three verified blight complaints in the previous twelve months. 
(Ord. No. 3084 , § 3, 1-23-18)  
5.40.100 - Time limit for final decision. 
The director shall provide a written decision regarding the placement of a UDCB within sixty days of the submission of a complete application for a UDCB permit. 
(Ord. No. 3084 , § 3, 1-23-18)  
5.40.110 - Appeal and petition processes. 
A.  Within ten calendar days after the date of a decision by the director on an application for a UDCB permit or a renewal of such, an appeal from said decision must be filed by the applicant or any other interested party. The appeal shall be submitted to the community development department at 13230 Penn Street, 2nd Floor, Whittier, CA 90602. In the event the last date of appeal falls on a weekend or holiday when city offices are closed, the next date such offices are open for business shall be the last date of appeal Such appeal shall be made on a form prescribed by the community development department and shall be filed with such department, along with the appropriate fees required by the city's master fee schedule. The appeal application must be complete and shall state specifically wherein it is claimed there was an error or abuse of discretion by the director or wherein his or her decision is not supported by the evidence in the record. The appeal itself must raise each and every issue that is contested, along with all the arguments and evidence in the record, which supports the basis of the appeal; failure to do so will preclude the appellant from raising such issues during the appeal and/or in court. 
If a hearing is held on the appeal, then during such hearing, the appellant will be limited to issues and/or evidence previously raised in the appeal itself. The appellant shall not be permitted to present any other issues and/or oral, written and/or documentary evidence during the appeal process. 
In considering the appeal, the city manager shall determine whether the proposal conforms to the requirements of this chapter, and may grant or deny a permit or require such changes in the proposed use or impose such reasonable conditions of approval as are in its judgment necessary to ensure conformity to said criteria. The written decision of the city manager shall be final and shall be made within sixty days of the submission of the appeal. 
B.  The applicant seeking placement of a UDCB which would be affected by this chapter and who contends that the ordinance as applied to him or her would be unlawful under and/or conflict with federal, state, or local law or regulation, must submit a petition to the city manager requesting relief from the ordinance. Petitions must be on the appeal form provided by the community development department and submitted to the community development department at 13230 Penn Street, 2nd Floor, Whittier, CA 90602. Failure to submit such a petition will preclude such person from challenging the ordinance as applied in court. The petition shall identify the name and address of the applicant and property owner, the affected application number, and shall state specifically and completely how the ordinance as applied to him or her would be unlawful under and/or in conflict with federal, state, or local law or regulation, and shall include payment of fees in accordance with the city's master fee schedule. Failure to raise each and every issue that is contested in the petition and provide appropriate supporting evidence will be grounds to deny the petition and will also preclude the petitioner from raising such issues in court. 
If a hearing is held on the petition, then during such hearing, the petitioner will be limited to issues and/or evidence previously raised in the petition itself. The petitioner shall not be permitted to present any other issues and/or oral, written and/or documentary evidence during the petition process. 
Within sixty calendar days of receipt of the completed petition, the city manager, or designee, shall mail to the applicant a written determination accepting or rejecting the petition. The written decision of the city manager is final. The city manager will utilize reasonable time, place and manner criteria to determine if the petition should be granted or denied consistent with this chapter. If the petition is granted, the city may impose reasonable time, place and manner-related conditions on the UDCB consistent with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 3084 , § 3, 1-23-18)  
5.40.120 - Location. 
A.  No UDCB shall be located within one thousand feet from any other UDCB, except those described in Subsection 5.40.060(B). 
B.  With the exception of areas described in Subsection (C), below, UDCBs are only allowed to be located in the following zones, which are designated in the zoning maps described in Chapter 17 of the Whittier Municipal Code: 
1.  C-2 General Commercial; 
2.  C-3 Commercial Manufacturing; 
3.  M Manufacturing. 
C.  No UDCBs are permitted within three hundred feet of a park, school, or government facility. 
D.  A UDCB is only permitted on a lot that also contains a principal building that contains at least one operating business. 
E.  UDCBs are prohibited within any of the following locations: 
1.  One hundred fifty feet from lots that lie in a residential, detached unit residential, or mixed housing type residential zone as designated in the city's zoning maps; 
2.  The public right-of-way and twenty feet of the public right-of-way; 
3.  Five feet from any property line; or 
4.  Landscaping. 
F.  UDCBs cannot block or impede access to: 
1.  Required parking or driveways; 
2.  Pedestrian routes; 
3.  Emergency vehicle routes; 
4.  Building ingress and egress; 
5.  Required handicapped accessibility routes; 
6.  Required easements; or 
7.  Trash enclosure areas or access to trash bins/trash enclosures. 
G.  UDCBs cannot impede the functioning of exhaust, ventilation, or fire extinguishing systems. 
H.  No more than one UDCB is permitted per parcel. 
I.  The donation/collection area must be visible from the principal building and be no more than ten feet from a continually operating light source of at least one foot candle. 
J.  At least one on-site pick up and drop off parking space shall be required for each UDCB. 
K.  Any requested signage must comply with the city sign regulations. 
(Ord. No. 3084 , § 3, 1-23-18)  
5.40.130 - Physical attributes. 
A.  UDCBs shall: 
1.  Be fabricated of durable and waterproof materials, 
2.  Be placed on ground that is paved with durable cement; 
3.  Have a collection opening that has a tamper-resistant locking mechanism; 
4.  Be more than eighty-two inches high, sixty inches wide and fifty inches deep; 
5.  Not be electrically or hydraulically powered or otherwise mechanized; 
6.  Not be a fixture of the site or considered an improvement to real property; and 
7.  Have the following information conspicuously displayed on at least two-inch type visible from the front on the UDCB: 
a.  The name, address, twenty-four-hour telephone number, and, if available, the Internet Web address, and email address of the operator of the UDCB; 
b.  Address and parcel number of the site; 
c.  Instructions on the process to register a complaint regarding the UDCB to the city code enforcement division; 
d.  The type of material that may be deposited; 
e.  A notice stating that no material shall be left outside the UDCB; 
f.  The pickup schedule for the UDCB; 
g.  A city approved identification system that identifies the box as being properly permitted by the city; 
h.  If the UDCB is owned by a nonprofit organization: 
i.  A statement describing the charitable cause that will benefit from the donations; 
ii.  The Federal Tax Identification Number of the nonprofit organization operating the UDCB; and 
iii.  The statement "This collection box is owned and operated by a nonprofit organization." 
i.  If the UDCB is owned by a for-profit entity: 
i.  "This donation may not be tax deductible." and 
ii.  "This collection box is owned and operated by a for-profit organization or registered charitable solicitor." 
iii.  On the UDCB, there shall be a sign in a visually conspicuous location with text in at least two-inch typeface stating that no material shall be left outside the UDCB. 
(Ord. No. 3084 , § 3, 1-23-18)  
5.40.140 - Maintenance. 
A.  No blight shall be within twenty feet of the UDCB including, but not limited to donation/collection overflow, litter, debris, and dumped material. 
B.  UDCBs shall be maintained and in good working order. Items to be repaired, removed, and/or abated include, but are not limited to graffiti, removed or damaged signs and notifications, peeling paint, rust, and broken collection operating mechanisms. 
C.  UDCBs shall be serviced not less than weekly between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. on weekdays and 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on weekends. This servicing includes the removal of donated/collected material and abatement of the blight described this section. 
D.  The operator shall maintain an active email address and a twenty-four-hour telephone service with recording capability for the public to register complaints. 
E.  UDCBs cannot be used for the collection of solid waste and/or any hazardous materials. 
(Ord. No. 3084 , § 3, 1-23-18)  
5.40.150 - Liability. 
Applicants and/or owner/owners agent shall maintain a minimum general liability insurance of one million dollars for the duration of the operation of a UDCB at each site, to cover any claims or losses due to the placement, operation, or maintenance of the UDCB and naming the city of Whittier as additional insured. 
(Ord. No. 3084 , § 3, 1-23-18)  
5.40.160 - AB 939 reporting. 
Permitted UDCB operators shall be required to report annually to the directors of community development and public works the tonnage collected from their UDCBs within the city, including a breakdown by material type, whether the materials were reused or recycled, and any other information needed by the city to comply with AB 939. This information must be available to the city within sixty days of the end of the calendar year. Failure to report to the satisfaction of the directors of community development and public works will be grounds for revocation of the UDCB permit. 
(Ord. No. 3084 , § 3, 1-23-18)  
5.40.170 - Compliance process. 
A.  Whenever the building official determines that a UDCB with a valid permit does not conform to any requirement in this chapter he/she shall promptly notify the owner/agent and UDCB operator through electronic mail of the violation. The violation must be abated and proof of such submitted to the city within seventy-two hours after receipt of such notification. 
B.  If an unpermitted UDCB is not within a permissible geographic area according to Section 5.40.120, then both the UDCB and any blight within twenty feet of the UDCB shall be removed within seventy-two hours after the owner/agent and UDCB operator is notified of the violation. 
C.  If an unpermitted UDCB is within a permissible geographic area according to Section 5.40.120 then any blight within twenty feet of the site shall be removed and the owner/agent and/or operator shall either: 1) apply for all UDCB permits required by this chapter; or 2) remove the UDCB. This requirement shall be met within seventy-two hours after the owner/agent and/or UDCB operator are notified of the violation. 
D.  Each day that a violation of a requirement of this chapter is not abated constitutes a new and separate offense. 
E.  The operation or maintenance of an unpermitted UDCB may be abated or summarily abated by the city in any manner by this code or otherwise by law for the abatement of public nuisances. Pursuant to Government Code Section 38773, all expenses incurred by the city in connection with any action to abate a public nuisance will be chargeable to the persons creating, causing, committing, or maintaining the public nuisance. 
F.  The city shall assess administration citations pursuant to W.M.C. Chapter 1.09 against an owner and/or operator who fails to timely resolve a violation or verified compliance is not sent to the city showing the resolution of the violation relating to a UDCB after notice. 
1.  For permitted UDCBs, the city shall issue administrative citations pursuant to W.M.C. Chapter 1.09: 
a.  Not more than one hundred fifty dollars for the first citation after the seventy-two-hour abatement period; 
b.  Not more than two hundred fifty dollars for the second citation after the seventy-two-hour abatement period; and 
c.  Not more than five hundred dollars for the third and each subsequent citation after the seventy-two-hour abatement period. Total fines resulting from administrative citations shall not be more than five thousand dollars within one year for each cited UDCB. 
2.  For unpermitted UDCBs, the city shall issue administrative citations pursuant to W.M.C. Chapter 1.09: 
a.  Not more than seven hundred fifty for the first citation after the seventy-two-hour abatement period; 
b.  Not more than one thousand dollars for the second citation after the seventy-two-hour abatement period; and 
c.  Not more than one thousand five hundred dollars for the third and each subsequent citation after the seventy-two-hour abatement period Total fines resulting from administrative citations shall not be more than ten thousand dollars within one year for each cited UDCB. 
G.  The daily administrative citations described in Subsection F shall continue until either the violation is abated or the UDCB is removed. Pursuant to Government Code Section 38773, removal of the UDCB shall be at the expense of the owner and/or operator. Any UDCBs removed shall also have any of its UDCB permits revoked. 
H.  The property owner and operator are jointly and severally liable and responsible for all fees, administrative citations, and compliance with the regulations. 
I.  Administrative citations for unpermitted UDCBs may be appealed administratively pursuant to appeals of administrative actions set forth in the Whittier Municipal Code or as developed by the city manager. Administrative citations for permitted UDCBs are not appealable. 
J.  A party aggrieved by a final administrative decision of the city may seek judicial review of the administrative decision pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Sections 1094.5 and 1094.6 within the time frame pursuant to those code sections. 
K.  All notices for unpermitted UDCBs shall be in writing and personally delivered to the owner/agent and UDCB operator or by depositing such notice in the United States mail, postage paid, and addressed to the owner/agent at the owner(s) last known address as it appears on the last Los Angeles County equalized assessments roll, as well as placed on the UDCB itself. If the city cannot reasonably determine the name and/or address of the unpermitted UDCB operator, placing the written notice on the UDCB itself constitutes sufficient notice. All notices regarding permitted UDCBs shall be through electronic mail. 
L.  Administrative citations established in this chapter are in addition to any other administrative or legal remedy which may be pursued by the city to address violations identified in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 3084 , § 3, 1-23-18)  
5.40.180 - Private rights of action. 
A.  Any person claiming a violation of this chapter may bring an action in the Superior Court of the State of California, as appropriate, to enforce the provisions of this chapter. Violations of this chapter are declared to irreparably harm the public. 
B.  The Court shall award reasonable attorney's fees, witness fees and costs to any plaintiff who prevails in an action to enforce this chapter. 
C.  No criminal penalties shall attach for any violation of this chapter. 
D.  No remedy set forth in this section is intended to be exclusive or a prerequisite for asserting a claim for relief to enforce any rights hereunder in a court of law. 
E.  Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to authorize a right of action against the city, nor shall this section give rise to any cause of action for damages against the city. 
F.  The parcel owner or owner's agent shall have the right to rescind consent for a UDCB to be placed on the property, provided written notice of the rescission is provided to the UDCB operator, as provided in their agreement but in no event less than ten business days prior to the UDCB being removed. 
G.  The parcel owner or owner's agent shall be held harmless by the UDCB operator for the removal of an unauthorized UDCB where removal is necessary to comply with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 3084 , § 3, 1-23-18)  
5.40.190 - Notice required for removal. 
A.  Any UDCB scheduled to be removed by either the city or the operator shall clearly display a notice on the UDCB with at least four-inch type visible from the front on the UDCB that states the following text in capital letters: "THIS BOX WILL BE REMOVED BY" followed by the date the UDCB is scheduled for removal The operator and property owners are jointly and severally responsible for the placement of the notice. 
B.  For UDCBs required to be removed by the city of Whittier due to an abatement order, the notice shall be posted immediately after the city notifies the operator and/or owner that the facility is required to be removed. 
C.  Notice that a UDCB will be removed by the owner or operator shall be posted at least fourteen calendar days prior to the removal of the facility. 
(Ord. No. 3084 , § 3, 1-23-18)  
Chapter 5.44 - MOTION PICTURES AND FILMING ACTIVITIES[2] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3058, § 1 , adopted Nov. 8, 2016, amended the title of Ch. 5.44 to read as set out herein. Formerly, Ch. 5.44 was titled, "Motion Pictures." 
 
5.44.010 - Permit—Required. 
No person shall use buildings, structures, lots, yards, courts, open spaces, spaces open to public view or any public property for the purpose of television, motion picture, commercial, digital media, student film or still photography without first obtaining a permit from the city manager or his/her designee therefor, except as specifically provided for in this chapter. Any person desiring such a permit, including but not limited to, a permit allowing the temporary use and occupancy of a portion of public property for the purpose of filming, shall submit a written application for the permit, together with a filing and processing fee in an amount set by the city council by ordinance, resolution or minute order, to the city manager or his/her designee, who shall, upon receipt thereof, issue the permit if found: 
A.  That the site proposed for such usage can be utilized without an unreasonable interference with public or private use of the site or any neighboring sites; and 
B.  That the activities proposed will not constitute an unreasonable threat of injury to person or property, if properly conducted. 
1.  For filming on private property: 
a.  Filming on private property in the Uptown Business District shall be limited to filming reviewed and concurred by the Whittier Uptown Association prior to submittal to the city; 
b.  The owner and any tenants of the private property has given his, her or their consent in writing to the issuance of the permit; 
c.  All prep, shoot and strike shall occur only between the hours of six o'clock a.m. and ten o'clock p.m. Deviation from these hours may only be permitted with written approval in advance from the city manager or his/her designee on a case-by-case basis. Such approval shall be considered after additional documentation is received, such as agreement from one hundred percent of affected property owners and occupants within the three hundred-foot distance of the film location; 
d.  All activity associated with the filming shall comply with the city's noise ordinance; 
e.  No lights will be placed so as to shine into the yards or buildings of adjoining private property unless written consent from the owner and any tenants of the adjoining private property has been obtained; 
f.  The filming shall not preclude ingress to or egress from any adjacent private property, unless the signatures of one hundred percent of the property owners and tenants whose properties would be affected have been obtained; 
g.  The filming shall not prevent access to or use of any public property, including streets and sidewalks abutting the property where the filming is to occur; 
h.  The applicant has obtained a permit from the Los Angeles County fire department film desk authorizing the filming and any and all associated pyrotechnics, use of hazardous materials, open flames, special effects smoke and use of vehicles inside buildings, and the filming shall be conducted in accordance with all capacity and fire safety restrictions ordered by the film desk; 
i.  There shall be no filming, within public view, of nudity, or of obscene or lewd acts; 
j.  Sets constructed within or outside of a building and physically attached to the building such that they receive either vertical or lateral support from the building, will require a building permit to investigate and approve the points of attachment of the set to the building. 
k.  The applicant shall notify all affected properties within three hundred feet of the film location(s) external boundaries, or to limits determined at the discretion of the city manager or his/her designee. The notification documentation that is provided to the affected properties shall be provided to the city. 
2.  For filming on public property: 
a.  Filming on the public right-of-way in the Uptown Business District shall be limited to filming reviewed and concurred by the Whittier Uptown Association prior to submittal to the city; 
b.  The applicant shall obtain written permission and/or a permit, if required, from any public entity other than the city of Whittier which owns or has jurisdiction over the public property on which filming is sought to be conducted, including but not limited to, a school district, community college district, county or state agency, and the California Department of Transportation, if the request includes closure of any state highway; 
c.  The applicant must prepare a traffic control plan which is to be approved by the city's traffic engineer which shall ensure the orderly movement of traffic through or around any area in which the filming is to occur, 
d.  The filming shall not preclude ingress to or egress from any private property, unless the signatures of one hundred percent of the property owners and tenants whose properties would be affected have been obtained; 
e.  The filming shall not prevent public access to any public property other than the public property on which filming is permitted; 
f.  All prep, shoot and strike shall be limited to the hours between six o'clock a.m. and ten o'clock p.m. Deviation from these hours may only be permitted with written approval in advance from the city manager or his/her designee on a case-by-case basis. Such approval shall be considered after additional documentation is received, such as agreement from one hundred percent of affected property owners and occupants within the three hundred-foot distance of the film location; 
g.  All activity associated with the filming shall comply with the city's noise ordinance; 
h.  No lights will be placed so as to shine into the yards or buildings of adjoining private property without the written consent of the owners and any tenants of such adjoining private property; 
i.  The applicant has obtained a permit from the Los Angeles County fire department film desk authorizing the filming and any and all associated pyrotechnics, use of hazardous materials, open flames, special effects smoke and use of vehicles inside buildings, and the filming shall be conducted in accordance with all capacity and fire safety restrictions ordered by the film desk; 
j.  There shall be no filming, within public view, of nudity or of obscene or lewd acts; 
k.  Sets constructed within or outside of a building and physically attached to the building such that they receive either vertical or lateral support from the building, will require a building permit to investigate and approve the points of attachment of the set to the building. 
l.  The applicant shall notify all affected properties within three hundred feet of the film location(s) external boundaries, or to limits determined at the discretion of the city manager or his/her designee. The notification documentation that is provided to the affected properties shall be provided to the city. 
C.  The applicant shall be in possession of the permit at all times while on location. The permit shall not be reassigned by the applicant without the written consent of the city. Posted parking regulations and/or vehicle code regulations will be enforced unless otherwise noted. 
(Ord. 2823 § 1, 2003: Prior code § 6295 (part)) 
( Ord. No. 3058, § 2 , 11-8-16; Ord. No. 3066 , § 1, 3-28-17)  
5.44.020 - Exceptions to permit requirement. 
No permit is required from the city of Whittier under this chapter if: 
A.  The filming is being conducted on private property, completely inside an enclosed building or structure, not viewable from adjoining public or private property, with a cast and crew of four or fewer people, who are using two or fewer motor vehicles in connection with the filming, and there are no pyrotechnics, use of hazardous materials, open flames, special effects smoke or use of vehicles. inside buildings associated with the filming; however, an application form as provided in Section 5.44.010 shall be submitted as provided in the city's film permit guidelines, and such filming shall nonetheless comply with the provisions of Section 5.44.010(A); or 
B.  The filming is being conducted by a bona fide news agency for the purpose of a spontaneous, unplanned television news broadcast or print media reporting ("breaking news"); or 
C.  The filming is being done by individuals who are not professional or student filmmakers, and the films are intended solely for personal use. 
D.  The filming is being done by a charitable organization with a 501(c) (3) Internal Revenue Service (IRS) status. 
(Ord. 2823 § 2, 2003: Prior code § 6295 (part)) 
( Ord. No. 3058, § 3 , 11-8-16)  
5.44.030 - Permit—Issuance conditions. 
A.  The city manager shall condition the issuance of a filming permit on the applicant's compliance with the requirements of Subsection (A) of Section 5.44.010, if the filming is to occur on private property, or Subsection (B) of Section 5.44.010, if the filming is to occur on public property. In addition, the following shall be imposed as conditions on the issuance of all filming permits: 
1.  The applicant shall secure liability insurance coverage in the amount set forth in the city of Whittier film permit guidelines then in effect. Such insurance shall include comprehensive general liability insurance, which includes property and fire insurance at the same rate and also, contractual liability and automobile liability at the same rate when applicable, in the form of a certificate and endorsement, covering the entire period of the permit and naming the city of Whittier as additional insured; 
2.  The applicant shall agree to waive all claims against the city of Whittier, its officers, agents, and employees, for fees, expenses or damage caused by, arising out of or in any way connected with the exercise of the rights under the permit; 
3.  The applicant shall agree to provide a waiver of subrogation on the worker's compensation policy stating that the insurer waives all rights of subrogation against the city including its elected or appointed officials, directors, officers, agents, employees, volunteers, or consultants; 
4.  The applicant shall agree to save harmless, indemnify and defend the city of Whittier, its officers, agents, and employees with respect to any claims or suits for damages caused by, asserted to be caused by, arising out of, or in any way connected with exercise by the applicant of the rights granted by the permit, except those arising out of the sole negligence of the city; 
5.  The applicant shall comply with municipal safety regulations and all requirements set out in the city's film permit guidelines; 
6.  The applicant will submit to municipal safety inspections. 
B.  The city manager or his/her designee shall require that a permittee pay, prior to commencement of filming, for any estimated costs incurred by the city for any necessary service in conjunction with the issuance and use of the permit, including but not limited to, police traffic control, as set forth in a fee schedule adopted by the city council. The applicant shall also pay any use fees required for use of any public property, including park or other city facility charges established by fee schedule or resolution. 
C.  On or before the date of the expiration of the permit, the permittee shall remove from said private and/or public properties all location sets, structures, rubbish, and unsightly matter placed on said properties by the applicant. In the event that the applicant fails to do so, the city may cause the same to be done and the applicant agrees to pay the city for its cost incurred therefore. 
(Ord. 2823 § 3, 2003: Prior code 6295 (part)) 
( Ord. No. 3058, § 4 , 11-8-16)  
5.44.040 - Permit—Decision to grant or deny. 
A.  The city manager or his/her designee shall investigate and grant, conditionally grant or deny an application for a permit within the time limits set forth in this section. 
B.  The completeness of an application shall be determined by the city manager or his/her designee, within five working days of its submittal to the city. If it is determined that the application is not complete, the applicant shall be notified in writing that the application is not complete and the reasons therefor, including any additional information necessary to render the application complete. Such writing may be hand delivered or sent via facsimile but also shall be deposited in U.S. mail, postage prepaid, immediately upon determination that the application is incomplete. Within five working days following receipt of an amended application or supplemental information, the city manager or his/her designee shall again determine whether the application is complete in accordance with the procedures set forth above. If an amended application is not filed with the city within fifteen days of the date of the notice to the applicant that the application is incomplete, then such application shall be deemed to have been withdrawn and the applicant will be required to submit a new application to the city. 
C.  Upon the filing of a completed application, the city manager or his/her designee shall cause to be made by city staff an appropriate investigation as is needed, including consultation with the building, police, parks, recreation and community services departments, public works departments and the Los Angeles County fire department and inspection of the premises on which filming is proposed. Consultation is not grounds for the city to unilaterally delay in reviewing a completed application, nor is it grounds to extend the time period to render a decision pursuant to this section. 
D.  The city manager or his/her designee shall render a written decision on the application for film permit within five business days of the submission of a completed application required by this chapter. Such written decision shall include findings upon which the decision is based and shall indicate any conditions which have been imposed in granting any such application. 
E.  The city manager or his/her designee's decision shall be immediately hand delivered, mailed, or emailed to the applicant, and shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of this code. 
F.  Notwithstanding any provisions in this chapter regarding the occurrence of any action within a specified period of time, the applicant may request additional time beyond that provided for in this chapter or may request a continuance regarding any decision or consideration by the city of the pending application. Extensions of time sought by applicants shall not be considered delay on the part of the city or constitute failure by the city to provide for prompt decisions on applications. 
(Ord. 2823 § 4, 2003) 
(Ord. No. 2958, § 5, 10-12-10; Ord. No. 3058, § 5 , 11-8-16)  
5.44.050 - Appeal. 
A.  Any interested person may appeal the decision of the city manager or his/her designee to the city council in writing, such written appeal to be personally delivered to the city or postmarked within five days of the city manager or his/her designee's written decision, or in the case of no written decision, within five days of any denial of a permit application by the city manager or his/her designee. 
B.  Consideration of an appeal of the city manager or his/her designee's decision shall be at a public hearing, notice of which shall be given pursuant to California Government Code Sections 65091 and 65905 and which hearing shall occur within fifteen days of the filing or initiation of the appeal. 
C.  The city council action on the appeal of the city manager or his/her designee decision shall be by a majority vote of the members present and upon the conclusion of the de novo public hearing, the city council shall grant, conditionally grant or deny the appeal. The city council's decision shall be final and conclusive and shall be rendered in writing within two days of the hearing, such written decision to be immediately mailed to the party appealing the city manager's decision and to any other affected parties. Such written decision shall include findings upon which the decision is based. 
D.  In reaching its decision, the city council shall not be bound by the formal rules of evidence. 
E.  Notwithstanding any provisions in this chapter regarding the occurrence of any action within a specified period of time, the applicant may request additional time beyond that provided for in this chapter or may request a continuance regarding any decision or consideration by the city of the pending appeal. Extensions of time sought by applicants shall not be considered delay on the part of the city or constitute failure by the city to provide for prompt decisions on applications. 
F.  The failure of the city council to render any decision within the timeframes established in any part of this section shall be deemed to constitute a denial. 
G.  Each appeal from a denial or conditional approval of a filming permit shall be accompanied by a filing and processing fee in an amount as set by resolution of the city council. Any person appealing may withdraw the appeal by filing a written request to do so at anytime prior to final action thereon, provided that there shall be no refund of fees. 
(Ord. 2823 § 5, 2003) 
( Ord. No. 3058, § 6 , 11-8-16)  
5.44.060 - Permit—Judicial review of decision to grant or deny. 
A.  The time for a challenge to a decision of the city council in a court of law is governed by California Code of Civil Procedure Sections 1094.5 and 1094.8. 
B.  Notice of the city council's decision and findings shall include citation to California Code of Civil Procedure Sections 1094.5 and 1094.8. 
C.  Any applicant whose permit has been denied or conditionally approved, to which such conditions the applicant objects, pursuant to this chapter shall be afforded prompt judicial review of that decision as provided by law. The city shall make all reasonable efforts to expedite such review and shall comply with the provisions of California Code of Civil Procedures Section 1094.8 and/or any subsequent, applicable statutes or rules of the courts of law of the state or nation which specify the prompt judicial review to be provided to a permit applicant. 
(Ord. 2823 § 6, 2003)  
5.44.070 - Permit revocation. 
A.  Any permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may be revoked summarily, subject to a pre-notice of violation or stop-work process unless there is a risk to the public health and safety, by the city on the basis of anyone or more of the following: 
1.  That the filming or related activity has been conducted in a manner which violates one or more of the conditions imposed upon the issuance of the permit, including failure to conform to the plans and procedure described in the application, or violation of the occupant load limits or other restrictions established by the Los Angeles County fire department; 
2.  That permittee has failed to obtain or maintain all required city, county and state licenses and permits; 
3.  That the permit is being used to conduct an activity different from that for which it was issued; 
4.  That the permittee has misrepresented a material fact in the application for permit or has not answered each question therein truthfully; 
5.  That the private property owner(s) and/or tenant(s) on whose property the filming was permitted have withdrawn consent to the filming. 
B.  The city officer who summarily revokes the permit on any of the enumerated bases shall advise the permit holder of the basis or bases for the revocation. The permit holder may appeal the revocation decision to the city manager or his/her designee, who shall hold an appeal hearing thereon within seventy-two hours. 
C.  The revocation hearing shall be heard by the city manager or his/her designee. The city manager shall not be bound by the formal rules of evidence at the hearing. 
D.  All interested persons, including the permit holder, shall be permitted to offer evidence and argument at the revocation hearing. 
E.  The city manager or his/her designee shall make his decision to uphold the permit revocation or reinstate the permit within twenty-four hours of the public hearing. 
F.  The city manager or his/her designee's decision shall be in writing and shall be final. Such written decision shall include findings upon which the decision is based. 
G.  The provisions of Section 5.44.060 shall apply to judicial review of any decision of the city manager made upon appeal. 
(Ord. 2823 § 7, 2003) 
( Ord. No. 3058, § 7 , 11-8-16)  
5.44.080 - Violations. 
Violation of any section of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor, but may at the discretion of the city prosecutor be charged as an infraction. Any police officer providing public safety services at a film permit location may issue a citation for violation of this chapter or for violation of the conditions of any permit issued hereunder. The minimum fine for a violation of this chapter or a permit violation is five hundred dollars per permit or chapter violation following non-compliance with a verbal and/or written notice of violation or stop-work notice. 
(Ord. 2823 § 8, 2003) 
( Ord. No. 3058, § 8 , 11-8-16)  
Chapter 5.48 - PAWNSHOPS AND PAWNBROKERS 
Sections: 
 
5.48.010 - Definitions. 
A.  The term "buy-form" is the name of the form or forms obtained from the department of justice by the licensee for the purpose of recording and furnishing by the licensee to the chief of police of the required information relative to purchases, pledges or consignments. 
B.  "Pawnbroker" means any person engaged in any one or more of the following businesses: 
1.  Pawnbroking; 
2.  Lending money for himself or any other person upon personal property, pawns or pledges, in the possession of the lender; 
3.  Purchasing articles of personal property and reselling or agreeing to resell such articles to the vendors or assignees at prices agreed upon at or before the time of the purchase. 
C.  A "pawnshop" is any room, store, building or other place in which the business of a pawnbroker is engaged in or conducted. (Amended during 1984 codification; prior code §§ 6275, 6275.1, 6275.4)  
5.48.020 - Hours. 
A pawnbroker shall not, and an agent or employee of a pawnbroker shall not accept any pledge or lend any money on personal property or purchase or receive any goods or merchandise or any article or thing whatsoever or in any manner whatsoever engage in or conduct the business of pawnbroker between seven p.m. of any day and seven a.m. of the following day. 
(Amended during 1984 codification; prior code § 6275.3)  
5.48.030 - Daily report. 
Every licensee under this chapter shall at the close of each business day, or on the first working day after receipt or purchase of the property, mail to the chief of police the buy-form or buy-forms made out during that day. The buy-forms shall contain: 
A.  A full, legible, true and complete report, in English, of all goods, wares, merchandise or other things received on deposit, pledged or purchased during that day. 
B.  A complete and reasonably accurate description of serialized or non-serialized property, including, but not limited, to, the following: serial number, size, color, material, manufacturer's name brand and model name or number, manufacturer's pattern name (when known) and other identifying marks or symbols or owner-applied numbers. Watches need not be disassembled when special skill or special tools are required to obtain the required information, unless specifically requested to do so by a peace officer. A special tool does not include a penknife, caseknife, or similar instrument and disassembling a watch with such an instrument does not constitute a special skill. 
C.  A certificate by the intended seller or pledger that he or she is the owner of the property or has the authority of the owner to sell or pledge the property. 
D.  A certificate by the intended seller or pledger that to his or her knowledge and belief the information is true and complete. 
(Ord. 2869 § 17, 2006: prior code § 6275.5)  
5.48.040 - Seller identification on report. 
Every licensee under this chapter shall verify the identification of the intended seller, consignee, or pledger and enter upon the buy-form positive identification as set forth in Section 5.48.060 below, furnished by the seller, pledger or consignee in addition to the individual's true name and address. Further, in addition to the positive identification mentioned in this section, the licensee shall require the seller, pledger, or consignee to furnish a plain impression print of his right index finger, or next finger in the event of amputation, upon the face side of the original sheet of the buy-form. 
In addition to the positive identification mentioned in this section, the licensee shall require the seller, pledger or consignee to furnish a plain impression print of his right index finger, or next finger in the event of amputation, upon the face side of the original sheet of the buy-form. 
(Ord. 2869 § 18, 2006: prior code § 6275.6)  
5.48.050 - Copy of chapter to be furnished. 
A copy of this chapter shall be furnished each new licensee by the chief of police, and the licensee must be furnished with all subsequent amendments that affect the type of business of the licensee. 
(Amended during 1984 codification; prior code § 6275.16)  
5.48.060 - Identification of seller. 
Every person who sells, pledges or consigns any property to any licensee in the course of business covered by the license, shall furnish true, positive identification in the form of a driver's license issued by any state or Canada, an identification card issued by any state, an identification card issued by the United States or a passport from any other country in addition to another item of identification bearing an address, to the licensee provided that the document is currently valid or has been issued within five years and contains a photograph or description, or both, of the person named on it, is signed by the person, and bears a serial or other identifying number. 
(Ord. 2869 § 19, 2006: Prior code § 6275.7)  
5.48.070 - Preservation of records. 
Every licensee shall preserve for a period of two years, a copy of the buy-form provided for that purpose, containing a carbon copy record thereon of the original writing made by the licensee, agent or employee, the original of which has been furnished to the chief of police. Every such record and property pledged, purchased, or received by the licensee shall be produced for inspection to any peace officer. 
(Prior code § 6275.8)  
5.48.080 - Police chief records. 
The chief of police shall maintain a file of all reports received pursuant to the terms of this chapter for a period of two years, and the reports shall be open to inspection by any peace officer. 
(Prior code § 6275.9)  
5.48.090 - Goods to be held. 
A licensee under this chapter shall not melt, destroy, sell or otherwise dispose of any article, goods, wares, merchandise or thing obtained or used in any business for the conduct of which a license is required by this chapter until thirty days after making a report to the chief of police as required in this chapter that the article, goods, wares, merchandise or thing has been purchased or received by the licensee. However, pursuant to Business and Professions Code § 21638.5, the holding period, as applied to personal property in Business and Professions Code § 21636 does not apply to personal property pledged to a pawnbroker with respect to the redemption of personal property by the pledger. 
(Ord. 2869 § 20, 2006: amended during 1984 codification; prior code § 6275.10)  
5.48.100 - Goods not to be altered. 
Until any article, goods, wares, merchandise or thing pledged to or purchased by any licensee under this chapter is held for the time required by this chapter or released by the chief of police, the licensee shall not clean, alter, repair, paint or otherwise change the appearance of the articles, goods, wares, merchandise or things. At all times during business hours he shall expose it to public view. 
(Prior code § 6275.11)  
5.48.110 - Goods released to police chief. 
The chief of police may release any property covered by this chapter which he inspects if after such inspection he is satisfied that the property is in the lawful possession of the licensee. 
(Prior code § 6275.12)  
5.48.120 - Hold order by police chief. 
The chief of police may place a hold order upon any property acquired by the licensee in the course of his business for a period of ninety days, and upon release of the property may require the licensee to keep a true record of the property and included therewith the true name and address of the person to whom the property was sold, or any other method of disposition. 
(Prior code § 6275.13)  
5.48.130 - Export of goods. 
A licensee under this chapter shall not export from this country any goods, wares, merchandise or things pledged to or received by the licensee in his capacity as licensee until the chief of police has inspected and released the property. 
(Prior code § 6275.14)  
5.48.140 - Exemptions from waiting periods. 
The waiting period required in this chapter does not apply to property purchased on a bill of sale or invoice from a regularly established place of business. As used in this section, an established place of business means a place of business which has been dealing in the type of articles purchased at the same location for not less than six months. 
(Prior code § 6275.15)  
Chapter 5.52 - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS 
Sections: 
 
5.52.010 - No peddlers sign. 
No peddler selling or pretending to sell goods, wares or merchandise of any kind or character, or any article, material or substance, shall ring the bell, or knock on the door of any residence, dwelling, flat or apartment whereon a sign bearing the words "No Peddlers" is painted or affixed or exposed to public view. 
(Prior code § 6230)  
5.52.020 - No solicitors sign. 
No person soliciting orders for goods, wares or merchandise of any kind or character, or any article, material or substance, shall ring the bell or knock on the door of any residence, dwelling, flat or apartment whereon a sign bearing the words "No Solicitors" is painted or affixed or exposed to public view. 
(Prior code § 6230.1)  
5.52.030 - Misrepresenting purpose of call. 
No peddler or solicitor seeking permission to call for the purpose of selling or taking orders, or attempting to sell or take orders for goods, wares or merchandise, or any article, material or substance at any house, flat or apartment where a sign bearing the words "No Peddlers" is painted or affixed, or exposed to public view, shall misrepresent, conceal or fail to disclose the purpose for which he is seeking permission to call at the house, flat or apartment. 
(Prior code § 6230.2)  
5.52.040 - Exemption of invited call. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any peddler or solicitor who knocks at any door or rings any bell at the invitation or with the consent of some member of the household at which he so applies for admission. 
(Prior code § 6230.3)  
5.52.050 - Hours of operation. 
No person shall, between the hours of eight p.m. and eight a.m. of the following day, sell or offer to sell, demonstrate or take orders for the sale of goods, wares or any form of merchandise, by entering upon the premises of another for such purpose. The provisions of this section shall not apply to peddlers or solicitors who have previously been invited or requested to appear at such premises by the owner or lawful occupant thereof. 
(Ord. 2834 § 3, 2003)  
5.52.060 - Commercial handbill distribution regulations. 
The following regulations shall apply to the distribution and circulation of commercial handbills within the city. Failure to comply with the regulations contained in this section and in this chapter shall be deemed to be a misdemeanor punishable in the manner prescribed in Chapter 1.08 of this code. The regulations are as follows: 
A.  Name of Distributor. No person shall circulate or distribute, or cause to be circulated or distributed any commercial handbill within the city unless it bears conspicuously thereon the name, address and telephone number of the distributor or other person responsible for the distribution; and 
B.  Consent of Distribution. No person shall circulate, distribute or cause to be circulated or distributed any commercial handbill on any property within the city without the consent of the owner or occupant of the property. For the purpose of this section the consent of the owner or occupant shall be presumed unless the owner or occupant has conspicuously posted upon the property a sign or other device which contains language which prohibits handbill delivery in or upon the premises; and 
C.  Distribution on Public Property. No person shall distribute or circulate, or cause to be circulated or distributed, any commercial handbill on the roadway, center divider or median of a street; to any person in an unparked vehicle; within ten feet of an entrance to a building; within ten feet of a marked or unmarked crosswalk; or on any portion of a driveway. 
D.  Distribution on Motor Vehicles. No person shall circulate or distribute, or cause to be circulated or distributed, any commercial handbill by placing it in or upon any motor vehicle, as that phrase is defined in the vehicle code of the state, which is parked upon any public street, alley or public parking area, or upon any such vehicle parked upon any private property; and 
E.  Distribution on Private Property. The delivery of commercial handbills on private property shall be accomplished by personally delivering them to the person occupying the residential property, or by placing them upon the property securely, to insure that they will not be blown from the property onto other lots or public places; 
F.  Hours of Distribution. No person shall distribute or circulate, or cause to be circulated or distributed, any commercial handbill between the hours of eight p.m. of any day and eight a.m. of the following day. 
(Ord. 2834 § 5, 2003)  
Chapter 5.54 - SOLICITATION OF EMPLOYMENT OR BUSINESS FROM PUBLIC STREETS AND HIGHWAYS 
Sections: 
 
5.54.010 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of the provisions of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall be construed to have the meanings herein set forth, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended: 
A.  "Business" means and includes any type of product, goods, service, performance or activity which is provided or performed or offered to be provided or performed in exchange for money, labor, goods, or any other form of consideration. 
B.  "Commercial parking area" means and includes any privately or publicly owned property which is designed or used primarily for the parking of vehicles and which adjoins one or more commercial establishments. 
C.  "Employment" means and includes service industry or labor performed by a person for wages or other compensation or under any contract of hire, written or oral, express or implied. 
D.  "Solicit" means and includes any request, offer, enticement or action which announces the availability for or of employment, the sale of goods, or a request for money or other property; or any request, offer, enticement or action which seeks to purchase or secure goods or employment, or to make a contribution of money or other property. As defined and used herein, a solicitation shall be deemed complete when made, whether or not an actual employment relationship is created, a transaction is completed, or an exchange of money or other property takes place. 
(Ord. 2756 § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.54.020 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2994, § 1, adopted Sept. 25, 2012, repealed § 5.54.020, which prohibited solicitation of employment or business from public streets and highways and derived from Ord. 2756, § 1(part), adopted 1999.  
5.54.030 - Solicitation of employment or business in or on commercial parking areas prohibited. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person, while in or on a commercial parking area, to solicit or attempt to solicit, employment, business or contributions from pedestrians or occupants of any motor vehicle. This section shall not apply to a solicitation of employment or business by the owner or person in lawful possession of the commercial parking area, or to any person who has obtained written permission from the owner or person in lawful possession of said commercial parking area. 
B.  The owner or person in lawful possession of the commercial parking area shall post or cause to be posted, at the property owner's sole cost and expense, signs which are readily visible to the general public in a form reasonably as follows: 
SOLICITATION OF EMPLOYMENT, BUSINESS OR CONTRIBUTIONS ON THIS PRIVATE PROPERTY IS PROHIBITED. 
WMC § 5.54.040  
5.54.040 - Penalty for violation. 
Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to be an infraction, and punishable as such, notwithstanding the fact that at the discretion of the city or district attorney, the violation of any section of this chapter may be filed as a misdemeanor. The complaint charging such violation shall specify whether the violation is a misdemeanor or an infraction. Each day a violation of any provision of this chapter shall continue shall be a new and separate violation. 
A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a nuisance and may be abated by the city through civil process by means of restraining order, preliminary or permanent injunction or in any other manner provided by law for the abatement of such nuisances. 
(Ord. 2756 § 1 (part), 1999)  
Chapter 5.56 - SHOOTING RANGES 
Sections: 
 
5.56.010 - Permit required. 
Any person desiring to operate and maintain a rifle or shooting range within the city shall first apply to the chief of police for a permit setting forth in the application all matters required by the chief of police. If, upon investigation by the chief of police, it appears that a rifle or shooting range could be maintained at a specified location set forth in the application without danger to the public and without creating a nuisance, then the chief of police may issue a permit therefor, upon such terms and conditions as he may impose. Before the permit is in effect, the applicant shall pay the regular business license fee as required by Chapter 5.04. 
(Prior code § 4260.13)  
Chapter 5.60 - TAXICABS 
Sections: 
 
5.60.010 - Definitions. 
A.  "Council" or "city council" means the city council of the city of Whittier. 
B.  "Driver" includes every person in charge of driving or operating any taxicab, either as agent, employee or otherwise. 
C.  "Stand" means a place designated by the council for the use, while awaiting employment, of any taxicab. 
D.  "Street" means any place commonly used for the purpose of public travel. 
E.  "Taxicab" means every automobile or motor-propelled vehicle of a distinctive name or color, of public appearance, such as in common usage in this country for taxicabs, used for the transportation of passengers for hire over the streets of the city, and not over a defined route, irrespective of whether the operations extend beyond the boundary limits of the city, at rates for distance traveled, or for waiting time, or for both, and such vehicle is routed under direction of the passenger or person hiring it. 
F.  "Taximeter" means a mechanical instrument or device by which the charge for hire of a taxicab is mechanically calculated either for distance traveled or for waiting time, or both, which charges shall be indicated by means of figures. 
(Prior code § 6240)  
5.60.020 - License—Required. 
No person shall operate or be in charge of or drive any taxicabs without first having obtained a permit and license in writing so to do as provided in this chapter, and the permit and license are in full force and effect. 
(Prior code § 6240.1)  
5.60.030 - License—Application. 
Applicants for such permits and license shall file with the council an application upon blanks provided by the council containing such information as may be provided by the rules and regulations of the council pertinent to the operation of and the character and quality of the service of the taxicab. 
(Prior code § 6240.2)  
5.60.050 - License—Applicant investigation. 
The council shall investigate the applicant as it deems advisable. 
(Prior code § 6240.4)  
5.60.060 - License—Council hearing. 
No permit for the operation of any taxicab shall be granted until the council, after a public hearing, determines that public convenience and necessity require the operation of the vehicle. The public convenience and necessity for the granting of the same number of permits held by the applicant under the same name and color scheme on the date preceded by this chapter for the expiration of permits and the permit shall be classified as a renewal and shall be granted a permit under the filing of an application unless the applicant violated any provision of this chapter. If the council decrees that public convenience and necessity require the operation of additional vehicles it shall not issue permits until each person holding a permit for the operation of a taxicab has been notified by the council of its findings as to such additional taxicabs as are found to be necessary to fill the expanding need. 
(Prior code § 6240.5)  
5.60.070 - License—Findings required. 
The council, in determining whether or not public convenience and necessity exists may make written findings of fact as it may deem pertinent and which findings must include a specific finding that the following conditions exist: 
A.  That applicant is fully responsible, 
B.  That the person holding a permit for the operation of a taxicab is under efficient management, earning a fair and reasonable return on his capital devoted thereto; 
C.  That the person holding a permit for the operation of a taxicab is, under normal conditions, adequately serving the public. 
(Prior code § 6240.6)  
5.60.080 - Insurance requirements. 
A.  Before any permit is issued, the owner of any taxicab shall be required to file with the council and thereafter keep in full force and effect a policy of insurance in such form as the council may deem proper, executed by an insurance company approved by the council, insuring the council against any loss and damage that may result to any person or passengers from the operation of the taxicab. The amount of coverage required shall be set by administrative procedure as stated in the City of Whittier Standard Operating Procedures. 
B.  In the event of the return unsatisfied of any execution issued on any final judgment or on any judgment from which an appeal may be taken without bond rendered against any such person in any suit for damages on account of injury to person or property caused by the taxicab, the person shall within ten days after return of the execution unsatisfied, increase the amount of his insurance to the amount of the judgment and failing to do so shall forthwith cease the operation of any taxicab until the insurance is filed or judgment paid. 
C.  All insurance policies shall contain a provision for a continuing liability thereunder to the full amount of the penalty thereof, notwithstanding any recovery thereon. 
D.  No person shall operate any taxicab without having a policy of insurance as required in this section in full force and effect at all times during the operation of the taxicab. 
(Ord. 2437 § 1, 1988: prior code § 6240.7)  
5.60.090 - License—Contents. 
Each permit issued under this chapter shall entitle the holding owner to engage in the taxicab business upon the payment of the license fee provided in this chapter and the city clerk-treasurer shall issue to the holder a license setting forth the name of the business for which the license is issued, the period for which issued, and the date issued. 
(Prior code § 6240.10)  
5.60.100 - License—Fees. 
A.  Every person operating any taxicab business within the city shall pay the following license fees: 
1.  For the operation and maintenance of the business, the sum of one hundred dollars per year payable annually in advance, which includes one taxicab. 
2.  The further sum for each taxicab stand located in the following areas are established as follows; 
a.  For each taxicab stand authorized under this chapter and located within the central traffic zone of the city where parking meters are installed, maintained and operated by the city, the sum of seventy-five dollars, payable annually; 
b.  For each taxicab stand on a street where there are no parking meters owned, maintained and operated by the city, the suits of fifty dollars payable annually; 
c.  For each taxicab stand or taxicab operated from private property and not from a public street or alley of the city, the sum of twenty-five dollars, payable annually. 
B.  All such license fees shall accompany the application for permit and in the event the license is not granted, the fees shall be refunded after first deducting all costs expended by the council in acting upon the application. All licenses presented to the applicant shall be nontransferable. 
(Prior code § 6240.30)  
5.60.110 - Driver permit—Application. 
A.  Every driver of a taxicab must make written application to the chief of police setting forth his name, age, residence, last previous address and the length of his residence at each; whether he is married or single; the name of the owner for whom he intends to drive; whether he has ever been convicted of a felony, and such other information as may be required by the chief of police. 
B.  The chief of police shall cause an investigation of the application to be made and cause the applicant to be examined as to his knowledge of the laws and ordinances regulating the operation of motor vehicles and his ability to operate a taxicab service on the streets of the city. 
C.  No driver's permit shall be granted to any person who is not of good moral character, or who does not own a driver's license issued by the Motor Vehicle Department of the state. 
D.  In addition to the requirements provided in this section for obtaining a driver's permit, every driver shall give and it shall be the duty of the police department to take the fingerprints of the driver together with his picture and such other information as will comprise a description of the driver. 
(Ord. 2869 § 22, 2006; prior code §§ 6240.27, 6240.29)  
5.60.120 - Driver permit—Fee and possession requirements. 
Every driver's permit granted by the chief of police must be filed with the city treasurer, who shall charge or collect the sum of one dollar. The permit shall at all times be carried on the person of the driver during the times he is driving the taxicab. 
(Prior code § 6240.28)  
5.60.130 - Stand permits. 
A.  A permit may be issued to the owner of a taxicab by the council allowing the taxicab while awaiting employment to stand at certain designated places upon the streets. 
B.  No such permit shall be granted except upon the regular application of the person desiring the stand. 
C.  The application must contain the written consent of the occupant of the first floor of that portion of the building or property in front of which it is desired that the vehicle shall stand or if it contains more than twenty-five residents or is used for hotel purposes, the written consent of the person operating the hotel. 
D.  If there is no building on the premises in front of which it is desired that the vehicle may stand, or if there is a building and the first floor is not occupied, then the permit may be granted upon the written consent of the owner of the building or premises. 
E.  In addition to the number of taxicabs that may be permitted to stand upon a street within the limits of any one block as provided in this section, the council may grant permission to a taxicab operator to stand upon the street at the station of any interurban or bus transportation system as may be necessary to meet the needs of the traveling public; provided, that the consent of the owner of the interurban or bus transportation system is first obtained by the operator for additional taxicabs. 
F.  No more than two taxicabs shall have permits to stand on any street within the limits of one block having a frontage of five hundred feet or more, nor shall more than two such taxicabs be permitted to stand on any one street within the block having a frontage of less than five hundred feet. 
G.  No permit shall be issued for any stand to be located within fifty feet of another stand on the same side of any street. 
(Prior code § 6240.11)  
5.60.140 - License—Suspension or revocation—Authorized. 
Permits and licenses provided for in this chapter may be granted, denied, revoked, suspended or canceled as to any person or applicant whenever in the exercise of responsible and sound discretion the granting authority determines that the provisions of this chapter have or have not been complied with, or that the permittee, licensee, or applicant is or is not a fit or proper person to be in charge of or operate any taxicab. 
(Prior code § 6240.23)  
5.60.150 - License—Suspension—Operation prohibited. 
From the time of the revocation or during the suspension of any permittee or licensee no person whose permit or license is suspended or revoked shall drive, operate or be in charge of any taxicab or permit the taxicab on which permit has been suspended or revoked to engage in the taxicab business or allow any such vehicle to stand while awaiting employment at a location designated in the suspended or revoked permit until a new permit has been procured or until the period of suspension has expired. 
(Prior code § 6240.24)  
5.60.160 - License—Suspension or revocation—Grounds. 
A.  The chief of police shall be the motor vehicle inspector of the council and may issue permits required in this chapter and he may suspend any of the permits mentioned in this chapter when the permittee or licensee has not complied with the provisions of this chapter or has been arrested or convicted for the commission of a felony, reckless driving, pandering or the use, sale, possession, information or transportation of narcotics or illicit intoxicating liquors, or for assault and battery, or has charged rates greater than those which the permittee has on file with the council or has violated any of the rules and regulations of the council pertaining to the operation of and the extent, character and quality of the services of taxicabs. 
B.  The action of the chief of police in issuing or suspending any of the permits shall be subject to the ratification and approval by the council without further action at any meeting held subsequent to such action of the chief of police but not later than fifteen days thereafter. 
(Prior code § 6240.25)  
5.60.170 - License—Termination and renewal. 
All permits and licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be for a period not to exceed one year and all such permits and licenses shall expire upon the last day of the current year. All permits issued for all street stands upon the written consent of a person operating a hotel must be renewed yearly. Other street stand permits shall remain in full force and effect until they are canceled either on the request of the permittee or the person who gave the written consent to use the stand by notifying the council that the permission has been withdrawn. If the council has canceled a permit for a stand after having been notified that the consent to use it has been withdrawn, it shall not grant a permit for a stand so canceled for a period of six months from the date of cancellation. 
(Prior code § 6240.26)  
5.60.180 - Owner and employee agreements. 
A.  All taxicabs for which a permit has been issued shall be operated by the owner or employee of the owner. 
B.  No owner or driver of a taxicab shall enter into any contract, agreement or understanding, between themselves by the terms of which the driver pays to or for the account of the owner a fixed or determinable sum for the use of the vehicle. 
(Prior code § 6240.8)  
5.60.190 - Identification of owner. 
A.  No taxicab permit shall be issued to any person until a standard and uniform sign or insignia has been adopted by the applicant and approved by the council, which designates the owner of the vehicle. 
B.  No permit shall be issued to any person whose name, monogram, or insignia conflicts with or imitates any name, monogram or insignia used by another in such a manner as to be misleading or tend to deceive or defraud the public. 
(Prior code § 6240.9)  
5.60.200 - Signs required. 
A.  Every taxicab used for carrying passengers for hire shall display in the rear of the driver's seat and in full view of passengers a card not less than two and one-half by five inches, not more than three by six inches which shall have lettered thereon the owner's name under which he is operating and the business address and telephone number of the owner together with the rates to be charged and the name of the driver of the taxicab. 
B.  Every taxicab shall have painted upon the door of the taxicab the name under which the owner operates together with the telephone number and the taxicab number. The name of the cab, and the telephone number shall be painted upon the sides of the taxicab. All of the letters mentioned in this subsection shall be not less than two and one-half inches in height and not less than a five-sixteenths-inch stroke. 
C.  Every taxicab may show an electrically lighted vacant sign attached to the top of the taxicab. Every such sign shall be not more than two and one-half inches high by nine inches in length. 
D.  No person shall display any sign other than those provided in this section without first obtaining a written permit of the council to do so. 
(Prior code §§ 6240.14, 6240.15)  
5.60.210 - Stand designation and location. 
A.  No taxicab shall be operated from any place except a stand designated by the council. 
B.  No owner or driver of any taxicab shall stand while awaiting employment at any place not a stand designated by the council and assigned to the owner of the taxicab. 
C.  No owner or driver of any taxicab shall leave the taxicab unattended at a stand for a period of time longer than three minutes. 
D.  Stands may be operated for a period of twenty-four hours a day except where standing, stopping and parking vehicles is otherwise prohibited by law. 
(Prior code §§ 6240.12, 6240.13)  
5.60.220 - Taximeters. 
A.  No owner operating any taxicab shall operate the vehicle unless it is equipped with a taximeter of such type and design as may be approved by the council. Every owner using the taximeter shall at all times keep the taximeter accurate. The meter shall be subject to inspection from time to time. 
B.  The chief of police or any police officer is authorized at his instance and upon the complaint of any person to investigate the taximeter and upon the discovery of any inaccuracy of the taximeter to remove any such taxicab equipped with the taximeter from the streets until the taximeter is correctly adjusted. 
C.  All taxicabs must base their charges upon a taximeter and all taximeters shall be placed so that the reading dial showing the amount to be charged is well lighted and readily discernible by the passenger riding in the taxicab. 
D.  No driver of a taxicab while carrying passengers shall display the flag attached to the taximeter in such a position as to denote that the taxicab is not employed, or throw the flag of the taximeter in a recording position when the vehicle is not actually employed or fail to throw the flag of the taximeter in a nonrecording position at the termination of each and every service. 
E.  No operator of any taxicab upon receiving payment of fare indicated by the taximeter shall refuse to give a receipt upon the request of any passenger giving the payment. 
(Prior code § 6240.16)  
5.60.230 - Rates. 
A.  The minimum and maximum rates of fare to be charged the public by taxicabs operated over any street may be set from time to time by the council by resolution. 
B.  No rate shall be placed in effect, charged, demanded or collected for taxicab services other than such rates so provided by resolution of the council pursuant to this chapter. 
C.  No rate shall be placed in effect, charged, demanded or collected for taxicab services until the council after hearing upon its own motion or upon application or upon complaint has found and determined the rate to be just, reasonable, nondiscriminatory, nor in any wise in violation of any provision contained in this chapter or any provision of law nor until the rate to be placed in effect, charged, demanded or collected has been approved and established by the council. 
D.  The council shall have power upon a hearing upon its own motion or upon complaint to investigate a single rate of fare or the entire schedule or rates in effect, charged, demanded, collected for taxicab services and to establish a new rate or schedule of rates in lieu thereof. 
E.  The provisions of this section shall not apply to those taxicabs, the rates or fares for which are based upon a flat rate. 
F.  Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to empower the council to approve or establish any rate or any schedule of rates for taxicab services that will by means of rebate, discount, script books, excursions, or commutation tickets or in anywise violate the minimum or maximum rate or provisions contained in this section or any provision of law. 
(Prior code § 6240.21)  
5.60.240 - Excessive charges prohibited. 
No person shall charge, collect, demand, receive or arrange for any compensation for the services of any taxicab for hire in the city in amount, rate or compensation greater than the charges or the rates regulated by the council. 
(Prior code § 6240.20)  
5.60.250 - Passenger compartment. 
The passenger compartment shall be the rear section of the taxicab and the front seat shall be the driver's compartment. 
(Prior code § 6240.18)  
5.60.260 - Exclusive use by passenger. 
When a taxicab is engaged, the original occupant shall have the exclusive right to the full and free use of the passenger compartment and no owner or driver shall solicit additional passengers for hire without the consent of the original fare. 
(Prior code § 6240.17)  
5.60.270 - Direct route required. 
Any driver employed to carry passengers to a designated point shall take the most direct route possible that will carry the passenger safely and expeditiously to his destination. 
(Prior code § 6240.19)  
5.60.280 - Rules adoption. 
The council shall have authority by written resolution to adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary for the service and safety of the operation of taxicabs. 
(Prior code § 6240.22)  
Chapter 5.64 - TOW CAR SERVICE 
Sections: 
 
5.64.010 - Permit—Required. 
No person shall conduct or operate within the city a motor vehicle towing service available to members of the general public involving the use of "tow cars" as that phrase is defined in the Motor Vehicle Code of the state, without first obtaining a permit from the city in the manner prescribed in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 6250)  
5.64.020 - Permit—Application required. 
Any person desiring to obtain such a permit shall submit to the city clerk-treasurer an application therefor, in a form prepared by the clerk. The application form shall include, among other things, the name and business organization of the applicant including the name of a managing employee, a list of equipment proposed to be used and the rates proposed to be charged, the location of office facilities and impound or storage yard. 
(Prior code § 6251)  
5.64.030 - Permit—Fee. 
The city council by resolution shall establish the filing and processing fee, which fee shall be paid contemporaneously with the filing of an application for a permit pursuant to this chapter. 
(Prior code § 6252)  
5.64.040 - Permit—Application processing. 
Upon receipt of an application, together with the required filing and processing fee, the city clerk-treasurer shall cause such investigation to be conducted as may be warranted with reference to the application, in order to ascertain whether the standards set forth in Section 5.64.050 are met with respect thereto. Upon completion of the investigation, the city clerk-treasurer shall set the matter for hearing before the city manager and shall give notice of such time and place of hearing to the applicant, and to any other person who has, in writing, requested notice as to the application. 
(Ord. 2295 § 1(part), 1983: prior code § 6253)  
5.64.050 - Permit—City manager review. 
A.  At the time and place set for the hearing, the city manager shall consider the application, the results of the investigation, and such other material as the applicant, or any other interested person, may present with reference thereto. If, as a result of the consideration of the matter, the city manager shall issue the permit if he finds that: 
1.  There is a need for the service proposed to be rendered in the city; and 
2.  The applicant has qualified persons available who will operate all of the equipment proposed for use in the operation; and 
3.  All of the equipment proposed for use in the operation meets all applicable requirements of the Vehicle Code of the state, together with other applicable laws. 
B.  Where reasonably necessary, the city manager may condition the approval if he finds any one of the standards set forth in subsection A of this section are not met, as to an application, he shall refuse to issue the permit. 
C.  The decision of the city manager shall be final and conclusive in the absence of an appeal taken in the time and manner set forth in Section 5.64.060. The city manager shall, forthwith, give written notice of his decision to the applicant and to any other person who requests, in writing, written notice of the decision. 
(Ord. 2295 § 1(part), 1983: prior code § 6254)  
5.64.060 - Appeal. 
The applicant, or any person who appeared at the hearing before the city manager, may file a written appeal with the city clerk-treasurer, appealing the city manager's decision to the city council. Upon receipt of such an appeal, together with a filing and processing fee as required by resolution of the city council, the city clerk-treasurer shall set the matter for hearing before the city council. Notice of the hearing shall be given to the applicant, and to any other person who requests such notice in writing. At the time and place of the hearing the city council shall consider the application, the results of the investigation, and all matters contained in the city manager's files with reference to the application, together with any material, written or oral, that the applicant or any other interested person desires to present bearing upon the application. The action of the city council shall be based upon the same standards governing the action by the city manager as set forth in Section 5.64.050. The action of the city council granting, conditionally granting or denying the permit shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. 2295 § 1(part), 1983: prior code § 6255)  
Title 6 - ANIMALS 
Chapters:  
Chapter 6.04 - ANIMAL CONTROL ORDINANCE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3029 , § 1, adopted Sept. 8, 2015, effective Oct. 1, 2015, repealed the former Ch. 6.04, §§ 6.04.010—6.04.100, and enacted a new chapter as set out herein. The former Ch. 6.04 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 2468, § 3(part), adopted in 1989; Ord. 2522, § 1, adopted in 1991; Ord. 2576, § 1, adopted in 1992; Ord. 2602, § 3, adopted in 1993; Ord. 2843, § 1, adopted in 2004; and Ord. 2869, § 23, adopted in 2006. 
 
6.04.010 - Title. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the "Animal Control Ordinance of the City of Whittier" and may be cited as the "Animal Control Ordinance." 
( Ord. No. 3029, § 1 , 9-8-15)  
6.04.020 - Code adopted. 
Title 10 of the Los Angeles County Code of Ordinances, and as it may be amended from time to time, entitled "Animals" is adopted by reference, as the animal control ordinance of the City of Whittier, subject to certain amendments, additions and deletions as hereinafter provided. 
( Ord. No. 3029, § 1 , 9-8-15)  
6.04.030 - Copies filed. 
Copies of Title 10 of the Los Angeles County Code of Ordinances as adopted in Section 6.04.020 have been deposited with the city clerk-treasurer and shall be at all times maintained by the city clerk-treasurer for use and examination by the public. 
( Ord. No. 3029, § 1 , 9-8-15)  
6.04.040 - Amendments generally. 
Title 10, as adopted in Section 6.04.020, is amended as follows: whenever reference is made to the County of Los Angeles or to the unincorporated areas of the County of Los Angeles, such area shall be deemed to include within its corporate limits the area of the City of Whittier for purposes of fulfilling the requirements of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 3029, § 1 , 9-8-15)  
6.04.050 - Amendments specifically. 
A.  Section 10.12.180 [of the Los Angeles County Code of Ordinances] is amended to read as follows: 
10.12.180 Unlicensed or unvaccinated dogs - Right of Entry for enforcement. 
For the purpose of discharging the duties imposed upon him or her by this Division 1, the director, in order to enforce the penalty provisions hereof to take up and impound any unlicensed or unvaccinated dog, may enter any real property upon which any dog is kept or harbored or upon which he has reason to believe any dog is kept or harbored and demand the exhibition by the person owning or having charge or control of any such dog, of the dog, the required rabies vaccination certificate and the license or license tag for such dog for the current year provided for by this Division. 
1.  This section does not permit any person to enter any private dwelling without consent or a court order, except where necessary to rescue an animal. 
B.  Section 10.20.020 [of the Los Angeles County Code of Ordinances] is amended to read as follows: 
10.20.020 Person deemed custodian when. 
Any person keeping or harboring any dog for 15 consecutive days shall be deemed to be the custodian thereof and subject to licensing provisions within the meaning of this Division 1. 
C.  Section 10.20.030 [of the Los Angeles County Code of Ordinances] is amended to read as follows: 
10.20.030 License—Required—Fees and other charges. 
Every person owning or having custody or control of any dog over the age of four months in the City of Whittier shall obtain an annual license from the director for each dog and shall pay the fee for the licenses including delinquency charges and field enforcement fees as set forth in Sections 10.20.130 and 10.90.010, except that the license fee for a spayed or neutered dog that is not owned by a senior citizen shall be set by City Council resolution. The owner or custodian of an animal found unlicensed by a department employee in the field will be charged a field enforcement fee as set forth in Section 10.90.010. 
D.  Section 10.20.038 [of the Los Angeles County Code of Ordinances] is amended to read as follows: 
10.20.038 Residential dogs and cats—Limitations. 
A.  Dogs. Up to three dogs may be kept at any residence without an animal facility license, provided the dogs' owner or custodian licenses each individual dog. For purposes of this section, a service dog licensed under Section 10.20.090 is not counted toward the number of dogs kept or maintained, while such dog is serving a person who is disabled within the meaning of Government Code Sections 12926(i) or 12926(k). 
B.  Cats. Up to five cats may be kept at any residence without an animal facility license, provided the cats' owner keeps all cats primarily indoors. 
E.  Section 10.20.190 [of the Los Angeles County Code of Ordinances] is amended to read as follows: 
10.20.190 Keeping unlicensed dogs prohibited. 
A person, shall not harbor or keep, or cause or permit to be harbored or kept, any unlicensed dog in the City of Whittier. 
F.  Chapter 10.20, Part 4 "Mandatory Spay and Neuter Program for Dogs" [of the Los Angeles County Code of Ordinances] is excluded from the City's adoption of Title 10 of the Los Angeles County Code of Ordinances. 
( Ord. No. 3029, § 1 , 9-8-15)  
6.04.060 - Conflicts. 
Whenever an apparent conflict or inconsistency exists between any provision of Title 10, as adopted in Section 6.04.020, and any provision of the Whittier Municipal Code, each provision shall be construed so as to supplement the other. In the event that any apparently conflicting or inconsistent provisions may not reasonably be so construed, the provisions of the Whittier Municipal Code shall prevail. 
( Ord. No. 3029, § 1 , 9-8-15)  
6.04.070 - No entitlements created hereby. 
The adoption of Title 10 as set forth in Section 6.04.020 shall not be construed for any purpose as creating any entitlement or authorizing any business or use which is prohibited by any provision contained in the Whittier Municipal Code. 
( Ord. No. 3029, § 1 , 9-8-15)  
6.04.080 - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
A.  Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of an infraction, unless another penalty is provided for in Title 10. 
B.  The violation of the following sections of Title 10 is a misdemeanor, punishable as set forth in Penal Code Section 19: 
10.12.190 
10.12.200 
10.20.280 
10.20.310 
10.28.060 
10.28.280(C) 
10.32.020 
10.32.070 
10.32.080 
10.37.030 
10.37.050(C) 
10.37.060(F) 
10.40.010 
10.40.040 
10.86.010 
( Ord. No. 3029, § 1 , 9-8-15)  
6.04.090 - Civil remedies available. 
A violation of any of the provisions of Title 10, as adopted in Section 6.04.020, shall constitute a nuisance and may be abated by the city through civil process by means of a restraining order, preliminary or permanent injunction or any other manner provided by law for the abatement of such nuisances. 
( Ord. No. 3029, § 1 , 9-8-15)  
Title 8 - HEALTH AND SAFETY 
Chapters:  
Chapter 8.04 - PUBLIC HEALTH CODE 
 
8.04.010 - Adopted. 
The Public Health Code (Ordinance No. 7583) of the county, reprinted December, 1997, including rules and regulations of the county health department, as altered and amended and shown in the Public Health Code, is adopted as the Public Health Code of the city for the protection of the public health in the city. In adopting the Los Angeles County Code, Title 11, Division 1, the city adopts by reference all amendments adopted by the Los Angeles County board of supervisors which pertain to the Public Health Code, subject to certain amendments, additions and deletions as may hereinafter be provided. Reference is made to the Public Health Code as amended and filed with the city clerk-treasurer as if set forth in full in this chapter, and all of the provisions thereof as amended and now shown in the Public Health Code are adopted and made a part of this chapter. Copies of the Public Health Code as amended on file with the city clerk-treasurer shall be maintained by the city clerk-treasurer and shall be made available for public use or inspection by the city clerk-treasurer but they shall not be taken from city hall. 
(Ord. 2735 § 1, 1998: Ord. 2577 § 20, 1992; prior code § 5110)  
8.04.020 - Public Health Code—Violation, penalty. 
Section 11.11.150 of the Los Angeles County Public Health Code is adopted as follows and as amended in the future by the Los Angeles County board of supervisors: 
 Section 11.11.150 Violation. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, violation of this chapter is punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00 or by imprisonment in the County jail for not more than six months, or both. Each day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted makes such violation a separate offense. 
(Ord. 2735 § 2, 1998)  
8.04.030 - Consumer Protection Code—Adoption and amendments. 
Sections 8.04.142, 8.04.165, 8.04.200, 8.04.225, 8.04.275, 8.04.306, 8.04.311, 8.04.337, 8.04.403, 8.04.405, 8.04.595, 8.04.752, 8.04.755, and 8.04.943 of the Consumer Protection Code (Ordinance Nos. 97-0071 and 2010-0045) of the county, including the rules and regulations of the county, as altered and amended and shown in the aforementioned sections of the Consumer Protection Code, are adopted by reference for the protection of the public health in the city. In adopting portions of the Los Angeles County Code, Title 8, Chapter 4, the city adopts by reference all amendments adopted by the Los Angeles County board of supervisors which pertain to those sections of the Consumer Protection Code, subject to certain amendments, additions and deletions as may hereinafter be provided. Reference is made to sections of the Consumer Protection Code as amended and filed with the city clerk-treasurer as if set forth in full in this chapter, and all of the aforementioned provisions thereof as amended and now shown in the Consumer Protection Code are adopted and made a part of this chapter. Copies of the Consumer Protection Code as amended on file with the city clerk-treasurer shall be maintained by the city clerk-treasurer and shall be made available for public use or inspection by the city clerk-treasurer but they shall not be taken from city hall. 
(Ord. No. 3064 , § 3, 3-28-17) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3064 , § 3, adopted March 28, 2017, repealed the former § 8.04.030 and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former § 8.04.030 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 2735, § 3, adopted in 1998.  
8.04.040 - Consumer Protection Code—Violation, penalty. 
Section 8.04.930 of the Los Angeles County Consumer Protection Code is adopted as follows and as amended in the future by the Los Angeles County board of supervisors: 
 8.04.930 Violation—Penalty. Violation of this chapter is punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00 or by imprisonment in the County jail for not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted, makes such violation a separate offense. 
(Ord. 2735 § 4, 1998)  
Chapter 8.08 - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE* 
 
8.08.010 - Findings. 
The city council finds, determines and declares as follows: 
A.  That this city has a history and reputation for well-kept properties and strict enforcement of zoning restrictions and building regulations; that the property values and general welfare of this community are founded, in part, upon the appearance and maintenance of properties; and 
B.  That there is a need for emphasis on the maintenance of a number of real properties, in that certain conditions which appear to constitute nuisances, as set forth in this chapter, have been found to exist in the city; and 
C.  That the existence of any real property in a condition constituting a nuisance, as defined in this chapter, is injurious and inimical to the public health, safety and welfare of the residents of this city and contributes substantially and increasingly to the problems of, and the necessity for, excessive and disproportionate expenditures for protection against hazards and diminution of property values, prevention of crime, and the preservation of the public health and safety and the maintaining of adequate police, fire and accident protection; that the problems are becoming increasingly direct and substantial in significance and effect; and 
D.  That the existence of public nuisances of the type referred to in this chapter, and the abatement thereof, is reasonably related to the proper exercise of the police power in protecting the health, safety and welfare of the public, and the exercise of such power by this city is authorized by the Constitution of the state, its Charter, Section 65800 et seq., Section 38660 et seq., Section 38771 et seq., and Section 39500 et seq. of the Government Code of the state, and other applicable law; and 
E.  That unless corrective measures of the type set forth in this chapter are undertaken to alleviate such existing conditions, the public health, safety and general welfare, and the property values and social and economic standards of this community will be substantially depreciated; that the abatement of the conditions will enhance the environment of the residents of the city; and 
F.  That the abatement procedures set forth in this chapter are reasonable and afford a maximum of due process and procedural guarantees to affected property owners. 
(Ord. 2703 § 1 (part), 1997)  
8.08.020 - Definitions. 
The definitions included in this code, including but not limited to, model codes adopted by this code, shall be utilized in interpreting the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2703 § 1 (part), 1997)  
8.08.022 - Unlawful to maintain substandard property conditions—Substandard property conditions designated. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge or possession of any property in the city to maintain thereon any substandard property condition as defined by this code. Substandard property conditions shall include, but not be limited to: 
1.  Unpainted structures or structures where the paint or other exterior finish has deteriorated so as to permit decay, excessive checking, cracking, peeling, chalking, dry rot, warping and termite infestation, rendering the building unsightly and a detriment to surrounding properties; 
2.  Broken or missing windows or doors; 
3.  Overgrown, dead, or dying vegetation, trees, or weeds and debris: 
a)  Constituting unsightly appearance, or 
b)  Potentially dangerous to public safety and welfare, or 
c)  Detrimental to nearby property or property values; 
4.  Attractive nuisances dangerous to children, such as abandoned and broken equipment, appliances or machinery; 
5.  Broken, discarded, abandoned or unused furniture, household furnishings such as stoves, refrigerators, freezers; cans or containers, lumber, junk, trash, salvaged materials, packing boxes or other debris stored in yard areas so as to be visible at ground level from public streets, alleys or adjoining properties; 
6.  Use of clotheslines, fences, trees or shrubs for the drying of clothing or fabrics in front yard areas or in side yard areas of corner lots; 
7.  Ponds, pools, polluted water, unenclosed or empty swimming pools constituting a hazard to unwary passersby or to children, or which are detrimental to the public health, safety or general welfare; 
8.  Any fence or wall maintained in such condition of deterioration or disrepair as to constitute a hazard to persons or property or to cause depreciation in the value of any adjacent or nearby property; 
9.  Structures Under Construction for Unreasonable Periods. Any structure or portion thereof which has been under construction, whether authorized by a valid construction permit or not, for a period exceeding twenty-four months from the date upon which work commenced, and where the exterior of such construction is incomplete, as determined by the building department, and presents an unfinished appearance at the exterior; 
10.  Abandoned or Damaged Structures. All structures or portions of structures which are abandoned, open, vandalized, partially destroyed, left in an unreasonable state of partial construction, or any combination thereof; 
11.  Unpermitted Structure. For purposes of this code, "unpermitted structure" shall be defined as any structure, or portion thereof, that was erected, constructed, enlarged, altered, repaired, moved, improved, removed, connected, converted, demolished or equipped, at any point in time, without the required permit(s) having first been obtained from the building official, as required by the California Building Code. 
12.  Maintenance of property so out of harmony or conformity with the maintenance standards of adjacent properties, or containing improvements or personal property allowed to become so defective, unsightly, or in such condition of deterioration or disrepair, as to cause substantial diminution of the enjoyment, use, or property values of such adjacent properties. 
( Ord. No. 3026, § 1 , 3-10-15) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3026, § 1 , adopted March 10, 2015, amended § 8.08.022 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 8.08.022, pertained to it being unlawful to maintain substandard property conditions, and derived from Ord. 2703, § 1(part), adopted in 1997.  
8.08.024 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3026, § 2 , adopted March 10, 2015, repealed § 8.08.024, which pertained to substandard property conditions designated and derived from Ord. 2869, § 24, adopted in 2006; and Ord. No. 2703, § 1(part), adopted in 1997. Similar provisions are now incorporated into § 8.08.022.  
8.08.026 - Vacant lots. 
For the purpose of this section, a vacant lot shall mean any property which is either undeveloped or has an existing on-site building/structure that is either abandoned, vacant and/or is un-leased by the property owner for more than thirty days. 
All vacant lots within the city (except those that do not immediately front onto a public street, are less than five feet wide in width or depth, are identified on the city's zoning map as "open space," are used as designated habitat conservation or for active agricultural production) shall be maintained in accordance with the following provisions of this section within thirty days of becoming vacant: 
A.  Unimproved Vacant Lot Types. Lots that are unimproved due to never having been developed or having become vacant subsequent to the removal of any pre-existing buildings, structures or impervious surfaces shall be subject to the approval of a vacant lot landscape and irrigation plan by the director of parks, recreation and community services and shall be improved and maintained at all times in accordance with the following provisions: 
1.  Lots That Are Less Than One-Half Acre. For unimproved vacant lots that are less than one-half acre in size (21,780 square feet), the entire lot shall be improved and maintained in the following manner: 
a)  The property owner shall landscape the entire lot using drought tolerate or xeriscape material that requires little to no water after the first three years of growth. Durable, high quality, synthetic turf may also be used as an alternative. The landscape material selected shall be reviewed and approved to the satisfaction of the director of parks, recreation and community services prior to installation, per Section 13.42.120 of the Whittier Municipal Code. The ground cover shall be maintained in good condition at all times. 
b)  The lot shall be improved with an operable automatic irrigation system for the ground cover which shall be installed and maintained in good condition by the property owner at all times. 
c)  The lot shall be maintained free of litter, weeds, graffiti, debris, including the stockpiling of any material, at all times. Any on-site litter, weeds, debris or stockpiling of material shall be immediately removed by the property owner, upon discovery. The property owner or their designated representative shall be responsible for inspecting the property at reasonable intervals or take other steps to reasonably ensure that no litter, weeds, graffiti, debris or material stockpiling collects or is maintained on the lot. 
d)  Any dead or dying vegetation as well as any broken, malfunctioning or non-functioning irrigation components on the lot shall be replaced by the property owner within seventy-two hours of their discovery or notification. The property owner shall be responsible for inspecting the property at reasonable intervals, or take other steps to reasonably ensure that there is no dead or dying vegetation nor any broken, malfunctioning or non-functioning irrigation components on the lot. 
e)  At the discretion of the director of parks, recreation and community services the standards contained in Section 8.08.026(A)(2) (Lots that are one-half acre or greater) may be applied to vacant lots that are one-half acre or less if deemed appropriate to mitigate any one or more of the following circumstances: 
i)  To adequately secure the property from illegal dumping or other such illicit activities. 
ii)  Because of public safety concerns or hazards associated with the property. 
iii)  A declared state or regional drought. 
2.  Lots That Are One-Half Acre or Greater. For unimproved vacant lots that are one-half acre (21,780 square feet) or greater in size, the entire lot shall be improved and maintained in the following manner: 
a)  The property owner shall provide a minimum five-foot wide landscape planter adjacent to all public rights-of-way (except those property lines located immediately adjacent to an alley) that abut their vacant lot. 
b)  All landscape planters shall be improved with an operable automatic irrigation system. The landscape material selected shall consist of drought tolerate or xeriscape material that requires little to no water after the first three years of growth. Durable, high quality, synthetic turf may also be used as an alternative. The landscape material selected shall be reviewed and approved to the satisfaction of the director of parks, recreation and community services prior to installation, per Section 13.42.120 of the Whittier Municipal Code. The ground cover shall be maintained in good condition at all times. 
c)  All on-site landscaping and irrigation shall be maintained in good condition at all times by the property owner of the lot. Any dead or dying landscaping shall be replaced by the property owner within seventy-two hours of their discovery or notification, including any broken, malfunctioning or non-functioning irrigation components. The property owner shall be responsible for inspecting the property at reasonable intervals or take other steps to reasonably ensure that all of the landscaping and irrigation on the lot is maintained in good condition and there are no broken, malfunctioning or non-functioning irrigation components on the lot. 
d)  A six-foot high, view obscuring, decorative perimeter barrier shall be erected around the entire vacant lot, with a minimum five-foot wide perimeter landscape planter in front of the fencing. In circumstances where the director of parks, recreation and community services finds that a higher perimeter barrier is warranted for adequate security of the site and/or because of unusual topographical circumstances associated with the vacant lot, the perimeter barrier may be constructed up to a maximum of eight feet high. All perimeter barriers shall include a gravel pathway leading to a security gate to provide accessibility to the interior of the lot for the police department or other emergency personnel. A key or security code for the gate shall be provided to the Whittier Police Department by the property owner upon installation and shall be kept up-to-date at all times. 
e)  All decorative, view obscuring, perimeter barriers shall consist of either painted wood, redwood, woodcrete, green vinyl chain-link fencing with a green windscreen securely attached (along the interior of the fence), or any other durable, aesthetically attractive, material deemed acceptable to the director of parks, recreation and community services. On corner or reversed corner lots, all fencing shall comply with Section 18.64.050 for visual safety. 
f)  All perimeter barriers shall be maintained in good condition at all times by the property owner. Any on-site graffiti shall be removed by the property owner within seventy-two hours of its discovery or notification. The property owner shall be responsible for inspecting the property at reasonable intervals. 
B.  Improved Vacant Lots. Vacant lots improved with existing on-site buildings or structures that are vacant, abandoned, or un-leased for thirty days or more (as determined by the director of parks) shall be maintained by the property owner as follows: 
1.  All existing on-site landscaping and irrigation shall be maintained in good condition at all times and in accordance with the provisions contained in Chapters 8.08, 8.22 and 8.24 of this code, including any conditions of approval applied to the site as part of the approved vacant lot landscape and irrigation plan under Section 8.08.026(C). 
2.  Any dead or dying vegetation as well as any broken, malfunctioning or non-functioning irrigation components for the lot shall be replaced by the property owner within seventy-two hours of their discovery or notification. The property owner or their designated representative shall be responsible for inspecting the property at reasonable intervals, or take other steps to reasonably ensure that there is no dead or dying vegetation nor any broken, malfunctioning or non-functioning irrigation components on the lot. 
3.  The lot shall be maintained free of litter, weeds, and debris, including the stockpiling of any material, at all times. Any on-site litter, debris or stockpiling of material shall be immediately removed by the property owner, upon discovery or notification. The property owner or their designated representative shall be responsible for inspecting the property at reasonable intervals, or take other steps to reasonably ensure that no litter, weeds, graffiti, debris or material stockpiling collects or is maintained on the lot. 
4.  All on-site structures shall be maintained in good condition at all times. Damage to any on-site buildings or structures shall be abated within ten days by the property owner upon discovery. An alternative abatement period shall be required, if deemed necessary by the building official, to protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
5.  The lot shall be adequately secured at all times to prevent illegal dumping, criminal activity, vandalism, graffiti, on-site loitering by the homeless and any/all other attractive nuisances to the satisfaction of the director of parks, recreation and community services and the chief of police. 
C.  Vacant Lot Landscape and Irrigation Plan. Prior to the issuance of a demolition permit on any lot in which the construction of a new building, structure, parking lot, or impervious surface will not commence within thirty days after demolition, the property owner shall submit a vacant lot landscape and irrigation plan for review and approval of the director of parks, recreation and community services (with the appropriate plan check fees). The director of parks, recreation and community services may impose any reasonable conditions of approval on the vacant lot landscape and irrigation plan to ensure that the lot will be adequately maintained during the time that it is vacant. Upon approval of the plan, the landscape and irrigation improvements to the lot, as specified in the plan, shall be completed to the satisfaction of the director of parks, recreation and community services within thirty days after demolition. A reasonable extension of time may be granted by the director of parks, recreation and community services in those situations when the director, in his or her sole discretion, determines that a good faith effort is being made by the property owner to comply with the provisions of this section. 
1.  Appeal of Decision. 
a)  The decision of the director of parks, recreation and community services to approve, conditionally approve or deny any vacant lot landscape and irrigation plan may be appealed in writing to the city manager within fifteen calendar days. The decision of the city manager shall be final, unless appealed in writing to the city council within fifteen calendar days of the city manager's decision. All decisions of the city council shall be final. 
b)  At the sole discretion of the city council, the provisions contained within this ordinance may be made modified, as deemed appropriate, if a finding is made that the legal property owner has demonstrated an extreme financial hardship such as, but not limited to, the filing of bankruptcy, property tax default, their exists over six months of outstanding arrears to the monthly mortgage payment on the property, or any other extreme/unique hardship the city council believes is contrary to the purpose and intent of this ordinance. 
D.  View Obscuring Barriers and Fencing on Vacant Lots. There shall be no on-site fencing or view obscuring perimeter barriers that screen any vacant lot in any manner that obstructs vehicular and/or pedestrian visibility of the public right-of-way, or interferes with the public's use of the public right-of-way, as determined by the director of public works. The directors of public works and parks, recreation and community services shall approve the location and design of all vacant lot fencing and perimeter barriers prior to the construction of any such fencing or barriers on a vacant lot. 
E.  The director of parks, recreation and community services shall implement all applicable sections of Chapter 13.42 (Water Conservation in Landscaping), regardless of the size of the vacant lot, to ensure that the approved vacant lot landscape and irrigation plan conserves water to greatest extent possible, while preserving the health of the landscaping approved on the vacant lot. 
F.  Where a recorded easement on vacant lot exists, the director of parks, recreation and community services may require and/or permit the property owner to use an appropriate ground cover over the easement (i.e., gravel, turf block, paving or some other acceptable material) that would enable a vehicle to drive over the easement. Any impervious surface approved over an easement shall be subject to the prior written approval of the easement holder. 
G.  Implementation. All vacant lots, regardless of how they became vacant, that are existing at the time of the adoption of the ordinance shall be brought into immediate compliance with all applicable provisions of this section, unless currently landscaped and irrigated under a previously approved vacant lot and landscape and irrigation plan approved by the director of community development or director of parks, recreation and community services prior to the adoption of this current ordinance. A reasonable extension of time may be granted by the director of parks, recreation and community services in those situations when the director, at his or her sole discretion, determines that a good faith effort is being made by the property owner to comply with this section. 
H.  Noncompliance Declared Nuisance. Failure to comply with any of the applicable requirements in this section shall constitute a public nuisance, as designated in Section 8.08.030, and the city attorney or the district attorney may commence an action or proceeding for civil abatement, removal and enjoinment thereof, in the manner proscribed by law; and shall take other steps and apply to such courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as well as abate or remove the nuisance, including abatement in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2906 § 1, 2008) 
(Ord. No. 2928, § 1, 6-23-09; Ord. No. 2958, § 3, 10-12-10)  
8.08.030 - Nuisances designated. 
It is declared that a public nuisance exists on any real property in this city: 
A.  Which has thereon any substandard building or structure as defined by the Uniform Housing Code; or 
B.  Which has thereon any condition constituting substandard property as defined by this code; or 
C.  The topography or configuration of which, whether the natural state or as a result of grading operations, causes or will cause erosion, subsidence, surface water runoff problems, or other conditions which will, or may, be injurious to the public health, safety and welfare or to adjacent properties; or 
D.  Which has thereon any building or structure which has been constructed or is maintained in violation of any specific requirement or provision applicable to such building or structure, contained in the building or zoning regulations of this city, or any other law or ordinance of the city, county or state relating to the condition, location or use of any building or structure; or 
E.  For any violation or failure to comply with any applicable provision of Section 8.08.026 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2906 § 2, 2008; Ord. 2703 § 1 (part), 1997)  
8.08.040 - Abatement methods. 
All or any part of any real property, or any building or structure located thereon, found, as provided in this chapter, to constitute a public nuisance shall be abated by rehabilitation, demolition or repair pursuant to the procedures set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. 2703 § 1 (part), 1997)  
8.08.050 - Declaration of nuisance. 
Whenever the city manager finds that any real property, or any building or structure located thereon within the city, is being maintained contrary to the conditions of this chapter, he shall set the matter for public hearing before a hearing officer, who shall be designated as such by the city manager. The city manager may, with the concurrence of the city attorney, record an appropriate lis pendens, giving notice of the pendence of the proceeding. 
(Ord. 2703 § 1 (part), 1997)  
8.08.060 - Abatement hearing—Notice. 
A.  The hearing officer shall give ten days' written notice to the owner of the affected property of the time and place of the hearing, by United States Postal Service, postage prepaid, addressed to the owner at his last known address. The notice shall describe the premises involved by street address, referring to the street by the name under which it is officially or commonly known, and shall further describe the property by giving the lot and block number thereof, shall give a brief description of the conditions which are, or may be, contrary to the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  In addition, at least ten days prior to the date set for hearing, the hearing officer shall cause to be conspicuously posted on the affected premises a copy of the notice and shall cause to be served upon the person in possession of the affected property if applicable, a copy of the notice. 
C.  "Owner," as used in this section, includes any person in possession of the affected premises, and any person having or claiming to have, any legal or equitable interest in the premises, as disclosed by a title search from any accredited title company. The failure of any person to receive the notice shall not affect the validity of any proceedings under this chapter. 
(Ord. 2703 § 1 (part), 1997)  
8.08.070 - Abatement hearing—Procedure. 
A.  At the time and place set for the hearing, the hearing officer shall hear and consider all relevant evidence, including but not limited to, applicable staff reports, objections or protests relative to the existence of the alleged public nuisance and/or the manner proposed for abatement of them. The hearing may be continued from time to time, without further written notice. 
B.  Upon the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall, based upon the evidence presented at the hearing, determine whether the premises, or any part thereof, as maintained, constitutes a public nuisance, as defined in this chapter. If the hearing officer finds that a public nuisance exists, the hearing officer shall issue an order of abatement, which shall direct and order the nuisance abated within the time, and in the manner, set forth in the order. The hearing officer shall give notice of his determination by serving a copy of the order upon the owner of the property affected thereby, and from any person requesting a copy of the order. If the hearing officer finds a nuisance does not exist, he shall dismiss the proceedings. The determination of the hearing officer shall be final and conclusive in the absence of an appeal, perfected in the time and manner set forth in Section 8.08.080. 
(Ord. 2703 § 1 (part), 1997)  
8.08.080 - Appeal. 
A.  The owner, or any person in possession or claiming any legal or equitable interest therein, of any real property which is the subject of a proceeding pursuant to this chapter, may appeal the hearing officer's determination to the city council. Such an appeal shall be timely only if filed within fifteen calendar days from and after the giving of notice by the hearing officer of his determination. 
B.  The appeal shall be in writing, and shall set forth the grounds for the appeal. The appeal shall be filed with the city clerk-treasurer within the time permitted pursuant to this chapter. A filing and processing fee, if required by resolutions of the city council, shall be paid contemporaneously by the appealing party with the filing of the appeal with the city clerk-treasurer. Upon the receipt by the city clerk-treasurer of such an appeal, and the filing and processing fee, the clerk-treasurer shall prepare an administrative record which shall consist of a transcript of the proceedings before the hearing officer, copies of the written material submitted in the hearing, if any, and a copy of the hearing officer's determination. The administrative record, as certified by the city clerk-treasurer, shall be transmitted to each member of the city council by the clerk-treasurer, who also shall set a time and a place for the council's hearing upon the appeal. 
C.  At the time of the hearing, which shall be noticed by the clerk-treasurer in the manner set forth in Section 8.08.060, the city council shall permit any interested person to present written or oral arguments relating to the appeal, but shall not permit the introduction of any evidence, unless a showing is made by the offering party that the evidence could not reasonably have been presented to the hearing officer at the time and place of that hearing. Additionally, the city council may permit the presentation of evidence if the evidence is reasonably calculated to show that there has been a substantial change in the condition of the property since the time of the hearing held by the hearing officer. Thereafter, based upon the administrative record, the evidence as may be presented pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and the written or oral arguments of interested persons, the city council shall determine whether the property, in its then condition, constitutes a public nuisance within the meaning of this chapter. If it finds a public nuisance exists, it shall issue an order of abatement requiring the abatement thereof, in the time and manner set forth in the order; if it finds the nuisance does not exist, it shall dismiss the proceeding. The decision of the city council shall be final. 
(Ord. 2703 § 1 (part), 1997)  
8.08.090 - Abatement order service. 
A copy of the final order of abatement of the nuisance shall be served upon the owners of the property in accordance with the provisions of Section 8.08.060, together with a detailed list of needed corrections and/or abatement methods. Any owner shall have the right to have any such premises rehabilitated or to have the buildings or structures demolished or repaired in accordance with the abatement order, at the owner's expense; provided, it is done prior to the expiration of the time set for the abatement in the order. Upon compliance with the order of abatement by the owner, the proceedings under this chapter shall be deemed terminated. 
(Ord. 2703 § 1 (part), 1997)  
8.08.100 - City abatement. 
If the nuisance is not completely abated by the owner in the time and manner set forth in the order of abatement, the city manager shall cause the nuisance to be abated by city forces or private contract; entry upon the premises to which an order relates is expressly authorized for such purposes. 
(Ord. 2703 § 1 (part), 1997)  
8.08.110 - Abatement cost—Record. 
The city controller shall keep an accounting of the cost, including incidental expenses, of abatement of the nuisance for each separate lot, or parcel of land, where the work has been done pursuant to Section 8.08.100, and shall prepare an itemized report thereof, showing the cost of abatement, including salvage value, if applicable, for each separate lot or parcel of land. A copy of the report shall be posted for at least five days prior to the hearing thereon, referred to in Section 8.08.120, upon the affected property. The posting shall also include a notice of the time and place when the report shall be considered by the hearing officer for confirmation. A copy of the report and notice shall be served upon the owner of the property, in accordance with the provisions of Section 8.08.060, at least five days prior to the hearing thereon. Proof of the posting and service shall be made by declaration filed with the city clerk-treasurer. The term "incidental expenses" shall include, but not be limited to, the actual expenses and costs of the city in the conduct of proceedings under this chapter, preparation of notices, specifications and contracts, inspection of the work, the costs of printing and mailings required under this chapter, and administrative staff costs. 
(Ord. 2703 § 1 (part), 1997)  
8.08.120 - Abatement cost—Hearing. 
At the time and place fixed and noticed in the manner set forth in Section 8.08.060, for receiving and considering the report referred to in Section 8.08.110, the hearing officer shall hear and pass upon the report, as prepared by the city controller, together with any written or oral objections or protests, which must be presented at the hearing, by any of the persons liable to be assessed for the cost of abating the nuisance. Thereupon, the hearing officer shall make such revision, correction or modification to the report as is appropriate, after which the report as submitted, or as revised, corrected or modified, shall be confirmed by order of the hearing officer. The hearing may be continued from time to time without further written notice. The decision of the hearing officer on the report shall be final and conclusive, in the absence of an appeal, perfected in the time and manner set forth in Section 8.08.130. 
(Ord. 2703 § 1 (part), 1997)  
8.08.130 - Abatement cost—Appeal. 
The decision of the hearing officer, made pursuant to Section 8.08.120, shall be subject to an appeal in the time and manner set forth in this section. The hearing officer shall give notice of his determination relating to the report, referred to in Section 8.08.120, to all persons requesting it, and the owner of the property affected by the report. Within fifteen calendar days after the giving of the notice, any person aggrieved by the determination may appeal it to the city council in the time and in the manner prescribed in this section. Any such appeal shall be in writing, and shall be filed with the city clerk-treasurer within the fifteen-day period permitted by this section. At the time of the filing, the appealing party shall deposit with the clerk-treasurer a filing and processing fee if required by resolution of the city council. Thereafter, the clerk-treasurer shall transmit to the city council a copy of the report as submitted to the hearing officer, a summary of the evidence presented to the hearing officer with respect to the report, copies of any written material submitted at the hearing held by the hearing officer, together with a copy of the report as confirmed by the hearing officer; the material shall be designated as the administrative record in the proceeding. The city council shall set a time and place for hearing upon the appeal, and at the time and place shall consider the administrative record and any oral and written arguments that any interested person wishes to submit based upon the administrative record. No evidence shall be accepted by the city council unless a showing is made by the offering party that the evidence was not reasonably available at the time of the hearing before the hearing officer. The city council shall, thereafter, revise, correct or modify the determination of the hearing officer; and, as modified, corrected or revised, confirm the report. The determination of the city council shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. 2703 § 1 (part), 1997)  
8.08.140 - Abatement cost—Collection. 
The cost of abatement of a nuisance upon any lot or parcel of land shall, after its final confirmation by a hearing officer or the city council, constitute a special assessment against the property to which it relates, and, after the recording of the order of confirmation in the official records of the county recorder's office as thus made and confirmed, it shall constitute a lien on the property in the amount of the assessment. A copy of the order and report shall be transmitted to the assessor and tax collector for the city, whereupon it shall be the duty of the assessor and tax collector to add the amounts of the assessment, or assessments, to the next regular bills of ad valorem taxes levied against the respective lot and parcels of land, and thereafter the amounts shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary ad valorem property taxes are collected. 
(Ord. 2703 § 1 (part), 1997)  
8.08.150 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person who owns, leases, occupies or who has charge or occupancy of any real property located within the city, who maintains thereon a public nuisance, as described in this chapter or in Chapter 10.56, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, but may be prosecuted pursuant to Section 1.08.015 unless the maintenance of the nuisance is made an infraction by ordinance. Any person convicted of a misdemeanor or an infraction is punishable in accordance with the provisions of Sections 1.08.010 and/or 1.08.015. 
(Ord. 2703 § 1 (part), 1997)  
8.08.160 - Violation—Civil proceedings. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the city manager from ordering the city attorney to commence a civil action to abate a nuisance in addition, or as an alternative, to proceedings pursuant to this chapter and Chapter 10.56. 
(Ord. 2703 § 1 (part), 1997)  
8.08.170 - Summary abatement. 
Where any real property, or any building or structure within the city, in the opinion of the city manager, constitutes a public nuisance, within the meaning of this chapter, and by reason thereof, an immediate threat of injury to persons, or damage to property, exists, he shall order the condition abated by such means as may be reasonably required to eliminate the threat of injury or damage. Thereafter, he shall advise the city council and property owner of the actions taken and the reasons therefor. He shall commence a proceeding to recover the city's costs of abatement, pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 2703 § 1 (part), 1997)  
Chapter 8.12 - SOLID WASTE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3078 , § 2, adopted Sep. 26, 2017, amended the title of Ch. 8.12 to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 8.12 was titled "Refuse." 
 
8.12.010 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and phrases shall be construed as set forth in this section, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended: 
A.  "Approved recycling container" means the container supplied by and/or identified by the city or the authorized recycling contractor as the container into which recyclable materials shall be placed and which shall be located at the designated recycling collection location. 
B.  "Authorized recycling contractor" means a person, firm, partnership, corporation, or other entity authorized under virtue of an agreement contract with the city to collect recyclable materials within the city limits. 
C.  "Biohazardous waste" means any waste which may cause disease or reasonably be suspected of harboring pathogenic organisms; included are waste resulting from the operation of medical clinics, hospitals, and other facilities processing wastes which may consist of, but are not limited to, human and animal parts, contaminated bandages, pathological specimens, hypodermic needles, sharps, contaminated clothing and surgical gloves. 
D.  "CalRecycle" means the California Department of Resources Recycling and Recovery. 
E.  "Container" means commercial size bins, roll-off boxes, or residential size carts approved and provided the city or contractor for accumulation and collection of solid waste, recyclable materials and green waste, or other source-separated material from any premises within the city. 
F.  "Contractor" means an entity who has been granted an agreement granting to the entity the exclusive right to collect solid waste within certain specified areas of the city. 
G.  "Designated recycling collection location" means those place(s) that include, but are not limited to, curbside locations designated in the agreement between the city and the authorized recycling contractor from which the authorized recycling contractor has contracted to collect recyclable material. 
H.  "Electronic waste" means "covered electronic wastes" as defined in the Act (Section 42463 of Public Resources Code) including discarded electronic equipment such as, but not limited to, television sets, computer monitors, central processing units (CPUs), laptop computers, and peripherals (e.g., external computer hard drives, computer keyboards, computer mice, and computer printers), and other similar items commonly known as "brown goods" and "e-waste". 
I.  "Exempt waste" means biohazardous or biomedical waste, hazardous waste, sludge, stable matter, green waste or lumber that is more than six feet in length in its longest dimension or two feet in diameter, automobiles, automobile parts, boats, boat parts, boat trailers, internal combustion engines, lead-acid batteries, all wastes not authorized for disposal in a class III landfill and those wastes under the control of the nuclear regulatory commission. 
J.  "Green waste" means leaves, grass clippings, brush, branches, plant debris, weeds, pruning and other forms of organic waste generated from landscape and garden maintenance generated at the premises wherein the green waste is collected. Green waste does not include items herein defined as exempt waste or materials not normally produced form gardens or landscape areas, such as brick, rock, gravel, large quantities of dirt, concrete, sod, non-organic wastes, oil, and painted or treated wood products. 
K.  "Hazardous waste" means any waste material or mixture defined as a "hazardous waste pursuant to California law under Public Resources Code § 40141 or under federal law under 42 U.S.C. § 6903 (RCRA), or defined as a "hazardous substance" under 42 U.S.C. §§ 9601 (CERCLA), or as a "hazardous material" under California Health & Safety Code Section 25260, as such statutes may be amended from time to time. 
L.  For the purpose of this chapter, the term "premises" is defined as a lot or lots, and any building or buildings located thereon, which are under a single ownership or occupancy. 
M.  "Recyclable material" means materials which have a market value and are source-separated from other solid waste for the purpose of recycling, such as, but not limited to, paper, newsprint, printed matter, pasteboard, paper containers, cardboard, glass, aluminum, polyethylene terephthalate and other plastics, beverage containers, compostable materials and such other materials designated by the city manager or CalRecycle as recyclable. 
N.  "Refuse" means putrescible and non-putrescible solid waste. 
O.  "Solid waste" means all "solid waste" as defined under California Public Resources Code § 40191, as such may be amended from time to time and includes discarded putrescible and non-putrescible solid, semisolid, and liquid wastes, including refuse, construction and demolition debris, bulky waste, recyclable materials, food waste, and green waste, or any combination thereof which are permitted to be disposed of in a class III landfill, and which are included in the definition of "non-hazardous solid waste" set forth in the California Code of Regulations. 
P.  "Universal waste" means all waste defined by Title 22, Subsections 66273.1 through 66273.9 of the California Code of Regulations. These include, but are not limited to, batteries, fluorescent light bulbs, mercury switches, and electronic waste. 
Q.  "White goods" means inoperative and discarded refrigerators, microwave ovens, ranges, water heaters, freezers, and other similar household appliances. 
(Ord. 2582 § 1, 1992; Amended during 1983 codification; prior code § 5210) 
( Ord. No. 3028, § 2 , 4-14-15; Ord. No. 3078 , § 2, 9-26-17)  
8.12.020 - Sanitary zones. 
The council, in its discretion, may make and pursuant to the provisions of this chapter establish, create and divide the city into sanitary zones for the purpose of regulating, collecting and disposing of solid waste. The sanitary zones shall be fixed, determined and created by the council by written resolution duly adopted by the council. 
(Amended during 1984 codification; prior code § 5210.17) 
(Ord. No. 3078 , § 2, 9-26-17)  
8.12.030 - Landfill. 
Savage Canyon landfill, owned and operated by the city, does not accept illegal materials, hazardous waste, biohazardous waste, universal waste, exempt waste, white goods, electronic waste, whole or shredded tires, contaminated soil, mattresses, box springs or green waste. Uncontaminated soil acceptance must be preapproved. 
(Ord. 2791 § 1, 2001: Ord. 2696 § 1, 1995: amended during 1984 codification; prior code § 5210.16) 
( Ord. No. 3028, § 2 , 4-14-15; Ord. No. 3078 , § 2, 9-26-17; Ord. No. 3083 , § 2, 1-23-18)  
8.12.040 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3078 , § 3, adopted Sep. 26, 2017, repealed § 8.12.040, which pertained to collection charges—fixing and derived from prior code, § 5210.18; an amendment made during the 1984 codification; Ord. 2445, § 1, adopted in 1988; Ord. 2758, § 1, adopted in 1999; and Ord. No. 2964, § 1, adopted April 12, 2011.  
8.12.050 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3078 , § 3, adopted Sep. 26, 2017, repealed § 8.12.050, which pertained to collection charges—collection and deposit and derived from prior code, § 5210.19; an amendment made during the 1984 codification; Ord. 2445, § 2, adopted in 1988; and Ord. 2758, § 2, adopted in 1999.  
8.12.060 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3078 , § 3, adopted Sep. 26, 2017, repealed § 8.12.060, which pertained to collection charges—method of collecting and derived from prior code, § 5210.22; an amendment made during the 1984 codification; Ord. 2445, § 3, adopted in 1988; Ord. 2758, §§ 3, 4, adopted in 1999; and Ord. No. 3028 , § 2, adopted April 14, 2015.  
8.12.070 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3078 , § 3, adopted Sep. 26, 2017, repealed § 8.12.070, which pertained to collection charges—payment required and derived from prior code, § 5210.24; and Ord. 2758, § 5, adopted in 1999.  
8.12.080 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3078 , § 3, adopted Sep. 26, 2017, repealed § 8.12.080, which pertained to collection charges—failure to pay and derived from prior code, § 5210.23; an amendment made during the 1984 codification; and Ord. 2758, § 6, adopted in 1999.  
8.12.090 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3078 , § 3, adopted Sep. 26, 2017, repealed § 8.12.090, which pertained to collection charges—responsibility for payment and derived from prior code, § 5210.8; Ord. 2757, § 1, adopted in 1999; Ord. No. 3028 , § 2, adopted April 14, 2015; and Ord. No. 3043, § 2, adopted Oct. 27, 2015.  
8.12.100 - Transporting. 
A.  No person shall collect, carry, convey or transport solid waste on or through any street, alley or public place in the city, except: 
1.  A person who is an employee of the city; 
2.  An employee of an authorized contractor of the city; or 
3.  A person responsible for generation of the solid waste from any residential unit, commercial or industrial business within the city. 
B.  No person shall haul, carry or transport any solid waste through the city or along or over any public street or public place in the city except in motor vehicles that are so constructed and maintained that the contents thereof will not be odorous. The motor vehicles shall be so loaded and operated that none of their contents will fall or spill therefrom, and every vehicle used for such purpose shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. Should such transportation cause leakage or deposit of said materials on or along city streets, public rights-of-way or other city property, the transporter shall be responsible for the cost of removal. 
C.  City, Contractor or Licensee. To protect public health, safety and welfare and to control vectors, the collection, removal and disposal of all solid waste and recyclables shall be performed exclusively by the city under the supervision of the public works director. The city may use, for such purpose, city personnel or enter into contracts with any person with or without advertising for bids, or both. The public works director may authorize any person to collect, remove and dispose of refuse and/or recyclables under such terms, conditions and limitations deemed necessary in the interest of public health, safety and welfare. 
D.  Self-Hauler Permit. A resident or property owner responsible for the generation or accumulation of solid waste and/or recyclables on their premise in the city may apply for a self-hauler permit for their premise. Such person shall be liable for the payment of permit application in the sum of one thousand dollars, business license fee, and file a surety bond in the sum of one thousand dollars conditioned upon compliance with the terms, conditions and limitations of the permit. The self-hauler permit is non-transferable. 
All city-provided solid waste and recycling containers shall be returned to the city. All contractor-provided refuse and recycling containers shall be returned to the contractor. Upon receipt of a self-hauler permit, the permittee shall furnish a copy of registration of the vehicle and receipt as proof of ownership of any roll-off bin to be used in transporting the solid waste and/or recyclable material. 
E.  A resident or property owner responsible for the generation of solid waste and/or recyclables for their premises in the city shall keep such premises in a clean and sanitary condition, and shall not cause or permit any solid waste to accumulate on the premises for a period in excess of more than fourteen days. 
F.  Self-hauler Reporting. Self-haulers shall, on a monthly basis, report to the city's department of public works the type, quantity, volume, weight and destination of the solid waste and/or recyclables removed and shall, on a monthly basis, provide the city with copies of disposal receipts. The public works director may suspend a permit for violation of any of the terms, conditions, or limitations thereof. Upon the termination or suspension of a self-hauler permit, the public works director is authorized to require such person to receive and pay the costs of receiving solid waste services from the city and/or the public works director may take any other actions deemed necessary in order to ensure that solid waste generated or accumulated on each premise is properly removed. 
G.  Gardeners. Any person engaged in the business of gardening is authorized to collect, remove, and dispose of green waste as may be required in such business. 
(Ord. 2869 § 25, 2006; Ord. 2827 § 1, 2003; Ord. 2791 § 2, 2001; Ord. 2758 § 7, 1999: prior code §§ 5210.4, 5210.5) 
(Ord. No. 3078 , § 2, 9-26-17)  
8.12.110 - Solid waste containers. 
It shall be the duty of every person (hereafter "customer") in possession or having the care or control of any premises in the city where solid waste accumulates or exists, to cause all such solid waste to be placed and kept in containers as specified in this code. 
A.  Containers in Automated Solid Waste Collection Areas. Customers whose premises are located in areas designated by the city manager to be served by an automated solid waste collection program shall place their solid waste in containers only in conformity with the following: 
1.  Materials resulting from commercial landscaping or building construction, demolition, alteration or repair such as, but not limited to dirt and sod, rock, brick, concrete, plaster, roofing materials, lumber, construction metal, and large appliances, must not be placed in automated solid waste containers or solid waste compactors. For disposal of such materials, temporary use of bins and/or roll-off containers are available through an authorized contractor of the city. Temporary use of bins and/or roll-off containers provided from other than an authorized contractor of the city is prohibited and shall be impounded. 
2.  Unauthorized use of alley automated containers is prohibited. Alley automated containers are, by their placement, designated for use by residents or businesses in close proximity to the containers. Use of automated alley containers by anyone other than those herein specified is prohibited. 
3.  The public works director or designee may, for good cause, permit the use of other types of containers serving the premises including, but not limited to, semiautomated metal dumpsters having a capacity of one cubic yard or greater and containers not exceeding a capacity of thirty-three gallons, provided such latter containers comply with the provisions of subsection B of this section. 
B.  Non-Automated Solid Waste Collection Areas. All residents shall utilize the automated collection system except those permitted otherwise by the director of public works or his designee. The permitted usage of manually-collected containers shall have a capacity not to exceed thirty-three gallons each and shall not exceed fifty pounds in weight per container when loaded, including the weight of the container. 
C.  Restaurant Food Waste. Restaurant-generated food waste must be placed in closed plastic bags prior to depositing into any solid waste container or compactor for disposal. Restaurant-generated food waste placed in a commercial organics recycling container will follow the recycling program guidelines. 
D.  Solid Waste Compactor. The public works director may, for good cause, require the use of a solid waste compactor compatible with the appropriate solid waste collection equipment. 
(Ord. No. 3078 , § 2, 9-26-17) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3078 , § 2, adopted Sep. 26, 2017, amended § 8.12.110 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 8.12.110 pertained to refuse containers and derived from prior code, § 5210.2; Ord. 2430, § 1, adopted in 1988; Ord. 2758, §§ 8—10, adopted in 1999; Ord. No. 2791, § 2, adopted in 2001; Ord. No. 2848, § 1, adopted in 2004; Ord. No. 3028 , § 2, adopted April 14, 2015; and Ord. No. 3043 , § 2, adopted Oct. 27, 2015.  
8.12.120 - Containers for medical materials. 
Containment, storage and disposal of medical waste shall be in compliance with the Medical Waste Management Act (California Health and Safety Code, Sections 117600-118360). 
(Ord. No. 3078 , § 2, 9-26-17) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3078 , § 2, adopted Sep. 26, 2017, amended § 8.12.120 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 8.12.120 pertained to receptacles for medical materials and derived from prior code, § 5210.2; and Ord. 2758, § 11, adopted in 1999.  
8.12.130 - Placement of containers—Non-automated solid waste collection. 
Solid Waste containers in areas not included in an automated solid waste collection program shall be placed and maintained as follows: 
A.  Such solid waste containers shall at all times be kept upon private premises in accordance with the provisions of this code, except: 
1.  When placed at authorized locations for collection; or 
2.  When otherwise directed by the director of public works or designee. 
B.  Approved locations for curb or alley collection of such solid waste containers shall be as follows: 
1.  Curb Collection. For premises not served by an alley: Containers shall be placed within the public parkway, but not within the sidewalk areas, except in those locations where the sidewalk abuts the curb. The containers shall not be placed in or upon the roadway of any street. 
2.  Alley Collection. For all premises served by an alley: Containers shall be placed for collection within a distance not to exceed five feet of the right-of-way line of the alley abutting the premises served. Containers shall not be placed within any portion of any alley, except where the location is approved, for good cause, by the public works director or designee. 
(Ord. No. 3078 , § 2, 9-26-17) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3078 , § 2, adopted Sep. 26, 2017, amended § 8.12.130 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 8.12.130 pertained to placement of containers—non-automated refuse collection and derived from prior code, § 5210.6; and Ord. 2430, § 2, adopted in 1988.  
8.12.132 - Placement of containers—Automated solid waste collection program. 
Solid Waste containers on premises included in an automated solid waste collection program area shall be placed and maintained as follows: 
A.  For premises served by an alley: all residences served with the three-container system for solid waste and recycling shall place these containers on their private property, but not necessarily out of public view. These containers shall not be placed within the right-of-way of an alley. For those units served with three hundred-gallon containers, the public works director or designee will designate an area for the containers. The director of public works or his designee may permit placement of solid waste and recycling containers in the public right-of-way in an alley only under unusual circumstances that render it impossible to retain the containers on private property. 
B.  For premises not served by an alley: solid waste containers shall at all times remain on private property, out of public view from the public right-of-way, except when placed at approved locations for collection. "Approved locations for collection," for the purposes of this subsection, shall be within the roadway with container wheels against the curb abutting the premises served. 
(Ord. No. 3078 , § 2, 9-26-17) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3078 , § 2, adopted Sep. 26, 2017, amended § 8.12.132 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 8.12.132 pertained to placement of containers—automated refuse collection program and derived from Ord. 2430, § 3, adopted in 1988; Ord. 2791, § 3, adopted in 2001; and Ord. No. 2794, § 1, adopted in 2001; Ord. No. 3028 , § 2, adopted April 14, 2015; and Ord. No. 3043 , § 2, adopted Oct. 27, 2015.  
8.12.135 - Infractions. 
It is a violation of this code, punishable as an infraction, for any person: 
A.  To keep or maintain a solid waste container at any location not permitted pursuant to the provisions of this code; 
B.  To damage or destroy any city-owned or contractor-owned solid waste container, or a solid waste container owned by any other person; 
C.  To move a city-owned or contractor-owned solid waste container in an area included within an automated solid waste collection program; 
D.  To fail to place restaurant-generated food waste in closed plastic bags prior to disposal or failure to follow the commercial organics recycling program guidelines when placing restaurant-generated food waste in a commercial organics recycling container; 
E.  To place any prohibited waste, such as commercial landscape waste, construction and demolition waste, or hazardous waste in alley automated containers; 
F.  For any unauthorized person to use an alley automated container to dispose of solid waste; and 
G.  To violate any part of Sections 8.12.160 and 8.12.170 of this code. 
(Ord. 2758 § 12, 1999; Ord. 2430 § 4, 1988) 
(Ord. No. 3078 , § 2, 9-26-17)  
8.12.140 - Collection times. 
No person shall place any such container for collection, except on the day designated by the city for collection of refuse from the premises. The city designated collection day is the twenty-four-hour period from six p.m. the day before to six p.m. the day of collection. Any container which is placed for collection contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to be a public nuisance and shall be issued a citation. 
(Ord. No. 3078 , § 2, 9-26-17) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3078 , § 2, adopted Sep. 26, 2017, amended § 8.12.140 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 8.12.140 pertained to collection times and impoundment of receptacles and derived from prior code § 5210.7; and Ord. No. 3028 , § 2, adopted April 14, 2015.  
8.12.150 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3078 , § 3, adopted Sep. 26, 2017, repealed § 8.12.150, which pertained to inspection of receptacles and derived from prior code, § 5210.11.  
8.12.160 - Interference with containers. 
A.  Ownership of Recyclable Material. Upon the placement of recyclable material at a designated recycling collection location, the recyclable material shall become the property of the authorized recycling contractor. 
B.  Unauthorized Collection Prohibited. No person, other than an authorized recycling contractor, shall remove recyclable material which has been placed at a designated recycling collection location. 
Any and each violation hereof from one or more designated recycling collection locations shall constitute a separate and distinct offense punishable as provided in subsection E of this section. 
C.  Approved Recycling Containers—Ownership and Unauthorized Removal. It is unlawful for a person other than the (1) resident of the premises or his/her designee; or (2) the city; or (3) an authorized agent of the city; or (4) the authorized recycling contractor, to remove any approved recycling container from the designated recycling collection location. 
D.  Right of Individual to Dispose of Recyclable Material. Nothing in this chapter shall limit the right of an individual person, organization, or other entity to donate, sell, or otherwise dispose of recyclable material, provided that any such disposal does not violate any provisions of this chapter. 
E.  Violations and Penalties. Violations of any part of this section shall be an infraction pursuant to Section 1.08.010 of this code. 
F.  Enforcement. Nothing in this chapter precludes a local authority from using employees to enforce this chapter. This authority shall be in addition to the authority granted to police officers. 
G.  Civil Action by Authorized Recycling Contractor. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to limit the right of the authorized recycling contractor to bring a civil action against any person who violates the above described sections of this chapter, nor shall a conviction for such violation exempt any person from a civil action brought by an authorized recycling contractor. 
H.  No person other than the owner or person entitled to use a container, an employee of the city, the agent or employee of a contractor, shall interfere in any manner with any solid waste container or the contents thereof, remove any such container from the location where it was placed by the owner or person entitled to possession thereof, or remove the contents from any such container. 
(Ord. No. 3078 , § 2, 9-26-17) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3078 , § 2, adopted Sep. 26, 2017, amended § 8.12.160 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 8.12.160 pertained to interference with receptacles and derived from prior code § 5210.3; Ord. 2582, § 2, adopted in 1992; Ord. No. 2758, § 13, adopted in 1999; and Ord. No. 3028 , § 2, adopted April 14, 2015.  
8.12.170 - Deposits of solid waste. 
A.  No person shall permit or allow any deposit or accumulation of any solid waste in or upon any lot or upon any public or private drive, alley or street, or in any building, or any other public or private place within the city, except as provided in this code. 
B.  No person shall keep, deposit or allow to accumulate any solid waste upon any premises for more than fourteen days. 
C.  All material not included within the definition of solid waste, accumulated in, or at any premises shall be removed and disposed of by the owner of the property. 
(Ord. No. 3078 , § 2, 9-26-17) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3078 , § 2, adopted Sep. 26, 2017, amended § 8.12.170 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 8.12.170 pertained to deposits of refuse and derived from prior code §§ 5210.1, 5210.12, 5210.14; and Ord. No. 2758, § 14, adopted in 1999.  
8.12.190 - Depositing sewage. 
A.  No person shall permit the contents of any cesspool, septic tank or water closet, sewer or sewage effluent, excrement, urine, slop water, butcher shop offal, refuse, rubbish, cans or any dead animal, dead fowl or putrid or offensive animal or vegetable matter or other type of solid waste to remain or be deposited or discharged upon the surface of the ground or upon any premises, lot or in any building, basement or in any public street, or into any standing water, stream or excavation or public place. 
B.  Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to prohibit the depositing of solid waste in any lawfully existing public landfill. 
(Ord. No. 3078 , § 2, 9-26-17)  
8.12.200 - Burying. 
No person shall bury solid waste on or in any publicly or privately owned real property in the city. 
(Ord. No. 3078 , § 2, 9-26-17)  
8.12.210 - Tree trimmings. 
A resident must schedule collection of overflow greenwaste which does not fit into a green automated container with the city's franchise recycler for collection on their regular trash day. The city shall not collect nor shall it be required to remove any tree cuttings or trimmings or any orchard or nursery where the total area of the orchard or nursery exceeds one-fourth acre. Scheduled spe cial collection of trimmings for residential areas must be tied securely in bundles and placed at either the curb or in the alley, whichever is the normally designated trash collection area on trash day. Bundles must not exceed two feet in diameter and four feet in length. Tree limbs and stumps must not be larger than four feet in length and four inches in diameter or exceed seventy-five pounds in weight. 
(Ord. 2791 § 4, 2001: prior code § 5210.13)  
8.12.220 - Administration. 
The director of public works or his designee is authorized and directed to administer the provisions of this chapter subject to the rules and regulations required in this chapter to be adopted and established by the council. 
(Ord. 2758 § 15, 1999: amended during 1983 codification; prior code § 5210.25)  
Chapter 8.16 - BURIALS 
 
8.16.010 - Cemetery use prohibited. 
A.  There has been presented to the council evidence, both oral and documentary, concerning the conditions of the cemeteries within the city and the conditions of the graves, tombstones and general surroundings thereof in the cemetery. 
B.  After considering the evidence and investigating the conditions, the council now finds and determines that the burial of the human dead in the Mount Olive Cemetery and the Clark Cemetery, located on West Broadway Street in the city, is dangerous and detrimental to the life, health, peace and safety of the citizens of this city, and that burials within the city should be discontinued and prohibited. 
(Prior code § 5500)  
8.16.020 - Findings. 
The burial of the human dead within the corporate limits of the city is found to be and is declared to be dangerous and detrimental to public health, peace and safety of the citizens of the city and the continued burial of the human dead within the corporate limits of the city will greatly impair the public health, peace and safety of the citizens. 
(Prior code § 5500.1)  
8.16.030 - Burials prohibited. 
Except as provided in this chapter, no person shall, either directly or indirectly bury or inter the dead body of any person in any cemetery, grave, burial ground or other place within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Prior code § 5500.2)  
Chapter 8.20 - BEEKEEPING 
 
8.20.010 - Prohibited. 
No person shall keep, own or control bees in hives or otherwise in the city. 
(Prior code § 4260.72)  
Chapter 8.22 - GRAFFITI ABATEMENT FEES AND PROCEDURE 
 
8.22.010 - Findings and purpose. 
The city council of the city finds and declares that: 
A.  The enlistment of business owners' active resistance to graffiti could be emphasized as a key element in combating graffiti crime. 
B.  In the past, the city has provided unlimited, free graffiti removal services. While this is a tremendous service to city businesses, and benefits the overall community in terms of eradicating graffiti, it provides no incentive to businesses to deal directly with the problem and formulate their own ideas, solutions and defense strategies as to how to avoid being victimized. 
C.  With the current economic crises, and the resulting reduction in number of staff directly assigned to graffiti abatement, it is essential that the city develop new approaches to reinforcing the program and maintaining and increasing its effectiveness. 
D.  Given the reduction in resources, the perpetual providing of free and unlimited graffiti abatement service, as the city's only approach to graffiti crime, is no longer an effective approach in and of itself. Other supportive policies must be developed and implemented. 
E.  The purpose of the provisions of this chapter is to provide an alternative method for graffiti abatement through the establishment of graffiti abatement fees to be applied to businesses within the city. 
(Ord. 2593 § 1 (part), 1993)  
8.22.020 - Declared a public nuisance. 
Any graffiti placed and/or existing upon publicly or privately owned permanent structures located on publicly or privately owned real property within the city is declared to be indecent and offensive to the sense, thereby constituting a public nuisance. Such graffiti if not so removed as provided in this chapter, shall be abated as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 2593 § 1 (part), 1993)  
8.22.030 - Removal policy. 
A.  The city shall provide graffiti abatement services to a business within the city. The graffiti shall be removed free of charge provided that requests for the same do not exceed four per property with the same owner. 
B.  Where a business requires graffiti removal more than four times, the owner of such property may abate said nuisance by independent means or request removal by the city. 
(Ord. 2593 § 1 (part), 1993)  
8.22.040 - Fee required. 
A.  Where an owner of commercial property requests graffiti removal pursuant to Section 8.22.030(B) of this chapter, the owner shall be required to pay a fee for such services. 
B.  Fees established by this section shall also apply where city abatement is mandated pursuant to Section 8.22.090 of this chapter. 
C.  Fees established herein shall be set periodically by resolution of the city council. Such fees shall include but are not limited to labor, procedural and overhead costs. 
(Ord. 2593 § 1 (part), 1993)  
8.22.050 - Payment of fees. 
A.  Fees established pursuant to Section 8.22.040 of this chapter and set by resolution of the city council shall be made in a timely fashion. Where an owner of commercial property has requested graffiti abatement services and fails to make payment for the same, fees shall be assessed against the property as set forth in Section 8.22.100 of this chapter. 
B.  Where graffiti abatement has been mandated pursuant to Section 8.22.090 of this chapter, the owner of the affected property may render payment of fees established by Section 8.22.040, in order to avoid subsequent assessment against said property. 
(Ord. 2593 § 1 (part), 1993)  
8.22.055 - Waiver of fees. 
The director of public works shall waive fees at his/her discretion, if he/she determines that the owner of the property/business is taking and continuing to take actions that prevent graffiti on his/her property. 
(Ord. 2593 § 1 (part), 1993)  
8.22.060 - Notice to remove. 
Whenever a graffiti incident is reported to the city and the affected business has already received the graffiti abatement services as provided by Section 8.22.030, and the owner does not abate said nuisance by independent means or request removal by the city, notice to remove such graffiti shall be given pursuant to Section 8.22.070 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2593 § 1 (part), 1993)  
8.22.070 - Form and manner of notice. 
Notice shall be given by posting in a conspicuous place upon or in front of the affected property. The notice shall be headed "NOTICE TO CLEAN PREMISES" in letters not less than one inch in height and, in legible characters, shall direct the removal of the graffiti, and refer to this chapter for further particulars. The notice shall be in substantially the following form: 
NOTICE TO CLEAN PREMISES 
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN THAT UNDER THE PROVISION OF CHAPTER 8.22 OF THE WHITTIER MUNICIPAL CODE, GRAFFITI IS EXISTING UPON THE FOLLOWING DESCRIBED PROPERTY: (GIVE ADDRESS) AND THAT IT CONSTITUTES A PUBLIC NUISANCE WHICH MUST BE ABATED. IF REMOVAL OF THE GRAFFITI IS NOT MADE WITHIN THREE (3) DAYS FROM THE DATE OF THIS NOTICE, THE SAME SHALL BE REMOVED BY THE CITY, AND THE COST OF THE REMOVAL ASSESSED UPON THE PROPERTY FROM WHICH THE GRAFFITI IS REMOVED AND THE ASSESSED COST WILL CONSTITUTE A LIEN UPON SUCH LAND UNTIL PAID. ALL PERSONS HAVING ANY OBJECTION TO THE PROPOSED REQUIRED REMOVAL MAY APPEAL TO THE CITY COUNCIL, IN WRITING, WITHIN THREE (3) DAYS FROM THE DATE OF THIS NOTICE. 
DATED: _____ 
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS 
CITY OF WHITTIER 
(Ord. 2593 § 1 (part), 1993)  
8.22.080 - Appeal. 
Within three days from the date of the notice, the owner or any other person interested in the property, land or lots affected by said notice may appeal to the city manager. The city manager shall hear and pass upon the appeal, and the decision of the city manager thereon shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. 2593 § 1 (part), 1993)  
8.22.090 - Abatement by city. 
A.  If within three days from the date of notice, the graffiti has not been removed from the premises in question as directed by the notice or by the city manager on appeal, the director of public works shall cause the same to be removed and may enter upon private property for the purpose of so doing. 
B.  If an appeal has been made to the city manager within three days from the date of the notices and if, upon appeal, the requirements of the original notice have been reversed, the city shall be responsible for any costs incurred as a result of action taken pursuant to Section 8.22.090(a) of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2593 § 1 (part), 1993)  
8.22.100 - Assessment—Lien. 
The director of public works shall keep or cause to be kept in his office a permanent record showing the legal description, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll of the county of Los Angeles, of each piece of property from which graffiti has been removed at city expense under the provisions of this chapter. The record book shall show any and all expenses incurred by the city in the removal of the graffiti as such expense relates to each separate property ownership. Said expenses are to be based on the fee established by Section 8.22.040 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2593 § 1 (part), 1993)  
8.22.110 - Appeal from assessment. 
Between the first and the seventh day of July of each year, the director of public works shall cause to be published in the official newspaper of the city, a notice that any person affected or aggrieved by any act or determination of the director of public works or of the city manager in connection with the provisions of this chapter may appeal to the city council. An appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed with the city clerk prior to the fifteenth day of July. At the next regular meeting of the city council after the fifteenth day of July, or from time to time thereafter as may be determined by the council, the council shall hear and pass upon each appeal, and the determination by the council thereupon shall be final and conclusive. In the event any determination of the director of public works is modified by determination of the city council or any assessment changed or corrected, the director of public works shall cause the correction to be made upon other record showing the assessment. 
(Ord. 2638 § 2, 1994: Ord. 2593 § 1 (part), 1993)  
8.22.120 - Cost assessment—Entry on the tax roll. 
At the expiration of the time for appeal, or upon the determination by the city council of all appeals so filed, and in compliance with the requirements of any determination so made, the director of public works shall deliver to the city clerk an abstract of the entries of the permanent record in which the director has shown each assessment for the preceding fiscal year. The abstract shall show the property affected and the amount charged against such property. The city clerk, prior to August 10th of each year, shall deliver to the county auditor of the county of Los Angeles the amount of each such charge to be placed upon the assessment roll against the respective lots, and thereafter the charges shall be of the same character and effect, subject to the same penalties, and shall be collected in the same manner and at the same time as city taxes. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any piece of property or land or lot if the charge against it has been paid prior to the delivery to the city clerk of the abstract. In that event, an appropriate entry shall be made in the record book by the director of public works showing that the charge had been paid. 
(Ord. 2593 § 1 (part), 1993)  
8.22.130 - Proof of notice. 
Proof of the posting, serving in person or mailing of any notice, order or determination provided for in this chapter shall be by affidavit of the person performing the duty, and the affidavit shall specify the time when the duty was performed. It shall be the duty of the director of public works to keep such affidavits among the official records in his office. 
(Ord. 2593 § 1 (part), 1993)  
8.22.140 - Refund conditions—Payments under protest. 
A.  Any assessment or any portion of an assessment levied pursuant to the provisions of this chapter which, either before or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, has been paid more than once, erroneously or illegally collected, paid in excess of the amount chargeable, or was not chargeable to the person or property paying the same under the provisions of this chapter, by reason of a clerical error of the employees or officials to the city, may be refunded by order of the city council in the same manner, to the same extent and under the same conditions as, at or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, are provided by the city for refund of payments of general taxes, at any time after the abstract of charges, taken from the record book of the director of public works, has been delivered to the county assessor and entered upon the assessment books. 
B.  The owner of any property assessed who may claim that the assessment is void in whole or in part may pay the same under protest. The protest shall be in writing, shall be received by the city clerk on or before March 1st after the tax becomes due and payable, and shall specify whether the whole or any part of the assessment is void and the grounds upon which such claim is founded. An owner, after making payment under protest, may recover the same in the manner and under the conditions provided in Section 39585 of the Government Code of the state of California. 
(Ord. 2593 § 1 (part), 1993)  
8.22.150 - Application. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply only to owners of commercial property within the city. 
(Ord. 2593 § 1 (part), 1993)  
8.22.160 - Definitions. 
"Graffiti" shall be as defined in Section 53069.3 of the California Government Code. 
(Ord. 2593 § 1 (part), 1993)  
Chapter 8.24 - WEED ABATEMENT 
 
8.24.005 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the provisions of this chapter is to provide an alternative method for the removal of noxious weeds, rubbish or other materials from private properties located within the city. 
(Ord. 2388 § 1 (part), 1986)  
8.24.007 - Duty of property owner. 
The owner of each lot in the city shall be responsible for the maintenance of all public rights-of-way which abut such lot, other than portions of public streets or alleys which are utilized for vehicular parking or traffic. The lot owner's obligation shall be to maintain such rights-of-way so that the same do not become a public nuisance; such maintenance duty shall include, but not be limited to, the obligation to remove therefrom weeds, rubbish or other materials which may constitute a fire hazard or a refuge for rats or other vermin or which may produce pollen which is or may be injurious to the health, safety or welfare of persons, or which is otherwise dangerous or injurious to adjacent real properties. 
(Ord. 2388 § 1 (part), 1986)  
8.24.010 - Unsafe conditions. 
No person, whether the same be the owner, agent or person in control of any inhabited or uninhabited lot, piece or parcel of land within the city, shall maintain such premises or allow the same to be maintained in a condition in which weeds, rubbish or any materials exist on said premises, which constitute a fire hazard or which may provide a refuge for rats or other vermin, or may produce pollen which is injurious to the health, safety or welfare of residents of the vicinity, or which otherwise is dangerous or injurious to neighboring property or the health or welfare of residents of the vicinity. The existence of any condition prohibited by this section is declared to be a public nuisance. 
(Ord. 2388 § 1 (part), 1986)  
8.24.020 - Notice to remove. 
Whenever the director of public works shall find that a condition prohibited by Section 8.24.010 exists upon any lot, piece or parcel of land, or upon any street, alley, sidewalk or right-of-way abutting such lot, piece or parcel of land, he shall give or cause to be given, in the manner provided in Section 8.24.030, a notice to remove such weeds, rubbish or other material. 
(Ord. 2388 § 1 (part), 1986)  
8.24.030 - Form and manner of notice. 
Notice shall be given by posting in a conspicuous place upon or in front of the lot, piece or parcel of land on which, or upon the street, alley, sidewalk, or right-of-way adjacent to which, such weeds, rubbish or other material may be. The notice shall be headed "NOTICE TO CLEAN PREMISES" in letters not less than one inch in height and, in legible characters, shall direct the removal of weeds, rubbish or other material as the case may be, and refer to this chapter for further particulars. The notice shall be in substantially the following form: 
NOTICE TO CLEAN PREMISES 
Notice hereby is given that under the provisions of Chapter 8.24 of the Whittier Municipal Code, noxious and dangerous weeds and/or rubbish, refuse and dirt are existing upon or in front of the following described property: (give the address or, if posting a whole street, the name of the street) and that they constitute a public nuisance which must be abated. If removal of the weeds, rubbish, refuse and dirt is not made within ten (10) days from the date of this notice, the same shall be removed by the City, and the cost of the removal assessed upon the land from which, or in front of which, the weeds, rubbish, refuse, and dirt are removed and the assessed cost will constitute a lien upon such land until paid. All persons having any objection to the proposed required removal may appeal to the City Council, in writing, within ten (10) days from the date of this notice. 
Dated this ___ day of _______. 
Director of Public Works 
City of Whittier 
As an alternative to the posting of notice, the notice required herein may be given by personal service on the owner, agent or person in control of such lot, piece or parcel of land, or by mailing the notice by depositing it in the United States Mail at Whittier, California, addressed to the owner of such lot, piece or parcel of land, at the address shown on the last equalized assessment roll. The notice shall bear the date of posting, personal service, or mailing. 
(Ord. 2388 § 1 (part), 1986)  
8.24.040 - Appeal. 
Within ten days from the date of the notice, the owner or any other person interested in the property, land or lots affected by said notice may appeal to the city council from the determination of the director of public works. The appeal shall be filed with the city clerk and shall be presented by the city clerk to the city council at the next regular meeting of the city council following the date of the filing. The city council, at such meeting or at such meeting to which the matter may be continued by the council, shall hear and pass upon the appeal, and the decision of the council thereon shall be final and conclusive. Written notice of the council's determination shall be mailed to the person appealing at the address shown on the appeal. 
(Ord. 2388 § 1 (part), 1986)  
8.24.050 - Abatement by city. 
If within ten days from the date of notice, or if an appeal has been made to the city council, within ten days from the date of the determination of the appeal, unless the appeal is sustained and the council determines that no such removal shall be required, the weeds, rubbish or other material have not been removed from the premises in question or from the street, alley, sidewalk or right-of-way abutting such premises as directed by the notice or by the city council on appeal, the director of public works shall cause the same to be removed and may enter upon private property for the purpose of so doing. 
If, upon appeal, the requirements of the original notice have been modified by the city council, the director of public works, in causing such weeds, rubbish or other material to be removed, shall be governed by the determination of the city council. 
(Ord. 2388 § 1 (part), 1986)  
8.24.060 - Assessment—Lien. 
The director of public works shall keep or cause to be kept in his office a permanent record showing the legal description, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll of the county of Los Angeles, of each piece of property or lot, or the street, alley, sidewalk or right-of-way abutting said property, from which weeds, rubbish or other material have been removed at city expense under the provisions of this chapter. The record book shall show any and all expenses incurred by the city in the removal of the weeds, rubbish or other material as such expense relates to each separate property ownership. Each entry in the record book shall be made upon the completion of work done on each piece of property or lot or upon the street, alley, parkway or sidewalk abutting thereon. After such entry has been made in the record book, the same shall constitute an assessment against the parcel of land, and thereafter the assessment shall be confirmed by motion of the city council. The assessment, after being made and confirmed, shall become a lien upon the parcel. 
(Ord. 2388 § 1 (part), 1986)  
8.24.070 - Appeal from assessment. 
The director of public works shall send notice to all owners of property subject to an assessment under the provisions of this chapter that they may appeal such assessment to the city council. The notice shall include the amount and nature of the assessment, the date, time and location of the appellate hearing, and that such assessment, upon affirmation, shall be recorded as a lien in the county recorder's office. An aggrieved party who wishes to appeal must file an appeal in writing with the city clerk no less than two days before the date of the appellate hearing. At the appellate hearing the city council shall hear and pass upon each appeal, and the determination by the council shall be final. If the determination of the director of public works is modified by the city council or any assessment changed or corrected, the director of public works shall cause the correction to be made upon the record showing the assessment. 
(Ord. 2655 § 1 (part), 1995: Ord. 2638 § 3, 1994: Ord. 2388 § 1 (part), 1986)  
8.24.080 - Cost assessment—Entry on the tax roll. 
At the expiration of the time for appeal, or upon the determination by the city council of all appeals so filed, and in compliance with the requirements of any determination so made, the director of public works shall deliver to the city clerk an abstract o the entries of the permanent record in which the director has shown each assessment for the preceding fiscal year. The abstract shall show the property affected and the amount charged against such property. The city clerk shall deliver to the county auditor the amount of each such charge to be placed upon the assessment roll against the respective lots, and thereafter the charges shall be of the same character and effect, subject to the same penalties, and shall be collected in the same manner and at the same time as city taxes. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any piece of property or land or lot if the charge against it has been paid prior to the delivery to the city clerk of the abstract. In that event, an entry shall be made in the record book by the director of public works showing that the charge had been paid. 
(Ord. 2655 § 1 (part), 1995: Ord. 2388 § 1 (part), 1986)  
8.24.090 - Proof of notice. 
Proof of the posting, serving in person or mailing of any notice, order or determination provided for in this chapter shall be by affidavit of the person performing the duty, and the affidavit shall specify the time when the duty was performed. It shall be the duty of the director of public works to keep such affidavits among the official records in his office. 
(Ord. 2388 § 1 (part), 1986)  
8.24.100 - Refund. 
Any assessment or any portion of an assessment levied pursuant to the provisions of this chapter which, either before or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, has been paid more than once, erroneously or illegally collected, paid in excess of the amount chargeable, or was not chargeable to the person or the property paying the same under the provisions of this chapter, by reason of a clerical error of the employees or officials of the city, may be refunded by order of the city council in the same manner, to the same extent and under the same conditions as, at or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, are provided by the city for refund of payments of general taxes, at any time after the abstract of charges taken from the record book of the director of public works has been delivered to the county assessor and entered upon the assessment books. The owner of any property assessed who may claim that the assessment is void in whole or in part may pay the same under protest. The protest shall be in writing, shall be received by the city clerk on or before March 1st after the tax becomes due and payable, and shall specify whether the whole or any part of the assessment is void and the grounds upon which such claim is founded. An owner, after making payment under protest, may recover the same in the manner and under the conditions provided in Section 39585 of the Government Code of the State of California. 
(Ord. 2388 § 1 (part), 1986)  
Chapter 8.26 - SEWER USER FEES* 
 
8.26.010 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter the following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the following meanings ascribed to them: 
A.  "City" means the city of Whittier; and 
B.  "City council" means the city council of the city; and 
C.  "Commercial/industrial user" means the owner of each privately owned lot located in the city on which there is located a commercial or an industrial user which user is serviced by the sewer system; and 
D.  "City manager" means the city manager of city; and 
E.  "Director of public works" means the director of public works of the city; and 
F.  "Dwelling unit" is defined as set forth in the city's zoning regulations; and 
G.  "Lot" is defined as set forth in the city's zoning regulations; and 
H.  "Residential user" shall mean the owner of a lot upon which there are located one or more dwelling unit(s) which dwelling unit(s) are served by the sewer system; and 
I.  "Rate" means the amount charged per one hundred cubic feet of water consumed; and 
J.  "Residential/multiresidential users in private developments" means a private community or home owners association (HOA) that operates, owns and maintains a private-sewer main system connected to the city's sewer system; and 
K.  "Sewage" means the used, spent or wasted sewage discharged by the community received directly or indirectly by the sewer system from residential users and commercial/industrial users; and 
L.  "Sewer system" means the entire network of appurtenances, improvements, fixtures, real and personal property involved and contributing to the operation and maintenance of the sewage collection and disposal system owned and operated by the city; and 
M.  "Sewer user fee" means the amount of a fee imposed annually by the city upon the owner of each privately owned lot served by the city's sewer system, as and for a sewer user fee, pursuant to this chapter; and 
N.  "Use" is defined as set forth in the city's zoning regulations; and 
O.  "User" means the owner of each privately owned lot located in the city which is serviced by the city's sewer system; and 
P.  "Water unit" means that amount of water consumed by a user equal to one hundred cubic feet of water (ccf). 
(Ord. 2779 § 1 (part), 2001: Ord. 2432 § 1 (part), 1988 
(Ord. No. 2969, § 1, 6-14-11; Ord. No. 2986, § 2, 6-26-12)  
8.26.020 - Sewer user fee. 
A.  Imposition of Fee. There is imposed upon the owner of each privately owned lot located in the city, a sewer user fee, the proceeds of which shall be utilized by the city for the operation and maintenance of the sewer system, and capital improvement costs pertaining thereto. The city council shall adopt an ordinance or resolution fixing the sewer user fees and thereafter the fees shall apply and be charged until they are changed, modified or amended by ordinance of the city council. 
B.  Exemption from Fee. No sewer user fee shall be made or collected where no portion of domestic water delivered to the user enters the sewer system. 
(Ord. 2779 § 1 (part), 2001: Ord. 2432 § 1 (part), 1988) 
(Ord. No. 2964, § 2, 4-12-11; Ord. No. 3043, § 3, 10-27-15)  
8.26.030 - Collection of sewer user fees. 
A.  Sewer user fees imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be collected on the tax roll in the same manner, by the same persons, and at the same times, together with and not separately from, the city's general taxes. Annually the director of public works shall cause to be prepared a written report, which shall contain a description of each lot upon which a sewer user fee has been imposed and the amount of the sewer user fee applicable to each such lot, calculated in accordance with the provisions of this chapter ("report"). The report shall be filed with the city clerk of city and submitted to the city council for review and approval as a part of the proposed city budget for the next succeeding fiscal year. The city council shall, as a part of its annual budget approval process, pursuant to Section 1101 of the city charter, approve, approve as modified or disapprove, the report. The lots upon which a sewer user fee is imposed may be described by reference to maps prepared in accordance with the provisions of Section 327 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, and on file with the office of the Los Angeles County assessor, of by reference to plats or maps on file in the office of the city clerk. 
B.  Prior to August 10th of each calendar year, following the annual determination of the sewer user fees by the city council, the city clerk shall file with the appropriate Los Angeles County officers, the report as approved by the city council, together with certified copies of the city council ordinance or resolution imposing the sewer user fees for the next succeeding fiscal year. The county officers shall thereafter enter the amounts of such sewer user fees imposed against the lots as they appear on the current county assessment roll. 
C.  The amount of the sewer user fee imposed upon a lot pursuant to this chapter shall constitute a lien against that lot as of twelve noon on the first Monday in March, of each year, immediately preceding the date of the adoption of said report, and imposition of such sewer user fee by the city council. 
D.  All laws which are now applicable, or hereafter made applicable, to the levy, collection and enforcement of general taxes of the city, including, but not limited to, those pertaining to the matter of delinquency, correction, cancellation, refund and redemption, shall be applicable to the sewer user fees imposed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2779 § 1 (part), 2001: Ord. 2432 § 1(part), 1988) 
(Ord. No. 2964, § 3, 4-12-11; Ord. No. 3043, § 3 , 10-27-15)  
8.26.040 - Adjustments and appeals. 
A.  Power of Director. The director of public works shall have the power to make for adjustments in the amount of any sewer user fee imposed upon a user, upon the director's initiative or upon written request of the user, if the director determines that the actual quantity of waste water entering the sewer system is substantially different from that as calculated in the manner set forth in this chapter. 
B.  Appeal. Any residential or commercial/industrial user may appeal any such determination made by the director with reference to an adjustment. The city manager shall review the determination of the director of public works. The city manager shall affirm, modify or disaffirm the director's action; the decision of the city manager shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. 2779 § 1 (part), 2001: Ord. 2432 § 1(part), 1988)  
8.26.060 - Sewer maintenance account. 
A.  All sewer user fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall be deposited with the city controller and credited to the sewer maintenance account. 
B.  All such monies collected shall be expended exclusively for the purposes of operation and maintenance of, and for capital improvements to, the sewer system, and administrative costs related thereto, all as determined by the city council. 
(Ord. 2779 § 1 (part), 2001: Ord. 2432 § 1(part), 1988)  
Chapter 8.28 - HOMING PIGEONS 
 
8.28.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to comply with the intent of California Government Code Section 65852.6 regarding homing pigeons. 
(Ord. 2544 § 2 (part), 1991)  
8.28.020 - Findings. 
A.  In order to maintain adequate compatibility with the surrounding neighborhood, to maintain the single family environment, to maintain clean and sanitary conditions to protect the public health, safety and welfare, certain specific conditions need apply to homing pigeons within all residentially zoned property. 
B.  Repealed. 
C.  No person shall keep, maintain or have in his possession within any residential district in the city any homing or racing pigeons without first obtaining a permit from the city manager as provided in Section 18.52.030 of this code. 
D.  Special permits required by this article shall be applied for to the city planning commission by written application filed with the city clerk, and the city planning commission shall have a reasonable time in which to cause an investigation to be made, and if it appears after investigation that the keeping of such homing pigeons at the location applied for under prevailing conditions will be a nuisance, a menace to health or interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property, then the permit shall be refused, and any permit granted is revocable for cause. 
(Ord. 2869 § 26, 2006; Ord. 2544 § 2 (part), 1991)  
8.28.030 - Definitions. 
"Homing pigeon," sometimes referred to as a racing pigeon, means a bird of the order Columbae, which are maintained and housed by the owner or keeper thereof in a pigeon loft and identified by means of leg bands. It shall not fall in the category of "fowl" which includes chickens, turkeys, ducks, geese and other domesticated birds other than pigeons. 
"Leg band" means a ring of metal or plastic which bears thereon the means of identifying the individual bird and its owner or keeper. 
(Ord. 2544 § 2 (part), 1991)  
8.28.040 - Homing pigeons as a permitted use. 
Homing pigeons are a permitted use subject to the following provisions: 
1.  A conditional use permit (including a site plan) is required if more than ten homing pigeons are proposed to be kept on the premises. The applicant shall obtain any health permits required by the county prior to approval of the conditional use permit. 
2.  The maximum number of homing pigeons permitted on any premises shall be one hundred. The conditional use permit shall specify the maximum number of homing pigeons allowed. 
3.  All homing pigeons shall be banded for the purpose of identification with a leg band. 
4.  All homing pigeons shall be fed and kept in an enclosed pen, coop, pigeon house, loft or other structure, which shall be neatly constructed, painted in such a manner as to conform to the neighborhood and not constitute an unsightly condition. 
5.  No such pen, coop, pigeon house, lot or other structure that houses more than ten homing pigeons shall be kept or maintained within fifteen feet of any of the subject property lines and within thirty feet of any adjoining dwelling unit. 
6.  Such pen, coop, pigeon house, loft or other structure shall be kept or maintained at all times in a sanitary condition free of offensive odors and in compliance with all health regulations of the Los Angeles County department of health service. 
7.  Every person owning or occupying any property or premises where homing pigeons are kept, shall keep such premises clean and sanitary. Any feces, uneaten food or other matter that emits an offensive odor or encourages the breeding of flies or other insects shall be collected daily and not allowed to accumulate. This provision shall not prohibit the owner or occupant of any premises from storing such feces, uneaten food or other matter in a closed container prior to disposal. 
8.  All pigeon droppings, feces, food scraps and other matter that emits an offensive odor shall be removed from the property or premises at least once each calendar week and be disposed of in a sanitary manner. 
9.  All feed for homing pigeons shall be stored in containers which secure protection against rodents, insects, birds and other animals. 
10.  Homing pigeons shall be flown for exercise or training in a manner that results in their flying a substantial distance from the immediate area of the loft, rather than continuously or repeatedly over the properties adjacent to the loft location. 
11.  At no time shall homing pigeons be allowed to perch or linger on the buildings or property of others. 
12.  Homing pigeons which are not raised or kept for the market or other commercial purpose, may be kept and liberated for exercise or racing at such times as may be provided for in a permit granted therefor, if a written permit authorizing such keeping and liberation for racing and exercise be first applied for. 
13.  Not more than twenty-five homing pigeons shall be released at any one time for liberation, exercise or training of any bird and no bird shall be released more than once in any twenty-four hour period. 
14.  The owner of said homing pigeons shall be a member of the California State Racing Organization or the American Racing Pigeon Union, Inc., with annual registration by licensee of the individual birds. Written proof of such registration shall be submitted with each application, and shall be provided annually thereafter to the city. 
15.  No homing pigeon business or breeding activities for sales shall be conducted on or from the premises or property. 
16.  The city's code enforcement supervisor or designee shall be responsible for determining if the keeping of birds permitted under this section constitutes a nuisance, health or safety hazard, once a conditional use permit is issued. 
17.  Nothing in this article shall be construed as allowing a nuisance of any kind or character to be committed. 
18.  The keeping of a number in excess of the maximum number specified in the conditional use permit shall require a variance from the city planning commission. 
19.  It shall be and is made unlawful for any person or persons to kill, maim, wound or destroy, within the corporate limits of the city, a "homing pigeon." 
20.  It is unlawful for any person to violate any provisions or to fail to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter. Any person violating any of the provisions of failing to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction. 
21.  Any interested person who is aggrieved by a decision of the city planning commission shall have the right to appeal the decision of the city council in accordance with the appeals procedure set forth in Chapter 18.52. 
(Ord. 2544 § 2 (part), 1991)  
Chapter 8.32 - NOISE CONTROL[2] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2943, § 1, adopted Jan. 12, 2010, repealed the former Chapter 8.32, §§ 8.32.010—8.32.120, and enacted a new Chapter 8.32 as set out herein. The former Chapter 8.32 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 2747, § 2(part), adopted in 1999; and Ord. 2869, § 29, adopted in 2006. 
 
8.32.010 - Purpose. 
A.  The making and creation of loud, unnecessary or unusual noises within the limits of the city is a condition which has existed for some time and the extent and volume of such noises is increasing. 
B.  The making, creation or maintenance of such loud, unnecessary, unnatural or unusual noises which are prolonged, unusual and unnatural in their time, place and use affect and are a detriment to public health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare and prosperity of the residents of the city; and 
C.  The necessity in the public interest for the provisions of this chapter is declared as a matter of legislative determination and public policy, and it is further declared that the provisions of this chapter are for the purpose of securing and promoting the public health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare, prosperity and peace and quiet of the city and its inhabitants. 
(Ord. No. 2943, § 1, 1-12-10)  
8.32.020 - Definitions. 
A.  "City" means the city of Whittier. 
B.  "City manager" means the city manager of the city of Whittier, or his/her designee. 
C.  "Chief of police" means the chief of the Whittier Police Department. 
D.  "Construction" means any site preparation, assembly, erection, substantial repair, alteration, demolition, or similar action. 
E.  "Continuous sound" means and denotes a sound the intensity of which remains essentially constant during a given period of time. 
F.  "Director" means the director of community development of the city of Whittier, or his/her designee. 
G.  "Daytime" denotes the local time of day between the hours of seven a.m. and nine p.m. on weekdays and between the hours of nine a.m. and nine p.m. on Saturdays, Sundays and local legal holidays. 
H.  "Emergency" means any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or imminent physical trauma or property damage, which demands immediate action. 
I.  "Emergency signal device" means any audible warning device, such as a gong, whistle or siren or any air horn or any similar device, used for emergency purposes or alert the public or emergency personnel to the existence of an emergency. 
J.  "Emergency work" means any work performed for the purpose of preventing or alleviating the physical trauma or property damage threatened or caused by an emergency. 
K.  "Mobile source" means any moving sound source on a public right-of-way. 
L.  "Motor vehicle" means a vehicle that is self-propelled. "Motor vehicle" includes, but is not limited to, passenger cars, trucks, truck-trailers, semi-trailers, campers, motorcycles, minibikes, go-carts, snowmobiles, mopeds, amphibious craft on land, dune buggies, all-terrain vehicles or racing vehicles. "Motor vehicle" does not include a self-propelled wheelchair, motorized tricycle, or motorized quadricycle, if operated by a person who, by reason of physical disability, is otherwise unable to move about as a pedestrian. 
1.  "Motorcycle" means (1) a motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of the rider, designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground; (2) a motor vehicle that has four wheels in contact with the ground, two of which are a functional part of a sidecar, is a motorcycle if the vehicle otherwise comes within the definition of subdivision (1); (3) a farm tractor is not a motorcycle; (4) a three-wheeled motor vehicle that otherwise meets the requirements of subdivision (1), has a partially or completely enclosed seating area for the driver and passenger, is used by local public agencies for the enforcement of parking control provisions, and is operated at slow speeds on public streets, is not a motorcycle. However, a motor vehicle described in this subdivision shall comply with the applicable sections of this code imposing equipment installation requirements on motorcycles. 
2.  "All-terrain vehicle (ATV)" means a motor vehicle that is all of the following: (1) designed for operation off of the highway by an operator with no more than one passenger; (2) fifty inches or less in width; (3) nine hundred pounds or less unladen weight; (4) suspended on three or more low-pressure tires; (5) has a single seat designed to be straddled by the operator, or a single seat designed to be straddled by the operator and a seat for no more than one passenger; (6) has handlebars for steering control. 
M.  "Nighttime" means those hours excluded from the definition of "daytime." 
N.  "Person" means any individual, corporation, partnership firm or any legal successor, representative or agent of the foregoing. 
O.  "Public right-of-way" means any street, avenue, boulevard, highway, alley, sidewalk or public space which has been dedicated for use by the general public and the dedication of which has been accepted by the appropriate governmental entity. 
P.  "Real property boundary" means an imaginary line along the ground surface, and its vertical extension, which separates the real property owned by one person from that owned by another person, but it does not include intra-building real property division. 
Q.  "Small power equipment" means any motorized or engine powered device, including but not limited to lawn mowers, lawn and garden tools, leaf blowers, riding lawn mowers and power saws, but excluding motor vehicles. 
R.  "Sound amplifying equipment" means any machine or device for the amplification of the human voice, music or any other sound. Sound amplifying equipment as used herein shall not be construed as including standard automobile radio when used and primarily audible only by the occupants of the vehicle in which installed or warning devices on authorized emergency vehicles or horns or other warning devices on other vehicles used only for traffic safety purposes. 
S.  "Special event" means assemblages, public meetings, and other special events including festivals, ceremonies, addresses, speeches, exhibits, performances, plays, circuses, musical events, athletic events that occur at a particular place and for a limited duration of time. 
T.  "Stadium event" means events held at a facility with permanent seating and accommodations for more than one thousand spectators. 
U.  "Stationary source" means any sound source operating or occurring on any public or private property. 
V.  "Weekday" means any day Monday through Friday, which is not a legal holiday. 
(Ord. No. 2943, § 1, 1-12-10)  
8.32.030 - Loud, annoying and unnecessary noises prohibited. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully make or continue, or cause to be made or continued, any excessive or unreasonable noise, which disturbs the peace or quiet of any neighborhood or which causes discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable person of normal sensitiveness residing in the area. 
B.  The standard that may be considered in determining whether a violation of the provisions of this section exists may include, but not be limited to, the following: 
1.  The level of the noise; 
2.  Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual; 
3.  Whether the origin of the noise is natural or unnatural; 
4.  The level and intensity of the background noise, if any; 
5.  The proximity of the noise to residential sleeping facilities; 
6.  The nature and zoning of the area within which the noise emanates; 
7.  The density of the inhabitation of the area within which the noise emanates; 
8.  The time of the day and night the noise occurs; 
9.  The duration of the noise, including whether it is of a temporary or short-term nature; 
10.  Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent, or constant; and 
11.  Whether the noise is produced by a commercial or noncommercial activity. 
(Ord. No. 2943, § 1, 1-12-10)  
8.32.040 - Loud, annoying and unnecessary noises—Enumerated. 
The city council finds the following to be loud, annoying and unnecessary noises, which are hereby declared to be in violation of this chapter; this list is deemed illustrative and shall not be construed in any way to be an exclusive or all-inclusive list of the noises prohibited by this chapter, it being the intent and purpose of this chapter to include and prohibit all noises of the character described in this section. Where no specific distance is set for the determination of audibility, reference to noise disturbance shall be deemed to mean plainly audible at a distance of one hundred feet from the real property boundary of the source of the sound, if the sound occurs on privately owned property, or from the source of the sound, if the sound occurs on the public right-of-way, public property, or private property open to the public. References to "adjacent" or "neighboring" residences or units in this section shall mean those residences or units located next to or in close proximity to the source of the noise, and no specific distance standard shall be required for such locations. 
A.  Animals and Birds. The keeping of any animal or bird that causes frequent or long continued noise plainly audible by inhabitants or occupants of any adjacent or neighboring residential properties or units, or plainly audible at a distance of fifty feet from any nonresidential building or structure, shall be presumed to disturb the comfort and repose of any person in the vicinity and shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this chapter; however, nothing in this subsection shall be construed to apply to occasional noises emanating from a legally operated kennel, animal hospital or veterinary clinic, humane society or pound. 
B.  Defect in Vehicle or Load. The use of any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in such manner as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise. 
C.  Motor Vehicle Noises. Any loud or annoying noise made by any motor vehicle and not reasonably necessary to the operation thereof under the circumstances, including, but not limited to, noise caused by screeching of tires; racing or accelerating the engine, except in the course of repair or adjustment thereof during nighttime hours; backfiring the engine; or the emission of exhaust from the engine tail pipe or muffler. 
D.  Domestic Power Tools. Operating or permitting the operation of any mechanically powered saw, sander, drill, grinder, lawn or garden tool, snow blower, small power equipment, or similar device used outdoors in residential areas during nighttime hours so as to cause a noise disturbance across a residential real property boundary. 
E.  Engine-Repair and Testing. It shall be unlawful for any person to repair, rebuild or test any engine so as to create a noise disturbance, during nighttime hours. 
F.  Horns and Signaling Devices. The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motor vehicle or any other vehicle on any street or public street except as a danger warning; the creation by means of any such signaling device of any unreasonably and unnecessarily loud or harsh sounds; the sounding of any such signaling device for an unnecessarily or unreasonably long period of time; or the use of any horn, whistle or other device operated by engine exhaust 
G.  Loudspeakers/Public Address System. The using, operating or playing, or permitting to be played, used or operated, of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, audio system, loudspeaker, sound amplifying equipment or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound, which casts sound upon the streets for the purpose of commercial or noncommercial advertising, or attracting the attention of the public to any building, structure or attraction (1) such that the sound there from creates a loud, annoying or unnecessary noise across a residential area; or (2) on a public right-of-way or public space, except as provided in Section 8.32.080. 
H.  Radios, Musical Instruments and Similar Devices. The using, operating or playing, or the permitting to be played, used or operated, any stereo, radio receiving set, musical instrument, audio system, television set or any like machine or device that produces or reproduces sound, in such manner as to disturb at any time, the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants, with louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for the person or persons who are in the room, vehicle, chamber or place in which the machine or device is operated and who are voluntarily listening thereto. The operation of any such machine or device during nighttime hours in such a manner as to be plainly audible by inhabitants or occupants of any adjacent or neighboring residential properties or units, or plainly audible at a distance of fifty feet from any nonresidential building, structure, vehicle or place in which it is located, shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this subsection. 
I.  Yelling and Shouting. Loud or raucous yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing in the public streets or in public places, or any other place, so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office or inhabitants or occupants of any neighboring or adjacent dwelling, hotel, apartment building or other kind of residence. The occurrence of such conduct during nighttime hours shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this subsection. 
J.  Noise in Proximity to Schools, Courts, Churches or Hospitals. The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to a school, institution of learning, church or court while such facilities are in use, or adjacent to any hospital which unreasonably interferes with the work of the institution or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients of the hospital; however, this subsection shall not apply unless conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets indicating that there is located in the vicinity a school, hospital, court or church. 
K.  Hawkers and Peddlers. The shouting or crying of peddlers, hawkers or vendors, so as to disturb the peace and quiet of the neighborhood. 
L.  Erection or demolition of buildings, excluding owner resident additions or remodeling, and the grading and excavation of land including the use of blasting, the start up and use of heavy equipment such as dump trucks and graders and the use of jack hammers except on weekdays between the hours of seven a.m. and six p.m. and on Saturdays eight a.m. to five p.m. The city manager may waive any or all of the provisions of this subsection in cases of urgent necessity, or in the interest of public health and safety. The provisions of this subsection may also be waived or modified pursuant to a conditional use permit or other development entitlement processed and issued in accordance with the applicable city requirements and procedures. 
M.  Late night disturbances of any kind that are plainly audible by inhabitants or occupants of any adjacent or neighboring residential properties or units, or are plainly audible at a distance of fifty feet from a real property boundary, that occur during nighttime hours, shall be prima facie evidence of violation of this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 2943, § 1, 1-12-10)  
8.32.050 - Mixed use developments. 
Due to the unique nature of mixed use developments, as are designated as such in a specific plan, violations of this chapter shall be determined pursuant to Section 8.32.030. The distance requirements of Section 8.32.040 shall not apply to mixed use neighborhoods. 
(Ord. No. 2943, § 1, 1-12-10)  
8.32.060 - Assessment of noise disturbance. 
Any law enforcement officer, code enforcement officer, or other employee or official designated by the city manager or designee who hears a noise or sound that is plainly audible, as defined in Sections 8.32.030 and 8.32.040, in violation of this chapter, may enforce this chapter and shall assess the noise or sound according to the following standards: 
A.  The primary means of detection shall be by means of the official's normal hearing faculties, not artificially enhanced. 
B.  The official shall first attempt to have a direct line of sight and hearing to the vehicle or real property from which the sound or noise emanates so that the official can readily identify the offending source of the sound or noise and the distance involved. If the official is unable to have a direct line of sight and hearing to the vehicle or real property from which the sound or noise emanates, then the official shall confirm the source of the sound or noise by approaching the suspected vehicle or real property until the official is able to obtain a direct line of sight and hearing, and confirm the source of the sound or noise that was heard at the place of the original assessment of the sound or noise. 
C.  The official need not be required to identify words, song titles, artists, or lyrics in order to establish a violation. 
(Ord. No. 2943, § 1, 1-12-10)  
8.32.070 - Defenses. 
In any prosecution for a violation of this chapter, it shall be a sufficient defense that the noise of which complaint is made resulted from reasons beyond the control of the person charged with making the noise, unless the noise is due to a reparable or otherwise curable cause which was not diligently cured or repaired; that it was necessary to make the noise to prevent injury to persons or property or that the creation or emission of the noise was done by or with a device, such as a horn, siren or muffler, installed and operated pursuant to state law and meeting the requirements thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2943, § 1, 1-12-10)  
8.32.080 - Exemptions and waivers. 
The following uses of any activity shall be exempt from noise level regulations: 
A.  Emergency Exemption. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to: (1) the emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency, or (2) the emission of sound in the performance of emergency work performed by authorized personnel for the purpose of securing the immediate health and safety of the public. 
B.  Warning Devices. Warning devices necessary for the protection of public safety, as for example, police, fire and ambulance sirens, and train horns, shall be exempted from the provisions of this chapter. 
C.  Outdoor Activities. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to outdoor gatherings, public dances, shows and sporting and entertainment events, provided such events are conducted pursuant to a permit or license issued by the city relative to the staging of the events. 
D.  Any noise resulting from activities of a temporary duration permitted by law and/or for which a waiver has been granted by the director. 
E.  The unamplified human voice, except as provided for in Section 8.32.040(I) (Yelling and Shouting). 
F.  Bells, chimes, carillons while being used for religious purposes or in conjunction with religious services, or for national celebrations or public holidays. 
G.  Scheduled stadium events, subject, however, to frequency and time limitations, parades, school activities, including band practice sessions. 
H.  Refuse collection trucks, provided the trucks do not collect refuse between the hours of nine p.m. and five a.m. 
I.  Permitted construction during daytime hours. 
J.  Federal or State Preempted Activities. Any other activity to the extent regulation thereof has been preempted by state or federal law shall be exempted from the regulations of this chapter. 
K.  Any activity by the city or any governmental entity. 
L.  Any activity that is protected by the First Amendment, provided that it takes place during daytime hours, except subject to time, place manner restrictions and/or any regulations imposed by a required or issued permit for such activity. 
(Ord. No. 2943, § 1, 1-12-10)  
8.32.090 - Thirty-day waivers. 
A.  Any person seeking a waiver pursuant to this section shall file an application with the director. The application shall contain information which demonstrates that bringing the source of sound or activity for which the waiver is sought into compliance with this chapter would constitute an unreasonable hardship on the applicant, on the community, or on other persons. The application shall be accompanied by a fee, as established by council resolution. 
B.  A separate application shall be filed for each noise source; provided, however, that several mobile sources under common ownership, or several fixed sources on a single property may be combined into one application. 
C.  Before a waiver application can be considered, the applicant must show proof that he/she has provided notice of the waiver application to all affected persons within a four-foot radius of the anticipated noise source. 
D.  Any individual who claims to be adversely affected by allowance of the waiver may file a statement with the director containing any information to support his or her claim. If at any time the director finds that a sufficient controversy exists regarding an application, a public hearing will be held. 
E.  In determining whether to grant or deny the application, the director shall balance denial as a hardship on the applicant against: (1) the adverse impact on the health, safety and welfare of other persons affected; (2) the adverse impact on property affected; and (3) any other adverse impacts of granting the waiver. Applicants and persons contesting the waiver shall be required to submit such information as the director may reasonably require. 
F.  A waiver shall be denied if the director determines that the balance of hardships weighs against the applicant and that granting the waiver shall substantially adversely impact the health, safety and welfare of other persons affected, including the quiet enjoyment of property. The decision on the waiver application shall be in writing, explaining the reasons therefor. The notice of denial shall issue within ten days of the application. 
G.  Waivers shall be granted by notice to the applicant containing all necessary conditions, including a time limit on the permitted activity. Acceptance of the waiver implies acceptance of any conditions imposed. Noncompliance with any condition of the waiver shall terminate the waiver and subject the person holding it to those provisions of this chapter for which the waiver was granted. Notification that a waiver has been granted shall issue in writing within ten days of the application. 
H.  A waiver will not exceed thirty days from the date on which it becomes effective. Any request for extension of time to a waiver beyond the original thirty days or for modification of other material conditions of the waiver shall require a new application. 
(Ord. No. 2943, § 1, 1-12-10)  
8.32.100 - Special events not subject to waiver requirement. 
A special event scheduled to take place either on public or private property is exempt from the requirement of obtaining a noise disturbance waiver, provided the special event is not scheduled to last more than forty-eight hours. Notwithstanding this exemption, the organizer or sponsor of an event must obtain and comply with any and all necessary city permits. 
(Ord. No. 2943, § 1, 1-12-10)  
8.32.110 - Request for appeal hearing. 
Any person may contest the denial of a waiver by submitting a written request to the city manager for an appeal hearing, clearly stating the reasons for the appeal, within ten days from the date of service of the denial notice. A hearing before the city manager shall be set for a date that is not less than five, nor more than twenty days from the date the request for hearing is filed. The person requesting the hearing (the appellant) shall be notified of the time and place set for the hearing at least five days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 2943, § 1, 1-12-10)  
8.32.120 - Appeal hearing process. 
A.  No hearing to contest the denial of a waiver before the city manager shall be held unless and until a written request for a hearing has been timely submitted and any applicable fines have been deposited. 
B.  The city manager shall only consider evidence that is relevant to whether the grounds for the denial of the waiver are valid and supported by evidence. 
C.  The appellant shall be given the opportunity to testify and present witnesses and any relevant evidence concerning the denial of the waiver. 
D.  The formal rules of evidence shall not apply. All relevant evidence may be considered, and the city manager has the discretion to exclude evidence if he/she finds such evidence to be irrelevant or needlessly repetitive. The city manager has the authority to cut off presentation of evidence if he/she reasonably believes that the evidence being presented is irrelevant or needlessly repetitive. 
E.  1.  The failure of the appellant to appear at the appeal hearing shall be considered an abandonment of the appeal and consent to its denial. 
2.  Notwithstanding the above, upon a showing of good cause by the appellant, the city manager may excuse the appellant's failure to appear at the hearing and reschedule the hearing. Under no circumstances shall the hearing be rescheduled more than one time. 
F.  The notice of denial of the waiver and any additional documents submitted by the director shall constitute prima facie evidence of the respective facts contained in those documents. 
G.  At least five days prior to the hearing, the appellant shall be provided with copies of reports and any other documents submitted or relied upon by the director. No other discovery disclosure is required. 
H.  The city manager may continue the hearing and request additional information from the director or the appellant prior to issuing a written decision. 
(Ord. No. 2943, § 1, 1-12-10)  
8.32.130 - City manager's decision—Right to judicial review. 
A.  After considering all of the testimony and evidence submitted at the hearing, the city manager shall issue a written decision to sustain or overrule the denial of the waiver and shall list in the decision the reasons for that decision. The decision of the city manager shall be final. 
B.  If the decision is to overrule the denial, suspension or revocation, then the director shall issue the waiver within ten days of the service of the decision. 
C.  The time for a challenge to the city manager's decision in a court of law is governed by California Code of Civil Procedure Sections 1094.5 and 1094.6. Notice of the city manager's decision shall include citation to California Code of Civil Procedure Sections 1094.5 and 1094.6. 
D.  The city manager's written decision shall be served on the appellant within ten days from the date of the hearing by mailing to the appellant by certified mail, return receipt requested, via the U.S mail. Service of the hearing officer's decision shall be deemed to have been completed on the date of mailing. 
(Ord. No. 2943, § 1, 1-12-10)  
8.32.140 - Exceptions for time to comply. 
A.  Within ninety days following the effective date of this chapter, the owner of any commercial or industrial activity, which is the source of sound that constitute a violation of this chapter, may apply to the director for an exception to the time to comply with the provisions of this chapter. The director shall have the authority to grant an exception not to exceed one hundred eighty days from the effective date of this chapter. 
B.  Appeals. Appeals of an adverse decision under this section shall be made to the city manager. The city manager's review shall be limited to whether the decision is supported by substantial evidence. The appeal procedures outlined in this chapter shall apply to appeals under this section. 
(Ord. No. 2943, § 1, 1-12-10)  
8.32.150 - Violation—Enforcement and penalties. 
A.  A violation of this chapter shall be punished as prescribed in Section 1.08.010. 
B.  A violation of this chapter is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, which may be abated by the city in the manner provided by the laws of the State of California and the ordinances of this city for the abatement of a public nuisance, and the city shall also have all rights provided by such laws and ordinances to recover damages suffered from any such nuisance and to recover from the owner of the property upon which such nuisance is located the cost of any abatement thereof by the city. 
C.  Joint and Several Responsibility. In addition to the person causing the offending sound, the owner, tenant or lessee of property, or a manager, overseer or agent, or any other person lawfully entitled to possess the property from which the offending sound is emitted at the time the offending sound is emitted, shall be responsible for compliance with this chapter if the additionally responsible party knows or should have known of the offending noise disturbance. It shall not be a lawful defense to assert that some other person caused the sound. The lawful possessor or operator of the premises shall be responsible for operating or maintaining the premises in compliance with this chapter and may be cited regardless of whether or not the person actually causing the sound is also cited. Notwithstanding the foregoing, an owner, manager, overseer or agent of property from which offending sound is emitted and who does not reside on such property shall not be cited for violation of the provisions of this chapter unless such owner, manager, overseer or agent has previously been informed in writing by a law enforcement officer, code enforcement officer, or other employee or official designated by the city manager or designee of the existence of an offending noise disturbance on the property, and such disturbance continues, occurs again or is otherwise not reasonably or fully rectified or brought into compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2943, § 1, 1-12-10)  
Chapter 8.36 - STORMWATER AND RUNOFF POLLUTION CONTROL* 
 
8.36.010 - Title. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the "Stormwater and Runoff Pollution Control Ordinance of the City of Whittier" and may be referred to as such. 
(Ord. 2752 § 1 (part), 1999) 
( Ord. No. 3013, § 1 , 11-12-13)  
8.36.020 - Statutory authority. 
The provisions of this chapter are adopted pursuant to the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq. 
(Ord. 2752 § 1 (part), 1999) 
( Ord. No. 3013, § 1 , 11-12-13)  
8.36.030 - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this chapter is to protect and improve water quality of receiving waters by: 
A.  Reducing illicit discharges to the municipal stormwater system to the maximum extent practicable; 
B.  Eliminating illicit connections to the municipal stormwater system; 
C.  Eliminating spillage, dumping, and disposal of pollutant materials into the municipal stormwater system; 
D.  Reducing pollutant loads in stormwater and urban runoff, from land uses and activities identified in the municipal NPDES permit. 
E.  Reducing the contribution of pollutants from the MS4 through interagency coordination. 
The intent of this chapter is to enhance and protect the water quality of the receiving waters of the United States in a manner that is consistent with the Clean Water Act and acts amendatory thereof or supplementary thereto; applicable implementing regulations; the municipal NPDES permit and any amendment, revision or reissuance thereof. 
(Ord. 2752 § 1 (part), 1999) 
( Ord. No. 3013, § 1 , 11-12-13)  
8.36.040 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of the provisions of this chapter concerning water quality hereinafter set forth, the following words and phrases shall be construed to have the meanings set forth, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended: 
"Best management practices" or "BMPs" are practices or physical devices or systems designed to prevent or reduce pollutant loading from stormwater or nonstormwater discharges to receiving waters, or designed to reduce the volume of stormwater or nonstormwater discharged to the receiving water. 
"Clean Water Act" means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251, et seq. 
"Discharge" means any release, spill, leak, pumping, flow, escape, dumping, or disposal of any gas, liquid, semisolid or solid substance. 
"Enforcing attorney" shall mean the city attorney or district attorney acting as counsel to the city and authorized to take enforcement action as described herein. 
"Executive officer" means executive officer of the California Regional Water Quality Control Board, Los Angeles. 
"Good housekeeping practice" means a best management practice related to the transfer, storage, use, or cleanup of materials performed in a regular manner that minimizes the discharge of pollutants to the storm drain system and/or receiving waters. 
"Hearing officer" means the director of public works of the city of Whittier, who shall preside at the administrative hearings authorized by this chapter. 
"Illicit connection" means any man-made conveyance that is connected to the storm drain system without a permit, excluding roof drains and other similar type connections. Examples include channels, pipelines, conduits, inlets, or outlets that are connected directly to the storm drain system. 
"Illicit discharge" Any discharge into the MS4 or from the MS4 into a receiving water that is prohibited under local, state, or federal statutes, ordinances, codes, or regulations. The term illicit discharge includes any nonstormwater discharge, except authorized nonstormwater discharges; conditionally exempt nonstormwater discharges; and nonstormwater discharges resulting from natural flows specifically identified in Part III.A.1.d. 
"Industrial activity" means any of the eleven classifications of industrial facilities specified in 40 Code of Federal Regulations Section 122.26(b)(14), defined by Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) and which is required to obtain a NPDES permit. 
"Maximum extent practicable (MEP)." In selecting BMPs which will achieve MEP, it is important to remember that municipalities will be responsible to reduce the discharge of pollutants in stormwater to the maximum extent practicable. This means choosing effective BMPs, and rejecting applicable BMPs only where other effective BMPs will serve the same purpose, the BMPs would not be technically feasible, or the cost would be prohibitive. The following factors may be useful to consider: 
1.  Effectiveness: Will the BMP address a pollutant of concern? 
2.  Regulatory Compliance: Is the BMP in compliance with stormwater regulations as well as other environmental regulations? 
3.  Public acceptance: Does the BMP have public support? 
4.  Cost: Will the cost of implementing the BMP have a reasonable relationship to the pollution control benefits to be achieved? 
5.  Technical Feasibility: Is the BMP technically feasible considering soils, geography, water resources, etc.? 
After selecting a menu of BMPs, it is of course the responsibility of the discharger to insure that all BMPs are implemented. 
"Municipal NPDES permit" California Regional Water Quality Control Board, Los Angeles Region. Order No. R4-2012-0175, NPDES Permit No. CAS004001 Waste Discharge Requirements For Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) Discharge Within the Coastal Watersheds of Los Angeles County, Except Those Discharges Originating From the City of Long Beach MS4, and any amendment thereto or reissuance thereof. 
"Municipal stormwater system" or "MS4" means a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm drains): 
(i)  Owned or operated by a State, city, town, borough, county, parish, district, association, or other public body (created by or pursuant to State law) having jurisdiction over disposal of sewage, industrial wastes, stormwater, or other wastes, including special districts under State law such as a sewer district, flood control district or drainage district, or similar entity, or an Indian tribe or an authorized Indian tribal organization, or a designated and approved management agency under section 208 of the CWA that discharges to waters of the United States; 
(ii)  Designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater; 
(iii)  Which is not a combined sewer; and 
(iv)  Which is not part of a Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW) as defined at 40 CFR § 122.2. (40 CFR § 122.26(b)(8)) 
"Nonstormwater discharge" means any discharge to the storm drain system and/or receiving waters that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
"NPDES" or "National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System" means the national program for issuing, modifying, revoking and reissuing, terminating, monitoring and enforcing permits, and imposing and enforcing pretreatment requirements, under CWA §307, 402, 318, and 405. The term includes an "approved program." 
"Owner" as applied to a building or real property, means any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or real property. 
"Person" means, within the context of this chapter, any natural person, firm, association, organization, partnership, business trust, corporation or company. 
"Pollutant" those "pollutants" defined in CWA §502(6) (33.U.S.C.§1362(6)), and incorporated by reference into California Water Code §13373, and may include but is not limited to garbage, debris, lawn clippings, leaves, fecal waste, biological waste, sediment, sludge, manure, fertilizers, pesticides, oil, grease, gasoline, paints, solvents, cleaners, and any fluid or solid containing toxic or nontoxic chemicals, metals, including batteries. 
"Public works director" means the director of public works of the city of Whittier. 
"Receiving waters" means rivers, lakes, oceans, or other bodies of water that receive runoff. 
"Regional Board" means the appointed members of the California Regional Water Quality Control Board, Los Angeles Region. 
"Runoff" means any runoff including stormwater and dry weather flows from a drainage area that reaches a receiving water body or subsurface. During dry weather it is typically comprised of base flow either contaminated with pollutants or uncontaminated, and nuisance flows. 
"State Board" means the State Water Resources Control Board of the California Environmental Protection Agency (hereinafter "SWRCB"). 
"Stormwater runoff" means any surface water flow produced by rain or snow melt. 
"Urban runoff" means surface water flow produced by nonstormwater resulting from residential, commercial and industrial activities. 
(Ord. 2752 § 1 (part), 1999) 
( Ord. No. 3013, § 1 , 11-12-13)  
8.36.050 - Illicit discharges and nonstormwater discharges. 
A.  No person shall cause or allow an illicit discharge to enter the municipal stormwater system. 
B.  Any person causing an illicit discharge to the MS4 may be required by the public works director to pay for the cost of clean-up and remediation. 
C.  Any owner of any private property from which a nonstormwater discharge is observed may be required by the public works director to pay for the cost of collecting and analyzing the discharge to determine if it is an illicit discharge. 
D.  The following nonstormwater discharges are considered exempt or conditionally exempt illicit discharges: 
1.  Discharges identified in Part III.A of the 2012 NPDES MS4 permit. 
(Ord. 2752 § 1 (part), 1999) 
( Ord. No. 3013, § 1 , 11-12-13)  
8.36.060 - Illegal disposal/dumping. 
No person shall intentionally place, litter, accumulate, maintain, discharge, or cause to enter into the MS4 any pollutant or any foreign object such as batteries, tires, waste receptacles, yard debris, refuse, rubbish, food waste, chemicals, animal waste or oil cans. 
(Ord. 2752 § 1 (part), 1999) 
( Ord. No. 3013, § 1 , 11-12-13)  
8.36.070 - Illicit connections. 
A.  No person shall maintain or intentionally use a connection that operates to convey an illicit discharge to the municipal stormwater system. 
B.  Upon discovery of an illicit connection, the person owning or operating such connection shall either remove it or render it incapable of conveying an illicit discharge. 
C.  If any person fails to eliminate an illicit connection after being called upon by the city to do so, the public works director shall take appropriate measures to remove or disable the illicit connection and may recover such costs from the owner of such illicit connection. 
(Ord. 2752 § 1 (part), 1999) 
( Ord. No. 3013, § 1 , 11-12-13)  
8.36.080 - Reduction of pollutants in runoff. 
A.  No person shall cause or threaten to cause the discharge of pollutants to the MS4 by exposing such pollutants to stormwater runoff. 
B.  The owner of parking lot surfaces, public or private, with a capacity of twenty-five spaces or more, shall cause the parking lot surface to be cleaned as often as necessary to remove refuse, residual oil, grease, or other pollutants that might otherwise be discharged to the MS4 by runoff. 
(Ord. 2752 § 1 (part), 1999) 
( Ord. No. 3013, § 1 , 11-12-13)  
8.36.090 - Control of pollutants from commercial facilities. 
Commercial facilities specified in the municipal NPDES permit shall implement BMPs prescribed by the regional board or its executive officer, through programs or actions made pursuant to the municipal NPDES permit, or by the city's director of public works, to minimize the discharge of pollutants to the MS4. 
(Ord. 2752 § 1 (part), 1999) 
( Ord. No. 3013, § 1 , 11-12-13)  
8.36.100 - Control of pollutants from industrial activities. 
A.  It shall be a violation of this chapter for any industry in the city that is subject to waste discharge requirements specified in the SWRCB Water Quality Control Board's Industrial General Permit (IGP), to operate without a NPDES general industrial activities stormwater permit. 
B.  Industries that require a NPDES IGP shall retain onsite the following documents which evidence compliance with permit requirements: 
1.  A copy of the notice of intent for general permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity as submitted to the State Board or a copy of the report of waste discharge (ROWD) as submitted to the Regional Board; 
2.  A waste discharge identification number issued by the SWRCB; 
3.  A stormwater pollution prevention plan and monitoring program plan; 
4.  Any stormwater quality data; and 
5.  Evidence of facility self-inspection. 
C.  Any industry in the city requiring a NPDES IGP shall, upon reasonable request from a duly authorized officer of the city, provide any of the documents described in subsection B. of this section. 
D.  Industrial facilities not subject to the NPDES industrial general permit that are subject to pollution control requirements under the municipal NPDES permit, shall implement BMPs prescribed by the regional board or its executive officer, through programs or actions made pursuant to the municipal NPDES permit. 
(Ord. 2752 § 1 (part), 1999) 
( Ord. No. 3013, § 1 , 11-12-13)  
8.36.110 - Control of pollutants from construction activities requiring general construction activity stormwater permit. 
A.  No person shall commence or continue any construction activity in the city that causes the disturbance of one acre or more of soil by clearing, grading, and excavating without demonstrating to the city that such person has obtained a NPDES construction general permit from the SWRCB. The NPDES construction general permit does not apply to the following construction activity: 
1.  Routine maintenance to maintain original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or original purpose of the facility; 
2.  Disturbances to land surfaces solely related to agricultural operations such as disking, harrowing, terracing and leveling, and soil preparation; 
3.  Construction activity covered by an individual NPDES permit for stormwater discharges; 
4.  Landfill construction activity that is subject to the industrial general permit; or 
5.  Construction activity that discharges to combined sewer systems. 
In the case of a public emergency that requires immediate construction activities, a discharger shall submit a brief description of the emergency construction activity within five days of the onset of construction, and then shall submit all PRDs within thirty days. 
B.  Any person engaged in a construction activity in the city requiring a NPDES construction permit shall retain at the construction site the following documents: 
1.  A copy of the notice of intent to comply with terms of the general permit to discharge water associated with construction activity; 
2.  A waste discharge identification number issued by the SWRCB; 
3.  A stormwater pollution prevention plan and monitoring program plan for the construction activity requiring the construction permit; and 
4.  Records of all inspections, compliance and noncompliance reports, evidence of self-inspection and good house keeping practices. 
C.  Any person engaged in a construction activity in the city requiring a general construction stormwater activity permit shall, upon reasonable request from a duly authorized officer of the city, provide any of the documents specified in subsection B. of this section and shall retain said documents for at least three years after completion of construction. 
D.  Construction activity not subject to the NPDES Industrial General permit that are subject to pollution control requirements under the municipal NPDES permit, shall implement BMPs prescribed by the regional board or its executive officer, through programs or actions made pursuant to the municipal NPDES permit. 
(Ord. 2752 § 1 (part), 1999) 
( Ord. No. 3013, § 1 , 11-12-13)  
8.36.120 - Control of pollutants from other construction activities. 
Any person engaged in a construction activity subject to municipal NPDES permit, shall be required to implement BMPs specified by the regional board, its executive officer, or the city's public works director. 
(Ord. 2752 § 1 (part), 1999) 
( Ord. No. 3013, § 1 , 11-12-13)  
8.36.130 - Control of pollutants from new developments. 
A.  Prior to the construction of a development or new development project, such project shall be evaluated by the city for its potential to discharge pollutants to the MS4 based on its intended land use. Such evaluation shall be conducted in accordance with development planning requirements established by the regional board or its executive officer, pursuant to the municipal NPDES permit. 
B.  Once a development or new development project has been evaluated for its potential to discharge pollutants to the MS4, the city shall require appropriate BMPs to be implemented during construction and following project completion in order to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants to achieve water quality standards/receiving water limitations. The prescription of BMPs shall be in keeping with requirements established by the regional board or its executive officer, pursuant to the municipal NPDES permit. 
C.  All structural BMPs are required to be properly operated and maintained according to product specifications and site characteristics to maintain effectiveness in reducing the discharge of pollutants. Documentation on operation and maintenance activities shall be retained onsite at all times, and made available upon request by an authorized enforcement officer. 
(Ord. 2752 § 1 (part), 1999) 
( Ord. No. 3013, § 1 , 11-12-13)  
8.36.140 - Inspection. 
A.  Authority to Inspect. The director of public works and his designees (hereinafter "authorized officers") are authorized and directed to enforce all provisions of this chapter. Prior to commencing any inspection, the authorized enforcement officer shall obtain either the consent of the owner or occupant of the property or shall obtain an administrative inspection or criminal search warrant. 
B.  Authority to Conduct Sampling and Establish Sampling Devices. With the consent of the owner or occupant or pursuant to a search warrant, any authorized enforcement officer may establish on any property such devices as necessary to conduct sampling or monitoring activities necessary to determining the concentrations of pollutants in stormwater and/or nonstormwater runoff. During all inspections as provided herein, the authorized enforcement officer may take any samples deemed necessary to aid in the pursuit of the inquiry or in the recordation of the activities onsite. 
C.  Requirement to Sample or Monitor. Any authorized enforcement officer may request that any person engaged in any activity and/or owning or operating any facility which may cause or contribute to stormwater pollution or contamination, illicit discharges, and/or discharge of nonstormwater to the stormwater system, undertake such monitoring activities and/or analyses and furnish such reports as the authorized enforcement officer may specify. The burden, including costs, of these activities, analyses and reports shall be paid by the owner of the property and bear a reasonable relationship to the need for the monitoring, analyses and reports and the benefits to be obtained. 
(Ord. 2752 § 1 (part), 1999) 
( Ord. No. 3013, § 1 , 11-12-13)  
8.36.150 - Enforcement. 
A.  Criminal Sanctions. 
1.  Penalty for Violation. It is unlawful for any person to violate any provisions or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed an infraction, and may be punished as such, notwithstanding the fact that at the discretion of the enforcing attorney, the violation of any section of this chapter may be filed as a misdemeanor or an infraction. The complaint charging such violation shall specify whether the violation is a misdemeanor or an infraction. 
2.  Prosecutor. The enforcing attorney may act on the request of the city manager or his/her designee, to pursue enforcement actions in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  Administrative Remedies. The authorized enforcement officer may, in his/her discretion, issue either a notice of noncompliance or a cease and desist order as hereinafter described. In determining which remedy option to pursue, the authorized enforcement officer may consider the severity of the discharge or violation, the potential for irreparable harm which may be caused by the discharge or violation, and/or whether the owner, occupant or responsible person is a repeat offender of the same or similar violation. 
1.  Notice of Noncompliance. The authorized enforcement officer may deliver to a permittee, the owner or occupant of any property, or to any person responsible for an illicit connection or prohibited discharge, or any other violation of this chapter, a notice of noncompliance. The notice of noncompliance shall be delivered in accordance with subsection B.4. of this section. 
a.  The notice of noncompliance shall identify the provision(s) of this chapter and/or the applicable permit, which has been violated. The notice of noncompliance shall state that continued noncompliance may result in additional enforcement actions against the owner, occupant and/or person. 
b.  The notice of noncompliance shall state a compliance date that must be met by the owner, occupant and/or person provided, however, that the compliance date may not exceed ninety days unless the authorized enforcement officer extends the compliance deadline up to an additional ninety days where good cause exists for an extension. 
c.  The notice of noncompliance may include the following terms and requirements: 
i.  Specific steps and time schedules for compliance as reasonably necessary to eliminate an existing prohibited discharge and/or to prevent the imminent threat of a prohibited discharge including, but not limited to, a prohibited discharge from any pond, pit, well, surface impoundment, holding or storage area; 
ii.  Specific steps and time schedules for compliance as reasonably necessary to discontinue any illicit connection; 
iii.  Specific requirements for containment, cleanup, removal, storage, handling, use, proper disposal, and treatment of any pollutant having the potential to contact stormwater or nonstormwater runoff; 
iv.  Any other terms or requirements reasonably calculated to prevent the imminent threat of or continuing violations of this chapter including, but not limited to, requirements for compliance with best management practices guidance documents promulgated by any federal, state of California or regional agency; and 
v.  Any other terms or requirements reasonably calculated to achieve full compliance with the terms, conditions and requirements of any permit issued pursuant hereto. 
2.  Cease and Desist Orders. The authorized enforcement officer may issue a cease and desist order. A cease and desist order shall be delivered in accordance with subsection B.4. of this section. A cease and desist order may direct a permittee, the owner or occupant of any property and/or other person responsible for a violation of this chapter to: 
a.  Immediately discontinue any illicit connection or prohibited discharge to the stormwater drainage system; 
b.  Immediately contain or divert any flow of water off the property, where the flow is occurring in violation of any provision of this chapter; 
c.  Immediately discontinue any other violation of this chapter; 
d.  Clean up or remediate the area affected by the violation; or 
e.  Immediately cease any activity not in compliance with the terms, conditions and requirements of the permit issued pursuant to this chapter. 
3.  Recovery of Costs. The authorized enforcement officer may deliver to the owner or occupant of any property, any permittee or any other person who has failed to comply with either a notice of noncompliance or a cease and desist order, an invoice for costs (invoice of cost) for reimbursement of the city's actual costs incurred in issuing and enforcement of any provision of this chapter. Actual costs shall include, but are not limited to, the cost to the city for the reinspection of the property, preparation, issuance and enforcement of any subsequent notice or order. The invoice of cost shall not apply to the first reinspection after service of the notice or order if the owner or occupant of any property, the permittee or person has corrected all violations as set forth in the notice or order. The costs charged herein are intended to compensate for administration costs and not for enforcement of the law. 
The invoice for costs shall be due and payable to the city within thirty days from the date of service. If any owner, occupant, permittee or person fails to pay the invoice for costs or file a timely appeal pursuant to subsections B.5. through B.9. of this section then the enforcing attorney may institute collection proceedings. 
4.  Delivery of Notice. Any notice of noncompliance, cease and desist order, notice of legal nonconforming connection or invoice of costs (hereinafter, collectively referred to as the "notice") shall be delivered pursuant to the following requirements: 
a.  The notice shall state that the recipient has a right to appeal the matter as set forth in subsections B.5.—9. of this section; 
b.  Delivery shall be deemed complete upon: 
i.  Personal service to the recipient; 
ii.  Deposit in the U.S. mail, postage prepaid for first class delivery; or 
iii.  Facsimile service with confirmation of receipt. 
c.  Where the recipient of notice is the owner of the property, the address for notice shall be the address from the most recently issued equalized assessment roll for the property or as otherwise appears in the current records of the city; 
d.  Where the recipient is a permittee, the address for notice shall be the address set forth on the application for a permit; and 
e.  Where the owner or occupant of any property cannot be located after the reasonable efforts of the authorized enforcement officer, a notice shall be deemed delivered after posting said notice on the property for a period of ten business days. 
5.  Administrative Hearing. Except as set forth in subsection B.7. of this section any person receiving a notice, or any person who is subject to any adverse determination made pursuant to this chapter, may appeal the matter by requesting an administrative hearing as set forth below. Notwithstanding the foregoing, these administrative appeal procedures shall not apply to criminal proceedings initiated to enforce this chapter. 
6.  Request for Administrative Hearing. Any person appealing a notice or an adverse determination shall, within thirty days of receipt thereof, file a written request for an administrative hearing with the office of the city clerk, accompanied by an administrative hearing fee as established by separate resolution. A copy of the request for administrative hearing shall also be mailed on the date of filing to the hearing officer. Thereafter, a hearing on the matter shall be held before the hearing officer within forty-five business days of the date of filing of the written request unless, in the reasonable discretion of the hearing officer and pursuant to a written request by the appealing party, a continuance of the hearing is granted. 
7.  Administrative Hearing for Cease and Desist Orders and Emergency Abatement Actions. An administrative hearing on the issuance of a cease and desist order or following an emergency abatement action shall be held within five business days following the issuance of the order or the action of abatement, unless the hearing (or the time requirement for the hearing) is waived in writing by the party subject to the cease and desist order or the emergency abatement. A request for an administrative hearing shall not be required from the person subject to the cease and desist order or the emergency abatement action. 
8.  Hearing Proceedings. The authorized enforcement officer shall appear in support of the notice, determination or emergency abatement action and the appealing party shall appear in opposition of the notice, determination or emergency abatement action. Each party shall have the right to present testimony and other documentary evidence as necessary for explanation of the case. The decision of the hearing officer shall be issued within ten business days of the conclusion of the hearing and shall be delivered by first-class mail, postage prepaid, to the appealing party. 
Notwithstanding the above, the decision of the hearing officer in any preceding determining the validity of a cease and desist order or following an emergency abatement action shall be mailed within five business days following the conclusion of the hearing. However, all other provisions in this chapter regarding appeal procedures shall apply to cease and desist orders. 
9.  Final Decision and Appeal to the City Manager. A person may appeal the decision of the hearing officer by filing a written notice of appeal with the city manager's office within ten business days from the date of mailing of the hearing officer's decision. The appeal shall be scheduled for city manager or his/her designee action in accordance with customary filing deadlines for projects submitted to the city manager. The notice of appeal shall state in detail the factual basis for the appeal. The city manager shall consider the appeal not less than ten, nor more than forty-five days, following the filing of the appeal. The city manager may continue the hearing date where necessary. At the time and place set for such appeal hearing, the city manager shall hold a de novo hearing. If the city manager finds from the relevant evidence at the hearing that the action taken was in conformance with the provisions of this chapter, it shall require compliance with the hearing officer's decision. A copy of the city manager's decision shall be mailed to the appellant within five working days after adoption thereof. 
The decision of the city manager shall be final. The decision must include notice that any legal challenge to the final decision shall be made pursuant to the provisions of Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5 and Section 1094.6 and shall be commenced within ninety days following issuance of the final decision. The administrative hearing fee paid by a prevailing party in an appeal shall be refunded. 
10.  City Abatement. In the event the owner or occupant of property, the operator of a facility, a permittee or any other person fails to comply with any provision of a compliance schedule issued to such owner, occupant, operator, permittee or person pursuant to this chapter, the authorized enforcement officer may request the enforcing attorney to obtain an abatement warrant or other appropriate judicial authorization to enter the property, abate the condition and restore the property. Any costs incurred by the city in obtaining and carrying out an abatement warrant or other judicial authorization may be recovered pursuant to subsection C.4. of this section. 
C.  Nuisance. Any condition in violation of this chapter including, but not limited to, the maintenance or use of any illicit connection or the occurrence of any prohibited discharge, shall constitute a threat to the public health, safety and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance pursuant to Government Code Section 38771. At the request of the city manager or his/her designee, the enforcing attorney may seek a court order to enjoin and/or abate the nuisance. 
1.  Court Order to Enjoin and/or Abate. At the request of the city manager or his/her designee, the enforcing attorney may seek a court order to enjoin and/or abate the nuisance. 
2.  Notice to Owner and Occupant. Prior to seeking any court order to enjoin or abate a nuisance or threatened nuisance, the authorized enforcement officer shall provide notice of the proposed injunction or abatement to the owner and occupant, if any, of the property where the nuisance or threatened nuisance is occurring. 
3.  Emergency Abatement. In the event the nuisance constitutes an imminent danger to public health and/or safety or the environment, the city manager or his/her designee may enter the property from which the nuisance emanates, abate the nuisance and restore any property affected by the nuisance. To the extent reasonably practicable, informal notice shall be provided to the owner or occupant prior to abatement. If necessary to protect the public health and/or safety or the environment, abatement may proceed without prior notice to or consent from the owner or occupant thereof and without judicial warrant. 
An imminent danger shall include, but is not limited to, exigent circumstances created by the dispersal of pollutants, where the same presents a significant and immediate threat to the public health and/or safety of the environment. Notwithstanding the authority of the city to conduct an emergency abatement action, the administrative hearing and appeal procedures pursuant to subsections B.5.—9. of this section shall follow the abatement action. 
4.  Reimbursement of Costs. All costs incurred by the city in responding to any nuisance, all administrative expenses and all other expenses recoverable under state law shall be recoverable from the person(s) creating, causing, committing, permitting or maintaining the nuisance. 
5.  Nuisance Lien. All costs shall become a lien against the property from which the nuisance emanated and a personal obligation against the owner thereof in accordance with Government Code Section 38773.1 and Section 38773.5. The owner of record of the property subject to any lien shall be given notice of the lien prior to recording as required by Government Code Section 38773.1. 
At the direction of the city manager or his/her designee, the enforcing attorney may be authorized to collect nuisance abatement costs or enforce a nuisance lien in an action brought for a money judgment or by delivery to the county assessor of a special assessment against the property in accordance with the conditions and requirements of Government Code Section 38773.5. 
D.  Consecutive Violations. Each day in which a violation occurs and each separate failure to comply with either a separate provision of this chapter, a notice of noncompliance, a cease and desist order or a permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall constitute a separate violation of this chapter punishable by fines or sentences issued in accordance herewith. 
E.  Nonexclusive Remedies. Each and every remedy available for the enforcement of this chapter shall be nonexclusive and it is within the discretion of the authorized enforcement officer or enforcing attorney to seek cumulative remedies, except that multiple monetary fines or penalties shall not be available for any single violation of this chapter. 
F.  Violations of Other Laws. Any person acting in violation of this chapter also may be acting in violation of the Federal Clean Water Act or the State Porter-Cologne Act and other laws and also may be subject to sanctions including civil liability. Accordingly, the enforcing attorney is authorized to file a citizen suit, pursuant to Federal Clean Water Act Section 505(a), seeking penalties, damages, and orders compelling compliance, and other appropriate relief. The enforcing attorney may notify Regional Board or any other appropriate state or local agency, of any alleged violation of this chapter. 
G.  Injunctions. At the request of the city manager or his/her designee, the enforcing attorney may file in a court of competent jurisdiction a civil action seeking an injunction against any threatened or continuing noncompliance with the provisions of this chapter. Any temporary, preliminary or permanent injunction issued pursuant hereto may include an order for reimbursement to the city of all costs incurred in enforcing this chapter including costs of inspection, investigation and monitoring, the costs of abatement undertaken at the expense of the city, costs relating to restoration of the environment and all other expenses as authorized by law. 
H.  Other Civil Remedies. 
1.  The city manager or his/her designee may cause the enforcing attorney to file an action for civil damages in a court of competent jurisdiction seeking recovery of: 
a.  All costs incurred in enforcement of the chapter including, but not limited to, costs relating to investigation, sampling, monitoring, inspection, administrative expenses, all other expenses as authorized by law and consequential damages; 
b.  All costs incurred in mitigating harm to the environment or reducing the threat to human health; and 
c.  Damages for irreparable harm to the environment. 
2.  The enforcing attorney is authorized to file actions for civil damages resulting from any trespass or nuisance occurring on public land or to the MS4 from any violation of this chapter where the same has caused damage, contamination or harm to the environment, public property or the MS4. 
I.  Whenever necessary, interagency coordination will be employed to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2752 § 1 (part), 1999) 
( Ord. No. 3013, § 1 , 11-12-13)  
Chapter 8.38 - SMOKING IN PUBLIC FACILITIES 
 
8.38.010 - Purpose and intent. 
The city council finds that the smoking of tobacco, or any other weed, plant, or substance is a positive danger to health and a material annoyance to those who are present in confined and unconfined spaces, and in order to serve public health, safety and welfare, the declared purpose of this chapter is to prohibit smoking of tobacco, or any other weed, plant or substance in or on public facilities owned or operated by the city of Whittier as stated and required in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2995, § 1, 1-8-13)  
8.38.020 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall be construed as defined in this section: 
(a)  Park shall have the same meaning as Section 12.42.020(F) of the Whittier Municipal Code. Parks shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Anaconda Park, 14575 Anaconda Street; 
(2)  Bailey Ranch House, 13421 Camilla Street; 
(3)  Broadway Park, 12816 Broadway; 
(4)  Central Park, 6532 Friends Avenue; 
(5)  Founders Memorial Park, 6031 Citrus Avenue; 
(6)  Friends Park, 7630 Washington Avenue (Joe Miller Field) and 7630 Washington Avenue (Skate Park); 
(7)  Greenway Trail, Mills Avenue to Pioneer Boulevard (4.5 miles); 
(8)  Guirado Park, 5760 Pioneer Avenue; 
(9)  Hellman Park, Greenleaf Avenue; 
(10)  Kennedy Park, 8530 Painter Avenue; 
(11)  Laurel Park, 8825 Jacmar Avenue; 
(12)  Lee Owens Park, 7930 Greenleaf Avenue; 
(13)  Leffingwell Ranch Park, 15740 Starbuck; 
(14)  Lou Henry Hoover Foundation, 10839 Beverly Boulevard; 
(15)  Michigan Park, 8228 Michigan Avenue; 
(16)  Murphy Ranch Park, 16200 Las Cumbres; 
(17)  Palm Park, 5703 Palm Avenue and 5706 El Rancho Drive; 
(18)  Parnell Park, 10711 Scott Avenue; 
(19)  Patricia Ryan Nixon Foundation, southwest corner of Mar Vista Street and Colima Road; 
(20)  Penn Park, 13950 Penn Street; 
(21)  J.G. Whittier Park, 7227 Whittier Avenue; 
(22)  Transit Depot Park, 7333 Greenleaf Avenue, 
(23)  York Field, 9110 Santa Fe Springs Road; 
(b)  Smoke or smoking means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The consumption of tobacco products by burning or inhalation; or 
(2)  The holding or carrying of a lighted smoking device; or 
(3)  Emitting or exhaling the smoke directly from a cigar, cigarette, pipe or any other lighted smoking device or substance. 
(Ord. No. 2995, § 1, 1-8-13)  
8.38.030 - Smoking prohibited. 
Smoking is prohibited and is unlawful within all areas posted as a no smoking area by the city by signs of sufficient number and posted in such locations as to be readily seen by persons within such area, including but not limited to: 
(a)  Within any park, including parking lot areas; and 
(b)  Within fifty feet of any park perimeter, provided that if any such perimeter encroaches on private property, this section's prohibition shall not apply to the private property. This prohibition shall also not apply to persons and vehicles in route along the public streets and sidewalks. 
(Ord. No. 2995, § 1, 1-8-13)  
8.38.040 - Disposal of tobacco waste. 
It shall be unlawful to dispose of any part of any tobacco product including, but not limited to, cigars and cigarettes or any other combustible substance, in any place where smoking is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2995, § 1, 1-8-13)  
8.38.050 - Administration. 
The smoking prohibitions established by this chapter shall be administered by any city employee authorized to enforce violations of this Code, or state code relating to smoking. 
(Ord. No. 2995, § 1, 1-8-13)  
8.38.060 - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Any violation of Section 8.38 shall be punishable in accordance with the provisions set out in Chapter 1.08 of this Code. 
(b)  Ejection. Any person who violates Chapter 8.38 shall be subject to ejection from the park by any city employee authorized to enforce violations of this Code or state law. 
(c)  Three or more violations of Section 8.38 by the same individual within any twelve-month period within the same park or public facility is declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated by the city through civil proceedings by means of a restraining order, preliminary or permanent injunction, or in any other manner provided by law for the abatement of such nuisances. Any such individual may be ordered to stay away from the public facility, sports facility, or park where the violations occurred for up to twelve months following the most recent violation. 
(Ord. No. 2995, § 1, 1-8-13)  
8.38.070 - Declaration of nuisance. 
Whenever the city manager finds that a person has committed three or more violations of Section 8.38.030, he shall set the matter for public hearing before a hearing officer, who shall be designated as such by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 2995, § 1, 1-8-13)  
8.38.080 - Abatement hearing—Notice. 
The hearing officer shall give ten days' written notice to the person that has committed three or more violations of the time and place of hearing, by United States Postal Service, postage prepaid, addressed to him/her at his/her last known address. 
(Ord. No. 2995, § 1, 1-8-13)  
8.38.090 - Abatement hearing—Procedure. 
(a)  At the time and place set for the hearing, the hearing officer shall hear and consider all relevant evidence, including but not limited to, applicable staff reports, objections or protests relative to the existence of the alleged public nuisance and/or the manner proposed for abatement of them. The hearing may be continued from time to time, without further written notice. 
(b)  Upon the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall, based upon the evidence presented at the hearing, determine whether the person constitutes a public nuisance, as defined in this chapter. If the hearing officer finds that a public nuisance exists, the person may be ordered to stay away from the public facility, sports facility, or park where the most recent violation occurred for up to twelve months. The hearing officer shall give notice of his determination by serving a copy of the order upon the person who committed three or more violations of Section 8.38.030, and from any person requesting a copy of the order. If the hearing officer finds a nuisance does not exist, he shall dismiss the proceedings. The determination of the hearing officer shall be final and conclusive in the absence of an appeal. 
(Ord. No. 2995, § 1, 1-8-13)  
8.38.100 - Appeal. 
(a)  The person who has committed three or more violations of Section 8.38.030, which is a subject of a proceeding, may appeal the hearing officer's determination to the city council. Such an appeal shall be timely only if filed within fifteen calendar days from and after the giving of notice by the hearing officer of his determination. 
(b)  The appeal shall be in writing and shall set forth the grounds for the appeal. The appeal shall be filed with the city clerk-treasurer within the time permitted pursuant to this chapter. A filing and processing fee, if required by resolutions of the city council, shall be paid contemporaneously by the appealing party with the filing of the appeal with the city clerk-treasurer. Upon the receipt by the city clerk-treasurer of such an appeal, and the filing and processing fee, the clerk-treasurer shall prepare an administrative record which shall consist of a transcript of the proceedings before the hearing officer, copies of the written material submitted in the hearing, if any, and a copy of the hearing officer's determination. The administrative record, as certified by the city clerk-treasurer, shall be transmitted to each member of the city council by the clerk-treasurer, who also shall set a time and a place for the council's hearing upon the appeal. 
(c)  At the time of the hearing, which shall be noticed by the clerk-treasurer, the city council shall permit any interested person to present written or oral arguments relating to the appeal, but shall not permit the introduction of any evidence, unless a showing is made by the offering party that the evidence could not reasonably have been presented to the hearing officer at the time and place of that hearing. Thereafter, based upon the administrative record, the evidence as may be presented pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and the written or oral arguments of interested persons, the city council shall determine whether the person constitutes a public nuisance within the meaning of this chapter. If it finds a public nuisance exists, it shall; if it finds the nuisance does not exist, it shall dismiss the proceeding. The decision of the city council shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 2995, § 1, 1-8-13)  
8.38.110 - Abatement order service. 
A copy of the final order of abatement of the nuisance shall be served upon the person who has committed three or more violations of Section 8.38.030, by United States Postal Service, postage prepaid, addressed to the person who has committed three or more violations of Section 8.38.030 at his/her last known address. 
(Ord. No. 2995, § 1, 1-8-13)  
Title 9 - PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE  
Chapter 9.08 - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC DECENCY 
 
9.08.010 - Deposit of offensive matter in public places. 
A.  No person shall deposit, by means of urination or defecation, any human waste material in any public place or in any place open to the public or exposed to public view or upon the surface of the ground or upon any premises, lot or in any building, basement or in any public street, or into any standing water, stream or excavation or public place other than a proper toilet or portable toilet. 
B.  For the purposes of this section, "human waste material" is defined as human urine discharged from the body or human fecal material defecated from the rectum. 
(Prior code § 4260.6)  
Chapter 9.12 - INTOXICATED PERSONS 
 
9.12.010 - Drinking in public. 
A.  No person shall drink any intoxicating liquor upon any public street, alley, sidewalk, park or other public place in the city. The provisions of this section shall apply to any person regardless of whether or not the person is in or upon an automobile, motorcycle, vehicle, conveyance or otherwise. 
B.  For the purpose of this section the term "intoxicating liquor" includes beer, wine, whiskey, gin or any other beverage containing more than one-half of one percent of alcohol by volume. 
(Prior code § 4260)  
Chapter 9.16 - HOTEL REGISTRATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3051, § 1 , adopted April 26, 2016, repealed the former Ch. 9.16, § 9.16.010, and enacted a new chapter as set out herein. The former Ch. 9.16 pertained to prostitution and derived from prior code, § 4265.2. 
 
9.16.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "hotel registration ordinance" and may be cited by that name. 
( Ord. No. 3051, § 1 , 4-26-16)  
9.16.020 - Definitions. 
A.  "Exigent circumstances" means the urgency of a situation makes the needs of law enforcement so compelling that a warrantless search is objectively reasonable under the Fourth Amendment. 
B.  "Guest" means a person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy in a hotel by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license or other agreement. 
C.  "Hotel" means any public or private space or structure, including, but not limited to, any inn, hotel, motel, apartment house, rooming house, lodging house, or hostelry offering space for sleeping or overnight accommodations in exchange for rent and for a period of less than thirty days. Hotel includes the parking lot and other common areas of the hotel. 
D.  "Operator" means the person who is either the proprietor of the hotel or any other person who has the right to rent rooms within the hotel, whether in the capacity of owner, manager, lessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee, employee, or in any other capacity. 
( Ord. No. 3051, § 1 , 4-26-16)  
9.16.030 - Hotel registration required. 
A.  Every hotel operator in the city shall at all times keep and maintain within the hotel a hotel register, which shall be transcribed in either electronic, ink or typewritten form and shall include the name and home address of each and every guest or person renting or occupying a room or rooms therein. 
B.  The hotel register shall be signed by the person renting or occupying a room or rooms, and the hotel operator shall thereupon write opposite the name or names so registered the number of each room assigned to or occupied by each such guest, together with the time when the room is rented. No guest shall be permitted to occupy any hotel room until all of the aforesaid entries have been made in the register. 
C.  When the occupant or occupants of each room so rented quit and surrender it, the hotel operator shall enter the time thereof in the hotel register opposite the names of the occupant or occupants. 
D.  The hotel register shall be kept in a conspicuous place. Any guest of the hotel may request to inspect the hotel register. Any city official or police officer may inspect the hotel register with the hotel operator's permission, pursuant to a warrant, pursuant to an administrative subpoena, or in exigent circumstances. 
E.  Erasures or alterations to the hotel register shall be prohibited. 
( Ord. No. 3051, § 1 , 4-26-16)  
9.16.040 - Prohibited rental. 
A.  No hotel operator shall rent any hotel room for sleeping or lodging purposes more than once between the hours of six in the evening and six in the morning of the next day, except to bona fide travelers with baggage. 
( Ord. No. 3051, § 1 , 4-26-16)  
Chapter 9.32 - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY 
 
9.32.010 - Changing ditch, arroyo or storm drain. 
No person shall change, in any manner whatever, the course of any ditch, arroyo or storm water drain in the city. 
(Prior code § 4260.19)  
Chapter 9.33 - AEROSOL PAINT CONTAINERS AND MARKER PENS 
 
9.33.010 - Possession prohibited—Generally. 
No person shall have in his or her possession any aerosol spray paint container having any substance commonly known as paint or dye or marker pens with tips exceeding four millimeters in width, while in any public park, playground, swimming pool, recreational facility or other public building owned or operated by the city, or while loitering in or near an underpass, bridge abutment, storm drain and other similar types of infrastructure not normally used by the public. This does not apply to authorized employees of the city nor authorized employees of an individual or company under contract with the city which requires the use of such materials. 
(Ord. 2601 § 1 (part), 1993)  
9.33.020 - Possession prohibited—School property. 
No person shall have in his or her possession any aerosol paint container having any substance commonly known as paint or dye while on any school property, grounds, facilities, buildings or structures, nor in the areas immediately adjacent to these specified locations. This does not apply to authorized employees of the school, nor authorized employees of an individual or company under contract with the school which requires the use of such materials. 
(Ord. 2601 § 1 (part), 1993)  
9.33.030 - Display in commercial establishments restricted. 
Every person who owns, conducts, operates or manages a retail commercial establishment selling aerosol spray paint containers or marker pens with tips exceeding four millimeters in width, containing anything other than a solution which can be removed with water after it dries, shall store or cause such aerosol spray paint containers or marker pens to be stored in an area viewable by, but not accessible to the public without employee assistance, pending legal sale or disposition of such containers or marker pens. 
(Ord. 2601 § 1 (part), 1993)  
Chapter 9.36 - FORTUNETELLING 
 
9.36.010 - Definition—Fortunetelling. 
The term "fortunetelling" means the telling of fortunes, forecasting of futures or furnishing any information not otherwise obtainable by the ordinary processes of knowledge, by means of any occult or psychic power, faculty or force, clairvoyance, clairaudience, cartomancy, phrenology, spirits, mediumship, seership, prophecy, augury, astrology, palmistry, necromancy, mind reading, telepathy or other similar practice, craft, art, science, cards, talisman, charm, potion, magnetism, magnetized article or substance, crystal gazing or magic of any kind or nature, or engaging in, practicing or carrying on any art, profession or business, the advertisement and practice of which is regulated by this chapter. 
(Ord. 2370 § 2 (part), 1986)  
9.36.020 - Exceptions. 
A.  The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any person solely by reason of the fact that he/she is engaged in the business of entertaining the public by demonstration of mind reading, mental telepathy, thought conveyance or the giving of horoscopic readings, at public places and in the presence of and within the hearing of other persons and at which no questions are answered, as part of such entertainment, except in a manner to permit all persons present at such public place to hear such answers, when not conducted in connection with the business of telling fortunes. Nothing in this section, however, shall be construed as exempting any such person from payment of the applicable license fee, if any, required to be paid by the licensing provisions of this code. 
B.  No person shall be required to pay any fee or take out any license for conducting or participating in any religious ceremony or service when such person holds a certificate of ordination as a minister, missionary, medium, healer or clairvoyant from any bona fide church or religious association maintaining a church and holding regular services and having a creed or set of religious principles that is recognized by all churches of like faith; provided, however, that the fees, gratuities, emoluments and profits thereof shall be regularly accounted for and paid solely to or for the benefit of the church or religious associations; provided, further, that the person holding a certificate in this section, shall, before practicing the profession specified in this chapter, file with the license processor a certified copy of his/her certificate of ordination with his/her name, age and street address in the city where he/she intends to carry on the business. Such bona fide church or religious association, as defined in this section, may, however, pay to its ministers, missionaries, mediums or workers a salary or compensation based upon a percentage basis; provided, that the agreement between the church and the minister, missionary, medium or worker, is embodied in a resolution and transcribed in the minutes of such church or religious association. 
(Ord. 2370 § 2 (part), 1986)  
9.36.030 - Permit and compliance with conditions required. 
A.  No person shall conduct, engage in, carry on, participate in, or practice fortunetelling or cause the same to be done for any direct or indirect charge, gift, donation or subscription by any means whatsoever, without having first obtained a permit from the license processor. 
B.  No person shall violate any of the terms of a permit issued pursuant to this chapter nor any of the regulations and provisions within this chapter. Each day such violation or violations occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. 2370 § 2 (part), 1986)  
9.36.040 - Application contents. 
Every person desiring a permit pursuant to this chapter shall file an application with the license processor upon a form provided by the license processor and, at such time, pay the required fee. The application shall be filed at least thirty days prior to the practicing of fortunetelling or conducting such business and shall contain the following information: 
A.  The full, true name and any other names or aliases now or previously used by the applicant. 
B.  The present address and telephone number of the applicant. 
C.  The previous addresses of applicant, if any, for a period of five years immediately prior to the date of the application and the dates of residence at each. 
D.  The applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair and the date and place of birth. 
E.  Two photographs of the applicant at least two inches by two inches taken within the last six months. 
F.  Business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for five years immediately preceding the date of application. 
G.  The business license history of the applicant and whether such applicant, in previous operations in the city or any other city, state or territory under license, has had such license or permit for fortunetelling or a fortunetelling business or similar type of business revoked or suspended, the reason therefor and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action or suspension or revocation. 
H.  All convictions within the last five years of any crime involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit or moral turpitude. 
I.  If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, together with the place and date of incorporation, and the names and addresses of each of its current officers and directors, and each stockholder holding more than five percent of the stock in the corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, the applicant shall set forth the name, address and dates of birth of the partners, including limited partners. If the applicant is a limited partnership, it shall furnish a copy of its certificate of limited partnership filed with the county clerk. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporations shall apply. The applicant corporation or partnership shall designate one of its officers or general partners to act as its responsible managing officer. Such designated persons shall complete and sign all application forms required of an individual applicant under this chapter, but only one application fee shall be charged. 
J.  The fingerprints of the applicant on a form to be provided by the police department. 
K.  Address of the proposed location for the conduct of the proposed profession, art or business of fortunetelling. 
L.  Such other identification and information as reasonably may be required in order to discover the truth of the matters hereinbefore specified as required to be set forth in the application. 
(Ord. 2370 § 2 (part), 1986)  
9.36.050 - Investigation. 
The license processor with the assistance of the police department, shall make, or cause to be made, an investigation of each applicant(s) in order to verify the facts contained in the application or the supporting data. 
(Ord. 2370 § 2 (part), 1986)  
9.36.060 - Issuance of permit. 
A.  At the conclusion of the investigation, the license processor shall approve the issuance of the permit if he/she shall find: 
1.  The information contained in the application or supporting data is true; 
2.  The applicant has not, within the previous one year, been convicted of any violation of this chapter or any law relating to dishonesty, fraud, deceit or moral turpitude; 
3.  The applicant agrees to abide by and comply with all terms of the permit and applicable laws of this code; 
4.  That the operation as proposed by the applicant, if permitted, would comply with all applicable laws including zoning; and 
5.  No information has been brought to the attention of the license processor as a result of the investigation which would require the denial of such permit. 
B.  The license processor shall thereafter issue the permit when: 
1.  The required fee has been paid; 
2.  There shall have been posted with the city clerk-treasurer a surety bond in the principal sum of five thousand dollars executed as surety by a good and sufficient corporate surety authorized to do surety business in the state and as a principal by the applicant which shall have been approved by the city attorney as to form, which bond shall have been given to insure good faith and fair dealing on the part of the applicant and as a guarantee of indemnity for any and all loss, damage, injury, theft or other unfair dealing suffered by any patron of the applicant within the city during the term of the permit. 
(Ord. 2370 § 2 (part), 1986)  
9.36.070 - Separate permit for each person practicing such business. 
Every natural person actively carrying on, conducting or engaging in fortunetelling for which a permit is required shall file a separate permit fee as required by the provisions of this chapter. No permittee shall transfer the permit to any other person. 
(Ord. 2370 § 2 (part), 1986)  
9.36.080 - Bond termination. 
The liability on any bond deposited with the city may be terminated upon the filing with the city clerk-treasurer by the surety on the bond a written notice to the city that the surety intends to terminate the liability upon the bond, such termination to become effective thirty days from and after the day upon which the notice of intention to terminate liability is filed with the city clerk-treasurer; provided, however, that in no case shall the termination of liability by the surety on any bond affect any liability incurred prior to the date of termination thereof. 
(Ord. 2370 § 2 (part), 1986)  
9.36.090 - Permit—Refusal—Appeal. 
If the license processor, following investigation of the applicant, deems that the applicant does not fulfill the requirements as set forth in this chapter he or she shall deny the application and shall notify the applicant by certified mail of such denial, within thirty days of the date of application. Any applicant who is denied a permit by the license processor may appeal each denial to the city manager or designee of the city manager pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. The appeal fee shall be as set by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 2370 § 2 (part), 1986)  
9.36.100 - Permit suspension and revocation. 
The license processor may, based on evidence that any of the provisions of this chapter have been violated, suspend or revoke a permit; provided that written notice by certified mail of such suspension or revocation is furnished the permittee. The permittee, within fifteen days after receipt of notice of suspension or revocation, may file an appeal with the city clerk-treasurer to be taken to the city manager or designee. In the event an appeal is timely filed, the suspension or revocation shall not take effect until final decision has been rendered by the city manager or designee. If the permittee fails to take an appeal within the fifteen-day filing period provided in this chapter, suspension or revocation shall take effect immediately upon expiration of such filing period. Procedures for appeals shall be those set forth in Section 9.36.100 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2370 § 2 (part), 1986)  
9.36.110 - Permit revocation and appeals procedure. 
A.  No permit shall be revoked until after a hearing shall have been held before the city manager or designee to determine good cause for such revocation, and it is unlawful for any person to carry on the business of fortunetelling until the suspended permit has been reinstated by the city manager or his designee. Notice of such hearing shall be given in writing and served at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing thereon. The notice shall state the grounds of the complaint against the holder of such permit, or against the business carried on by the permittee at the fortunetelling business and shall state the time and place where such hearing will be held. 
B.  Such notice shall be served upon the permitholder by delivering the same to such person or by leaving such notice at the place of business of the permitholder during usual business hours, with the person who is apparently in charge thereof, or the residence of the permitholder, in the custody of a person of suitable age and discretion. In the event the permitholder cannot be found and the service of such notice cannot be made in the manner provided in this chapter, a copy of such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, addressed to the permitholder at his place of business or residence at least ten days prior to the date of such hearing. 
C.  After such hearing, the city manager or his designee shall render a written decision within ten working days from the date the matter is submitted for decision. The action of the city manager or his designee shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. 2370 § 2 (part), 1986)  
9.36.120 - Permit cancellation. 
Upon the delivery of any false statement in the application or any misrepresentation by the applicant in procuring the permit, or upon the failure, neglect or refusal of the applicant to promptly, voluntarily and without notice, furnish and file a new bond when the surety on any bond has terminated its liability, and cause the same to be approved by the license processor as to sufficiency of sureties and by the city attorney as to form, or in the case of death, bankruptcy or removal from the city of any one or both of the sureties on bond, then and in that event, the license processor may, upon five days' notice to the applicant, cancel and annul the permit; whereupon the applicant shall be amenable to the penalties prescribed in this chapter, from and after the date of the cancellation, as though in this chapter, the permit had never been granted. 
(Ord. 2370 § 2 (part), 1986)  
9.36.130 - Posting of permit. 
Every permittee shall post the license in a conspicuous place upon the premises. 
(Ord. 2370 § 2 (part), 1986)  
Chapter 9.40 - NIGHTTIME CURFEW FOR MINORS 
 
9.40.010 - Purpose. 
The provisions of this chapter are adopted in accordance with the authority granted to the city under the police power delegated to it by the Constitution of the state of California. The police power provides the city with the authority to react when the potential exists for jeopardy to the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizens. The city is concerned with the level of juvenile violence, juvenile gang activity and juvenile crime in the city. The crimes being committed by juveniles include serious offenses such as murders, drive-by shootings, drug-related crimes and other gang-related activities. Moreover, juveniles are particularly susceptible by their lack of maturity and experience to participate in unlawful and gang-related activities and to be victims of older perpetrators of crime. In addition, recent local statistics regarding juvenile crime and victimization indicate that enforcement of a curfew for juveniles decreases the percentage of juvenile victimization and increases the number of arrests for violent crimes during curfew hours. Based on the foregoing, the city believes that having an enforceable nighttime juvenile curfew ordinance is critical to preserving the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. 2718 § 3, 1997)  
9.40.020 - Definitions. 
The following definitions are applicable to this chapter: 
"City" means the city of Whittier, a municipal corporation created under the laws of the state of California. 
"Curfew hours" means the period from ten p.m. any evening of the week, until six a.m. the following day. 
"Emergency" means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, natural disaster, an automobile accident or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. 
"Establishment" means any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited, including but not limited to, any place of amusement of entertainment. 
"Guardian" means: (1) a person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or (2) a public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by the court. 
"Minor" means any person under eighteen years of age. 
"Operator" means any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation operating, managing, or conducting any establishment. The term includes the members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a corporation. 
"Parent" means a person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent or stepparent of another person. 
"Public place" means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities and shops. 
"Remain" means to: (1) linger, stay or be present; or, (2) fail to leave the premises when requested to do so by a peace officer or the owner, operator or employee of an establishment. 
"Responsible adult" means a person of at least eighteen years of age, authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor. 
"Serious bodily injury" means bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement or protracted loss or impairment of the functions of any bodily member or organ. 
(Ord. 2718 § 4, 1997)  
9.40.030 - Curfew restrictions. 
A.  It is unlawful for any minor to be present in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours. 
B.  It is unlawful for any parent or guardian of a minor to knowingly permit, or by insufficient control to allow, the minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours. 
C.  It is unlawful for any owner, operator or employee of an establishment to knowingly allow a minor to be present on the premises of an establishment within the city during curfew hours. 
(Ord. 2718 § 5, 1997)  
9.40.040 - Defenses to curfew restrictions. 
A.  It is a defense to prosecution under Section 9.40.030 that the minor was: 
1.  Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian, or by a responsible adult; 
2.  On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian, or the responsible adult, without any detour or delay; 
3.  In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel; 
4.  Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop; 
5.  Involved in an emergency; 
6.  On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence; 
7.  Attending an official school, religious or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from such an activity, without detour or delay; 
8.  Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution; or 
9.  Emancipated pursuant to law. 
B.  In addition to those defenses provided in subsection A of this section, it is a defense to prosecution under Section 9.40.030(C) that the owner, operator or employee of an establishment promptly notify the city's police department of the fact that a minor was present on the premises of an establishment within the city during curfew hours and refused to leave the establishment after first being asked to leave. 
(Ord. 2718 § 6, 1997)  
9.40.050 - Enforcement. 
Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a police officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for being in the public place or on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any responses and other circumstances, no defense under Section 9.40.040 is present or applicable. 
(Ord. 2718 § 7, 1997)  
9.40.060 - Penalties. 
A person who violates a provision of this chapter is guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of a day during which the violation is committed. Penalties are provided as follows: 
A.  Any minor who violates the provisions of Section 9.40.030 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor upon conviction thereof. Minors shall be dealt with in accordance with juvenile court law and procedure as provided by applicable state law. 
B.  Any parent, guardian, owner, operator or employee of an establishment who violates the provisions of Section 9.40.030 shall be guilty of an infraction upon conviction thereof. The infraction offense(s) shall be punishable as follows. 
1.  The initial violation of this chapter shall be deemed to be an infraction and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine to be determined by the court not to exceed one hundred dollars. 
2.  The second violation of this chapter shall be deemed to be an infraction and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine to be determined by the court not to exceed two hundred dollars. 
3.  The third or subsequent violations of this chapter shall be deemed to be an infraction and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine to be determined by the court not to exceed five hundred dollars. 
(Ord. 2718 § 8, 1997)  
9.40.070 - Cost recovery. 
A.  Determination by Court. When, based on a conviction for a violation of this chapter or for wilful misconduct in violation of Welfare and Institutions Code Section 602, a minor is detained for a period of time in excess of one hour, and the detention requires the supervision of the minor by an employee(s) of the city's police department, the parent or guardian of said minor shall be jointly and independently liable for the cost of providing such personnel over and above the services normally provided by the department. The liability shall not exceed the total sum of five hundred dollars. 
B.  Determination by Chief of Police. As determined by the chief of police or his designee, the parent or guardian of a minor committing any public offense amounting to an act of wilful misconduct in violation of Welfare and Institutions Code Section 602 where police personnel provide services relating to the detention, processing or supervision of minors that are over and above the normal services usually provided by the city's police department, may be assessed, and billed for, the cost of providing such personnel for such services beyond those normally provided by the department. The liability shall not exceed the total sum of five hundred dollars. 
C.  Appeal. Any person receiving a bill for police services pursuant to this chapter may, within fifteen days after billing date, file a written request appealing the imposition of the charges. Any billing sent pursuant to this section shall inform the billed party of the right to appeal the billing. Any appeal regarding such billing shall be heard by the city manager, or his or her designee, as the hearing officer. Within ten days after the hearing, the hearing officer shall give written notice of the decision to the appellant. Upon the filing of a request for an appeal, payment of the bill for the police services shall be suspended until notice of the decision of the hearing officer. If the appeal is denied in part or in full, all amounts due to the city shall be paid within thirty days after notice of the decision of the hearing officer. 
(Ord. 2718 § 9, 1997)  
Chapter 9.42 - DAYTIME CURFEW FOR MINORS 
 
9.42.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to prohibit any minor between the ages of six and eighteen who is subject to compulsory school requirements under state law from remaining in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city between the hours of eight a.m. and two-thirty p.m. on days when school is in session with certain exceptions. 
(Ord. 2719 § 2, 1997)  
9.42.020 - Definitions. 
The following definitions are applicable to this chapter: 
"City" means the city of Whittier, a municipal corporation created under the laws of the state of California. 
"Curfew hours" means the period between the hours of eight a.m. and two-thirty p.m. on days when school is in session and during the hours designated for schooling for the minor. 
"Emergency" means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, natural disaster, an automobile accident or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. 
"Establishment" means any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited, including but not limited to, any place of amusement or entertainment. 
"Guardian" means: (1) a person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or (2) a public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by the court. 
"Minor" means any person between the ages of six and eighteen years of age who is subject to compulsory education or compulsory continuation education or homeschooling requirements under state law (pursuant to Education Code Section 48200 et seq.). This definition shall also apply to minors whose enrollment status is that of suspension, expulsion, or transfers in progress. 
"Operator" means any individual, firm, association, partnership or corporation operating, managing or conducting any establishment. The term includes the members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a corporation. 
"Parent" means a person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent or stepparent of another person. 
"Public place" means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, beaches, parks, playgrounds and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities, theaters, game rooms, shops, shopping malls or any other public place of business. 
"Remain" means to: (1) linger, stay or be present; or (2) fail to leave the premises when requested to do so by a peace officer or the owner, operator or an employee of an establishment. 
"Responsible adult" means a person at least eighteen years of age, authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor. 
"Serious bodily injury" means bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ. 
(Ord. 2719 § 3, 1997)  
9.42.030 - Curfew restrictions. 
A.  It is unlawful for any minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours. 
B.  It is unlawful for any parent or guardian of a minor to knowingly permit, or by insufficient control to allow, the minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours. 
C.  It is unlawful for any owner, operator or employee of an establishment to knowingly allow a minor to remain in or upon the premises of an establishment within the city during curfew hours. 
(Ord. 2719 § 4, 1997)  
9.42.040 - Defenses to curfew restrictions. 
A.  It is a defense to prosecution under Section 9.42.030 that the minor was: 
1.  Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian, or by a responsible adult, and they are conducting activities which are "excused" within the meaning of Education Code Section 48205; 
2.  On an emergency errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian or by a responsible adult, without detour or delay; 
3.  Going to or from an employment activity, without detour or delay, or engaged in an employment activity, pursuant to a valid school work permit; 
4.  Going to or from a medical appointment, without detour or delay, and can demonstrate proof of that appointment; 
5.  Given permission to leave campus for the lunch period, has in his or her possession a valid lunch pass and has complied with the conditions and restrictions applicable to the lunch pass; 
6.  Attending an official school, religious or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored, sanctioned, or arranged by the school, or going to or returning from such an activity, without detour or delay; 
7.  Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution; 
8.  Given permission to leave campus, has in his or her possession a valid school-issued, off-campus permit and has complied with the conditions and restrictions applicable to the off-campus permit; 
9.  Not a resident of a school district within the city and possesses a valid passport, visitor's visa, or other form of reliable identification to establish that the minor is temporarily visiting within the city; or 
10.  Receiving instruction by a qualified tutor pursuant to Education Code Section 48224 or receiving home instruction through the private exemption pursuant to Education Code Section 48222. 
B.  In addition to those defenses provided in subsection A of this section, it is a defense to prosecution under Section 9.42.030(C) that the owner, operator or employee of an establishment promptly notified the city's police department of the fact that a minor was present on the premises of an establishment within the city during curfew hours and refused to leave the establishment after first being asked to leave. 
(Ord. 2719 § 5, 1997)  
9.42.050 - Enforcement. 
Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a police officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for being in the public place or on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any responses and other circumstances, no defense under Section 9.42.040 is present or applicable. 
(Ord. 2719 § 6, 1997)  
9.42.060 - Penalties for minors. 
A minor who violates a provision of this chapter is guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of a day during which the violation is committed. Any minor who violates the provisions of Section 9.42.030 shall be guilty of an infraction upon conviction thereof. The infraction offense(s) shall be punishable as follows: 
A.  First-Offense Infraction. The initial violation of this chapter shall be deemed to be an infraction and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine to be determined by the court not to exceed one hundred dollars and/or any other penalty provided by Welfare and Institutions Code Section 258. 
B.  Second-Offense Infraction. The second violation of this chapter shall be deemed to be an infraction and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine to be determined by the court not to exceed two hundred dollars and/or any other penalty provided by Welfare and Institutions Code Section 258. 
C.  Third- or Subsequent-Offense Infraction. The third or subsequent violation of this chapter shall be deemed to be an infraction and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine to be determined by the court not to exceed five hundred dollars and/or any other penalty provided by Welfare and Institutions Code Section 258. 
D.  The court may set aside the penalties set forth herein if the minor produces proof satisfactory to the court that the following have occurred: 
1.  The minor has had no unexcused absences from school from the date of the citation; and 
2.  The minor has performed twenty hours of court-approved community service during times other than the minor's hours of school attendance; and 
3.  The minor's parent or guardian has attended a parenting class or a series of parenting classes approved by the court; and 
4.  The minor and parent or guardian have attended counseling as directed and approved by the court. 
(Ord. 2719 § 7, 1997)  
9.42.070 - Hearing requirement—Obligation to attend. 
A minor cited for a violation of this chapter must attend a court hearing on the violation and must be accompanied by his/her parent or guardian. If any such parent or guardian fails to attend the hearing with the minor, and unless the interests of justice would otherwise be served, the court shall continue the hearing and shall issue a citation to said parent or guardian directing that person to appear at the continued hearing with the minor (pursuant to Welfare and Institutions Code Section 661). 
(Ord. 2719 § 8, 1997)  
9.42.080 - Penalties for parents or guardians. 
A parent or guardian who violates a provision of this chapter is guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of a day during which the violation is committed. Any parent or guardian who violates the provisions of Section 9.42.030 shall be guilty of an infraction upon conviction thereof. The infraction offense(s) shall be punishable as follows: 
A.  First-Offense Infraction. The initial violation of this chapter shall be deemed to be an infraction and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine to be determined by the court not to exceed one hundred dollars. 
B.  Second-Offense Infraction. The second violation of this chapter shall be deemed to be an infraction and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine to be determined by the court not to exceed two hundred dollars. 
C.  Third- or Subsequent-Offense Infraction. The third or subsequent violation of this chapter shall be deemed to be an infraction and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine to be determined by the court not to exceed five hundred dollars. 
D.  The court may set aside the penalties set forth herein if the parent or guardian produces proof satisfactory to the court that the following have occurred: 
1.  The minor has had no unexcused absences from school from the date of the citation; and 
2.  The parent or guardian has performed twenty hours of court-approved community service; and 
3.  The parent or guardian has attended a parenting class or a series of parenting classes approved by the court; and 
4.  The minor and parent or guardian have attended counseling as directed and approved by the court. 
(Ord. 2719 § 9, 1997)  
9.42.090 - Penalties for owners or operators or employees of an establishment. 
An owner, operator or employee of an establishment who violates a provision of this chapter is guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of a day during which the violation is committed. Any owner, operator or employee of an establishment who violates the provisions of Section 9.42.030 shall be guilty of an infraction upon conviction thereof. The infraction offense(s) shall be punishable as follows: 
A.  First-Offense Infraction. The initial violation of this chapter shall be deemed to be an infraction and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine to be determined by the court not to exceed one hundred dollars. 
B.  Second-Offense Infraction. The second violation of this chapter shall be deemed to be an infraction and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine to be determined by the court not to exceed two hundred dollars. 
C.  Third- or Subsequent-Offense Infraction. The third or subsequent violation of this chapter shall be deemed to be an infraction and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine to be determined by the court not to exceed five hundred dollars. 
(Ord. 2719 § 10, 1997)  
9.42.100 - Cost recovery. 
A.  Determination by Court. When, based on a conviction for a violation of this chapter or for wilful misconduct in violation of Welfare and Institutions Code Section 602, a minor is detained for a period of time in excess of one hour, and the detention required the supervision of the minor by an employee(s) of the city's police department, the parent or guardian of said minor shall be jointly and independently liable for the cost of providing such personnel over and above the services normally provided by the department. The liability shall not exceed the total sum of five hundred dollars. 
B.  Determination by chief of police. As determined by the chief of police or his designee, the parent or guardian of a minor committing any public offense amounting to an act of wilful misconduct in violation of Welfare and Institutions Code Section 602 where police personnel provide services relating to the detention, processing or supervision of minors that are over and above the normal services usually provided by the city's police department, may be assessed, and billed for, the cost of providing such personnel for such services beyond those normally provided by the department. The liability shall not exceed the total sum of five hundred dollars. 
C.  Appeal. Any person receiving a bill for police services pursuant to this chapter may, within fifteen days after the billing date, file a written request appealing the imposition of the charges. Any billing sent pursuant to this section shall inform the billed party of the right to appeal the billing. Any appeal regarding such billing shall be heard by the city manager, or his or her designee, as the hearing officer. Within ten days after the hearing, the hearing officer shall give written notice of the decision to the appellant. Upon the filing of a request for an appeal, payment of the bill for the police services shall be suspended until notice of the decision of the hearing officer. If the appeal is denied in part or in full, all amounts due to the city shall be paid within thirty days after notice of the decision of the hearing officer. 
(Ord. 2719 § 11, 1997)  
Chapter 9.48 - FIREARMS 
 
9.48.010 - Discharging prohibited. 
No person shall discharge any gun, revolver, pistol, firearm, spring gun, air gun, sling, slingshot and device designed or intended to discharge a dangerous missile within the city, except as provided: 
A.  Police officers in the discharge of their duties; 
B.  Any person acting in self-defense; 
C.  Shooting galleries operated under license issued by the city; 
D.  Rifle ranges being operated under a permit, as provided in this code; or 
E.  Civilian employees and trained volunteers in the course of their wildlife management duties using air guns discharging less lethal ammunition, including but not limited to water-filled projectiles, approved by the chief of police or his/her designee. 
(Ord. 2350 § 1, 1985; Ord. No. 3085 , § 1, 4-24-18)  
Chapter 9.52 - RELOCATION BENEFITS 
 
9.52.010 - Findings and purpose. 
The city council of the city of Whittier finds and declares that: 
A.  Some rental units in Whittier are found to have severe code violations which threaten the life and safety of occupants and require the units or rooms to be vacated to allow for extensive repairs. 
B.  Such code violations are often caused by deferred maintenance, may breach the landlord's implied warranty of habitability and sometimes constitute constructive eviction of the household from its residence. 
C.  Tenants of substandard residential units or structures suffer financial and other hardship when required to vacate their housing because the owner fails to correct the substandard conditions. 
D.  It is appropriate to require the owner to mitigate partially the tenant's hardship, since the hardship arises from the owner's failure to comply with the law and fulfill a landlord's obligations to the landlord's tenants. 
E.  Financial hardship arises because the tenant generally needs a large sum of money to relocate, often including first and last month's rent, deposit, moving expenses and utility deposits for a new residence. Low-income tenants are generally unable to obtain such sums and, as a result, are at great risk of becoming homeless. 
F.  The level of payments provided in this chapter are reflective of actual relocation costs likely to be incurred by displaced households. 
G.  Delayed payment of relocation benefits may impose extreme hardship upon tenants who then must themselves obtain the large sums necessary to relocate. Delayed payment may also require the city to expend city general funds to provide tenants with financial assistance for relocation. Any requirement to pay relocation benefits should contain disincentives for delayed payment in the form of appropriate penalties. 
(Ord. 2561 § 1(part), 1992)  
9.52.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply: 
A.  "Displaced." A tenant is displaced, within the meaning of this chapter, if the tenant is ordered to move out of a residential unit or structure by an order to vacate. 
B.  "Order to vacate" means the first written notice sent by an authorized city official to the owner and posted on the affected property declaring that, due to failure to repair or maintain, the unit or structure shall be vacated. 
C.  "Owner" means the owner of the property at the time the order to vacate is issued, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, and any successor in interest. 
D.  "Residential unit or structure" means any dwelling apartment, room or place which is the place of permanent or customary and usual abode of any person or household. 
E.  "Tenant" means any resident of the affected property is a tenant as that term is used in Chapter 2 of Title 5 of Part 4 of the California Civil Code (Sections 1940, et seq.). 
F.  "Vacation date" means the date by which a tenant is required to vacate a unit or structure, pursuant to an order by an authorized city official. 
(Ord. 2561 § 1(part), 1992)  
9.52.030 - Relocation benefits payable to displaced tenants by owner. 
Any tenant who is displaced from any structure which is occupied as a dwelling unit, but which is illegally created, constructed or occupied for which an order issued by an authorized city official under Chapter 8.08, or any other applicable provision, that the structure is to be vacated due to unsafe or hazardous living conditions shall be entitled to receive relocation benefits from the owner as specified in this chapter. 
(Ord. 2561 § 1(part), 1992)  
9.52.040 - Relocation benefits—When payable. 
A.  The relocation benefits required hereunder shall be payable within ten days after the date the order to vacate is first mailed to the owner or posted on the premises, or at least twenty days prior to the vacation date set forth in the order to vacate, whichever occurs later. 
B.  If there are fewer than ten days between the first posting or mailing of the order to vacate and the vacation date, the relocation benefits shall be payable within twenty-four hours after the order is posted or mailed. The city manager or his designee shall attempt to provide telephonic or written notice to the owner to notify the owner that benefits are payable immediately. Failure to provide the notice as specified herein shall not relieve the owner of any obligations imposed by this chapter. 
(Ord. 2561 § 1(part), 1992)  
9.52.050 - Relocation benefits—Amount payable. 
The relocation benefits shall be a sum equal to the greater of the following: (1) twice the established monthly rental rate for the unit being vacated by the displaced tenant, or (2) twice the established monthly rental rate for a two-bedroom rental unit within the city. The relocation benefits shall be paid in addition to the return, as required by law, of any deposit held by the owner plus the itemized costs as outlined in Section 9.52.070(A)(1—6). 
(Ord. 2561 § 1(part), 1992)  
9.52.060 - When relocation benefits are not payable. 
A.  No relocation benefits shall be payable by the owner to any tenant who caused or substantially contributed to the condition giving rise to the order to vacate as determined by the city manager or his designee. 
B.  No relocation benefits shall be payable by the owner if the unit or structure became unsafe or hazardous during the tenancy (and no more than six months prior to the order to vacate) as a result of earthquake, flood, fire, act of public enemy or other disaster not proximately caused by building, plumbing, electrical, mechanical or fire code violations. 
(Ord. 2561 § 1(part), 1992)  
9.52.070 - Payment of relocation costs by city. 
A.  In the event the owner fails, neglects or refuses to pay a displaced tenant relocation benefits due pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, the city may within budgetary limitations, make payment of such relocation benefits as the city manager or his designee determines is necessary to assist the displaced tenant to relocate, up to the amount payable by the owner under Section 9.52.050, including, without limitation, the following costs: 
1.  Transportation of the tenant's personal property to the new location; 
2.  Packing, crating, unpacking and uncrating the tenant's personal property; 
3.  Insurance of the tenant's property while in transit; 
4.  The reasonable replacement value of property lost, stolen or damaged (not through the fault or negligence of the displaced person, his or her agent or employee) in the process of moving, where insurance covering such loss, theft or damage is not reasonably available; 
5.  The costs of disconnecting, dismantling, removing, reassembling, reconnecting and reinstalling machinery, equipment or other personal property of the tenant, including connection charges imposed by utility companies for starting utility service; 
6.  Any other sums needed by the tenant to obtain substitute housing, such as deposits and prepaid rent. 
B.  Any displaced tenant who needs relocation benefits because an owner fails to pay benefits due hereunder shall apply to the city manager or his designee for benefits no later than fifteen days after vacating the premises. The city manager or his designee, shall grant benefits only if he or she determines that the tenant is eligible for benefits from the owner and shall take into consideration the amount needed by the tenant to secure alternative housing. Any applicant aggrieved by a decision of the city manager or his designee, to grant or not grant benefits, or as to the amount granted, may appeal the decision to the public nuisance hearing officer. A written notice of appeal containing a brief statement of the ground for appeal shall be sent to the city manager or his designee within ten days from the date of the manager's decision. The public nuisance hearing officer shall hold an informal hearing on the appeal within fifteen days after the notice of appeal is received by the city manager or his designee, and shall issue written findings within five days after the hearing. Such findings shall be the final decision. 
C.  The city may recover from the owner any amount paid by the city to a tenant pursuant to this section. The city shall also be entitled to recover from the owner an additional amount equal to one-half the amount so paid as a penalty for failure to make timely payment to the displaced tenant and city's actual costs (including direct and indirect costs) of administering the provision of benefits to the displaced tenant. 
D.  Any amounts paid by the city including but not limited to penalties and administrative costs may after final confirmation by city manager or his designee or the city council, constitute a special assessment against the property to which it relates, and after the recording of the order of confirmation in the official records of the county recorder's office as thus made and confirmed, it shall constitute a lien on the property in the amount of the assessment. 
E.  Prior to instituting any action to collect from the owner relocation benefits paid pursuant to this section, or to impose a lien therefor, the city shall send to the owner by first class mail, postage prepaid, at the owner's address as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, an itemized accounting of all benefits paid by the city to the owner's tenants. The invoice shall notify the owner that an informal meeting to present any evidence or argument challenging the invoiced amount or liability for any amount shall be available if such written request is received by the city manager or his designee within five calendar days of the notice. The request shall be in writing, shall be signed by the owner, and shall set forth the facts and reasons upon which the contention is based. If after this informal meeting the owner maintains that not all of the benefits are chargeable to the owner, because the recipients were not displaced tenants, no benefits were payable pursuant to Section 9.52.030, or on other grounds, the owner shall submit a written appeal to the public nuisance hearing officer within twenty days after mailing to him the itemized accounting. The public nuisance hearing officer or his designee, shall hold an informal hearing for the purpose of determining the amount of benefits paid which are chargeable to the owner. If the public nuisance hearing officer upholds the decision of the city manager or his designee a fifty percent penalty shall be added for lack of timely payment to the tenant(s) as specified in Section 9.52.040 in addition to all of the city's administrative costs. The decision of the public nuisance hearing officer shall be final. Failure to receive the itemized accounting shall not relieve the owner of any obligation to the city. 
F.  Nothing contained in this chapter shall require the city to pay any relocation benefits to any tenant. 
G.  Any damages which a displaced tenant may receive under the provisions of this chapter shall be reduced by the amount of any benefits received from the city. 
(Ord. 2561 § 1(part), 1992)  
9.52.080 - Penalties and administration costs—Exception. 
Notwithstanding Sections 9.52.040(B) and 9.52.070(C), if there are fewer than ten days between the first posting or mailing of the order to vacate and the vacation date, and if the city advances relocation benefits to any tenants, no penalty shall be payable by the owner if reimbursement is made to the city within fifteen days after an itemized accounting from the city is mailed as set forth in Section 9.52.070 or, if an appeal from the accounting is taken pursuant to Section 9.52.070. 
(Ord. 2561 § 1 (part), 1992)  
9.52.090 - Remedies cumulative. 
The remedies hereunder are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies available under law. 
(Ord. 2561 § 1 (part), 1992)  
9.52.100 - Attorney fees. 
In any action brought by a tenant or the city to recover benefits payable hereunder, the court shall also award reasonable attorney fees. 
(Ord. 2561 § 1 (part), 1992)  
9.52.110 - Summary of provisions. 
Any order to vacate issued to an owner or tenant shall be accompanied by a summary of the provisions of this chapter. Failure to provide a summary shall not relieve any person of the obligations imposed by this chapter. 
(Ord. 2561 § 1 (part), 1992)  
9.52.120 - Establishment of relocation benefits account. 
The city shall establish a relocation benefits expenditure account and provide appropriations through city council action. A relocation revenue account will be established to account for revenue generated by this program. The public nuisance hearing officer shall make periodic reports to the city manager or his designee on the activity and status of these accounts. 
(Ord. 2561 § 1 (part), 1992)  
9.52.130 - Exceptions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to property owned by the city, the Whittier Redevelopment Agency, the Whittier Authority, the county of Los Angeles, the state of California or any governmental agency. 
(Ord. 2561 § 1 (part), 1992)  
Chapter 9.56 - COST RECOVERY PROGRAM FOR SECOND RESPONSES 
 
9.56.010 - Authority and purpose. 
A.  The procedures set forth in this chapter for summary abatement of nuisances and for making the costs of such abatement a special assessment against the parcel on which the nuisance existed, are adopted pursuant to the authority of Sections 38771 through 38773.5 of the California Government Code and Article 11, Section 7 of the California Constitution. 
B.  The procedures set forth in this chapter are not exclusive and are in addition to the procedures for abatement which are conferred upon the city by California Civil Code Section 3494, California Code of Civil Procedure Section 731 and any other applicable provision of law. 
C.  The purpose of this chapter is to identify activities which constitute a public nuisance, to provide for the summary abatement of such a nuisance at the expense of persons creating, causing, committing or maintaining it, and to promote peace, health, safety and the general welfare of the public by minimizing the frequency of return calls to loud and disturbing parties, gatherings, events or assemblages at various locations within the city. 
(Ord. 2603 § 1 (part), 1993)  
9.56.020 - Definitions. 
A.  "Host or hostess" means any person conducting and/or permitting a party, including: 
1.  Owner(s) and/or lessee(s) of the property where a party is being given; 
2.  Person(s) hosting a party; 
3.  Person(s) receiving money or other consideration for granting access to a party; 
4.  Person(s) serving, furnishing or making available alcoholic beverages; 
5.  Parent(s) or legal guardian(s) of a minor who is also a host. 
B.  "Party" means a gathering, event or assemblage of a group of persons who have assembled or are assembling for a social occasion or for a social activity on private residential and/or commercial property including, but not limited to, residential dwelling units, saloons, bars, nightclubs, pool halls, restaurants, theaters or amphitheaters. 
C.  "Person" means any individual and includes a corporation, partnership, company, association, organization or league and any other entity which owns, leases or controls property. The term "person" includes person responsible for the event. 
D.  "Person responsible for the event" means the person who owns the property where the party takes place, the person in charge of the premises and/or the person who organized the event. If the person responsible for the event is a minor, then the parent(s) or legal guardian(s) of the minor will be jointly and severally liable for the costs incurred for the police services. 
E.  "Police chief" means the chief of police of the city of Whittier or his designee(s). 
F.  "Police services" includes, but is not limited to, the salaries of the police officers, or other public safety personnel, for the amount of time actually spent responding to or remaining at the party as well as all costs reasonably expended for use and cost of equipment incurred in responding to incident, at a rate established by resolution of the city council; the actual costs of any medical treatment to injured officers or other safety personnel; and the cost of repairing any damaged city equipment or property, and attorneys' fees. 
G.  "Public nuisance" means behavior constituting a violation of the provisions of: (1) Chapter 11 of Title 7 of the California Penal Code, and (2) Sections 407 or 415 of the California Penal Code, and (3) Section 8.32.030 of the Whittier Municipal Code, or (4) noise that is unreasonably loud, raucous, excessive or jarring to persons within the area of audibility in a residential area which disturbs the peace or quiet of any neighborhood. 
H.  "Residence" means a structure providing independent living facilities for one or more persons including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. 
I.  "Residential area" means any area which is within three hundred feet of any single-family or multifamily residence, other than commercial hotels, motels and similar establishments for temporary lodging, measured by a straight line between the closest structure wall of the residence and the location of the behavior described in subsection G of this section. 
J.  "Special security assignment" means the assignment of police officers in response to a return or second call to the same location after the distribution of a written warning that a party violates the law. 
(Ord. 2869 § 32, 2006; Ord. 2603 § 1 (part), 1993)  
9.56.030 - Exemptions. 
The following acts or conditions are exempt from the provisions of this chapter: 
A.  Activities conducted on the grounds of any public or private nursery, elementary, intermediate or secondary school; 
B.  Outdoor gatherings, public dances and shows, which meet or exceed all security requirements which may be set forth as a condition for the issuance of a valid permit; provided, said events are conducted pursuant to a permit issued by the city of Whittier pursuant to Title 5 of the Municipal Code of the city of Whittier; 
C.  Any activity or noise for which a variance or permit has been granted pursuant to Title 18 of the Municipal Code of the city of Whittier; 
D.  Any activity to the extent regulation thereof has been preempted by state or federal law. 
(Ord. 2603 § 1 (part), 1993)  
9.56.040 - Noise restrictions—General. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or allow to be conducted any party where there is loud and unreasonable noise if such noise is sufficiently loud and unreasonable in volume level, duration and character to maliciously and wilfully disturb the comfort, health, peace, safety or repose of reasonable person(s) of ordinary sensibilities. 
B.  Continuation of an activity prohibited by this section after notification by a peace officer that the activity is disturbing the peace, shall be prima facie evidence of malicious and wilful intent. 
(Ord. 2603 § 1 (part), 1993)  
9.56.050 - Enforcement—First response—Notice of disturbance to host. 
A.  The chief of police is directed to enforce the provisions of this chapter. Nothing herein shall affect the authority of the chief of police and his officers to make lawful arrests at any time, including on the first response to a disturbance constituting a nuisance as defined in this chapter. 
B.  The first response and warning shall be deemed to be normal police service. On the first response to a disturbance, the Whittier police department shall determine whether the disturbance constitutes a public nuisance as defined in this chapter and if said public nuisance constitutes an immediate threat to the public peace, health, safety or general welfare. 
C.  If officers determine that the disturbance constitutes as immediate threat to public health or safety, the officers, as an alternative to immediate arrest of the persons responsible for the public nuisance, may proceed as set forth in this subsection. 
1.  The officers shall advise the persons responsible for committing, creating, causing, maintaining or permitting the disturbance, the occupant of the property where the disturbance is located, if he is present, and/or the owner of the property if he is present that: (1) the disturbance constitutes a public nuisance and violates this section; (2) unless they voluntarily stop the disturbance, the officers will take appropriate action to stop it, including, but not limited to, arrest or citation of those violating the law; and (3) if the Whittier police department is required to expend additional manhours and/or use equipment after the first response to stop the subsequent disturbance, the owner and the occupant of the property shall be held jointly and severally liable for the costs incurred. 
2.  When police department personnel respond to a complaint involving a disturbance caused by a party, the responding officers shall issue a written notice to the host/hostess if such person(s) are available on the premises. The notice shall be read and signed by the available host/hostess acknowledging receipt of the warning, and a signed copy of the warning shall be left with the available host/hostess. A notice of first response of disturbance shall be in written form substantially as follows: 
Notice of First Response—Disturbance 
 This NOTICE OF VIOLATION given to: 
 _______ (name) 
 _______ (DOB) 
 at _______ (location) 
 _______ (phone number) 
 on _______ (date) 
 at _______ (time) is the result of a disturbance in violation of: (1) Title 9, Chapter 20/56 of the Whittier Municipal Code. (2) California Penal Code Section 407/415, or (3) Chapter 11 of Title 7 of the California Penal Code. 
 If it is necessary for the Whittier Police Department to respond a second or subsequent time to the premises or location to stop similar or continuing disturbances at this location, the owner of the property and the occupant of the property may be assessed civil penalties for the cost of providing special police services incurred in such second or subsequent responses. All violators of statutes or ordinances will be subject to arrest and/or citation. 
 _______(time) 
 _______(date) 
 ___________ 
 (Signature of host/hostess to whom notice is given - time - date) 
 _______(time) 
 _______(date) 
 _______ 
 (Signature and badge # of police officer who issued notice - time - date) 
A minimum charge of seventy-five dollars shall be assessed if a second response is requested as a result of a disturbance at this location. 
(Ord. 2603 § 1 (part), 1993)  
9.56.060 - Notice of disturbance—Signature of host unavailable. 
A.  If no owner or adult person in charge of the premises can be identified at the time of the first response or is not available, the written notice required herein may simply be posted in any conspicuous, visible outdoor location near any entrance to the premises. 
B.  If the host/hostess and/or person(s) responsible for the event refuse to sign receipt of the notice, officers shall write the words "refused to sign" on the signature line. The host/hostess and/or person(s) responsible for the event shall be provided with a copy of the notice. Another copy of the notice shall be posted in a conspicuous, visible outdoor located near any entrance to the premises on each occasion the police respond. 
(Ord. 2603 § 1 (part), 1993)  
9.56.070 - Public property rentals. 
If the location of the disturbance that requires police department response is a public building, then the responsible person for the purposes of this chapter will be the person renting the building. 
(Ord. 2603 § 1 (part), 1993)  
9.56.080 - Enforcement—Second response—Special police assignment—Documentation. 
A.  If, after giving the notice of first response of disturbance, the chief of police receives any additional complaints about a disturbance at the same location on the date specified in the Notice of First Response - Disturbance or within a twenty-four hour period commencing after the first response and warning, officers shall respond again to the location of the disturbance. Once confirmed that this is a second or subsequent disturbance complaint response, a supervisor shall be notified of the noise complaint and the number of officers, equipment and time spent on these additional response(s). If the responding officers determine that the disturbance continues to constitute a public nuisance as described in this chapter and poses an immediate threat to the public peace, health, safety or general welfare, the officers shall take appropriate actions to immediately abate the public nuisance, including arrest and/or citation of persons violating the law, closure and dispersal of any party. 
B.  Utilization of police personnel during any response after the first warning to any party or to control the threat to the public peace, health, safety or general welfare shall be deemed to be a special police assignment over and above the services normally provided. 
C.  In those situations which require the police to respond on additional occasions, reports and documentation will be prepared. Such documentation will include such information as to number of personnel utilized, time resources expended to control the event, host/hostess identification, victims' names, witnesses' names, etc. Reports and documentation will be forwarded to the services division commander who will prepare administrative reports as to actual police department costs incurred by response to the disturbance. All documentation will then be forwarded to the city attorney's office for prosecution and cost recovery efforts. 
(Ord. 2603 § 1 (part), 1993)  
9.56.090 - Second response—Recovery of costs authorized. 
A.  When a party occurs in violation of this chapter and a police officer, pursuant to Section 9.56.080, determines that there is a threat to the public peace, health, safety or general welfare, and that the disturbance continues to constitute a public nuisance, the host/hostess responsible for the event shall be held liable for the cost incurred of providing police services for the special security assignment by the police, at any time within twenty-four hours after a written warning is issued to control the threat to the public peace, health, safety or general welfare. 
B.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the city shall be authorized to recover the cost incurred when its police department, pursuant to the provisions of Section 9.56.080, responds a second time within a consecutive twenty-four-hour period to any party or other assemblage of persons within the city. In addition, the costs of such special assignment may result in a lien against the property on which the nuisance was maintained and shall be a personal obligation against the property owner as here set forth if: 
1.  The owner, host/hostess and/or other person in possession of the premises has, at the time of the first response, been delivered a written notice as previously described in Section 9.56.050; and 
2.  There is probable cause by police to believe that a violation of California Penal Code Section(s) 407, 415 or 416 or Whittier Municipal Code Section 9.20.010 has occurred on the premises anytime after first responding. 
C.  The cost of such special police services may include all costs incurred by the city of Whittier, including reasonable administrative costs and overhead, in providing such law enforcement services. Costs may include damage to city property, and/or injuries to city personnel and attorneys' fees. 
D.  The costs provided for in this section shall be computed by the city and shall be forwarded in the form of an invoice sent by first class mail to the person or persons responsible for the event at the time of the police responses. The bill shall apprise the person or persons responsible for the event that failure to pay the bill may result in a lien on the property on which the nuisance was maintained and shall be a personal obligation against the property owner. 
E.  The amount of such fees charged shall be deemed a debt to the city, due and payable by the person(s) responsible for the disturbance and, if minors, their parent(s) or legal guardian(s). Any person owing money shall be liable to the city in any court of competent jurisdiction in an action brought in the name of the city for recovery of the amount of the costs billed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
F.  The city does not waive its right to seek reimbursement for actual costs through other legal remedies or procedures available at law or in equity. The remedies provided by this chapter shall be in addition to any other remedies provided by law. 
(Ord. 2638 § 4, 1994; Ord. 2603 § 1 (part), 1993)  
9.56.100 - Collection of costs of special police assignment. 
A.  The costs provided in this chapter shall be collected in the following manner: 
1.  Copies of the initial first response warning, the second response voucher and any additional vouchers shall be forwarded to the Whittier city controller where the cost of special security assignment services shall be computed and an amount assessed which reflects the actual costs of services rendered as established by resolution of the city council of the city of Whittier. 
(Ord. 2603 § 1 (part), 1993)  
9.56.110 - Joint and several liability. 
If the owner and occupant of the property are different persons, they shall be jointly and severally liable for the amount set forth in the invoice. 
(Ord. 2603 § 1 (part), 1993)  
9.56.120 - Liability of occupant who is not owner. 
If the owner of the property is not the occupant of the property and if the occupant of the property does not pay the amount set forth in the invoice within thirty calendar days after the invoice becomes final or the hearing officer confirms the invoice or after the invoice has been confirmed by the board of appeals, the city controller shall take appropriate steps to collect the amount set forth in the invoice from the occupant of the property, including causing a lawsuit to be filed on behalf of the city of Whittier against the occupant for the amount set forth in the invoice. 
(Ord. 2603 § 1 (part), 1993)  
9.56.130 - Nonpayment. 
When the full amount due to the city for second or subsequent response costs, as set forth in this chapter, is not paid by the person or persons responsible therefore within thirty calendar days of the date of the billing for such costs, the chief of police shall file with the city clerk-treasurer a sworn or certified statement showing the response costs incurred, the date costs were incurred and the location of the property to which the response was made. The recordation of such a sworn or certified statement with the county recorder shall constitute a lien on the property. The remedy provided in this section shall not constitute an election of remedies by the city. 
(Ord. 2603 § 1 (part), 1993)  
9.56.140 - Appeal—Hearing on statement of costs of abatement. 
A.  The invoice shall notify the host that a hearing to respond in opposition to the proposed action shall be available if such written request is received by the chief of police within thirty calendar days of the billing for such posts. The request protesting payment shall be in writing, shall be signed by the appellant and shall set forth the facts and reasons upon which the appeal is based. The host shall be permitted to present any evidence or argument challenging the invoiced amount or liability for any amount. 
B.  If a written request protesting payment of the amount set forth in the invoice is received within thirty days, a reasonably impartial and involved reviewer (hereinafter referred to as hearing officer) shall conduct a hearing within an additional sixty calendar days after receipt of the written request protesting payment on a date set by the hearing officer. The city manager or his designee shall appoint a hearing officer who shall possess the authority to recommend a final disposition of the matter. 
C.  Said notice of the hearing shall be personally served if possible. If personal service is not possible, the notice of hearing shall be served to the owner of the property as shown on the latest equalized assessment roll and to the occupant of the property at the address of the property by certified mail, return receipt requested. All notices required under this subsection shall be served at least thirty days in advance of the hearing and shall contain a copy of all the charges, reports and documentation upon which the invoice is based. 
D.  At the time fixed for the hearing, the hearing officer shall consider the cost abatement statements, the protest and objections raised by the protesting party or parties, and shall hear the testimony of all competent persons desiring to testify pertaining to the costs of abating the public nuisance and any other pertinent matters, subject to reasonable limitations of cumulative testimony and other procedures as may be set forth. 
E.  The hearing officer may revive, correct or modify the invoice as he/she considers just and thereafter shall confirm the invoice. The hearing officer shall excuse the owner or the occupant of the property from payment of the amount set forth in the invoice if the hearing officer determines that the owner or occupant was not in possession of the property at the time of the disturbance or could not have reasonably prevented the disturbance, unless the person responsible for the disturbance was the minor child of the owner or occupant of the property. The hearing officer shall excuse the owner or occupant of the property from the payment set forth in the invoice if the hearing officer determines that the owner or the occupant took reasonable steps to stop the disturbance following the first response by the Whittier police department. 
F.  The decision of the hearing officer shall be served by certified mail, return receipt requested, within thirty calendar days after the conclusion of the hearing. Upon mailing, the decision shall be final and is subject to city council review only. 
H.  The final decision of the hearing officer may be appealed to the city council by the owner or the occupant of the property or by any member of the city council. The city council shall constitute the board of appeals for any decision of the hearing officer. Notice of the appeal to the board of appeals shall be filed with the city clerk-treasurer within thirty calendar days after the decision of the hearing officer is final. A late notice of appeal will not be considered. Questions raised during the appeal process to the board of appeals shall be limited to those issues raised in the notice of appeal as set forth in subsection A of this section. The board of appeals shall conduct a hearing within an additional sixty calendar days after timely filing of the notice of appeal with the city clerk-treasurer. The board of appeals reserves the right to postpone a scheduled hearing upon good cause. The hearing officer shall give notice of the hearing by the board of appeals not less than thirty calendar days prior thereto. 
I.  The filing of a timely notice of appeal shall stay further proceedings until the board of appeals has made its determination. 
J.  The board of appeals may uphold, reverse or modify any final determination appealed from. The decision of the board of appeals shall become final and conclusive as to all matters in controversy upon service thereof by registered mail upon those persons aggrieved. Upon denial of an appeal, the appellant(s) shall have thirty days to pay the applicable response costs, or the city may commence proceedings to collect such sums as are due as provided by law and to place a lien upon the affected property. 
(Ord. 2603 § 1 (part), 1993)  
9.56.150 - Special assessment. 
If the owner of the property does not pay the amount set forth in the invoice within thirty calendar days after the invoice becomes final or the hearing officer confirms the invoice, or after the invoice has been confirmed by the board of appeals, whichever is later, the city clerk-treasurer shall order that the amount set forth in the invoice shall become a special assessment against the property on which the public nuisance was abated and that a notice of lien be filed. The assessment shall continue until it is paid, together with interest at the rate established by city council resolution, computed from the date of confirmation of the invoice until payment. The assessment may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and it shall be subject to the same penalties, procedures and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary taxes. All acts applicable to levy, collection and enforcement of property taxes shall apply to this special assessment. 
(Ord. 2638 § 5, 1994: Ord. 2603 § 1 (part), 1993)  
9.56.160 - Notice of abatement lien. 
In the event of an assessment pursuant to Section 9.56.150, the city clerk-treasurer shall cause to be filed in the office of the county recorder a notice in substantially the following form: 
Under the authority of California Government Code Sections 38771 through 38773.5, the City of Whittier did on _______, 19___, abate a nuisance upon the real property hereinafter described and then on _______, 19___, did assess the cost of the abatement not to exceed $___ upon the real property. The record owner of such property is _______ (name and address). The City of Whittier claims a special assessment on the real property for the cost of the abatement in the amount of $___. This amount is a special assessment against the real property until it is paid, with interest at the rate of seven (7%) percent per year from _______, 19___ (insert date of confirmation of invoice). The real property referred to above, and upon which the special assessment is claimed, is that certain parcel of land situated within the County of Los Angeles, State of California, more particularly described as follows: _____ 
_____
_____
(Ord. 2603 § 1 (part), 1993)  
9.56.170 - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The city council of the city of Whittier hereby declares that it would have adopted the ordinance codified in this chapter and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. 2603 § 1 (part), 1993)  
Chapter 9.60 - AGGRESSIVE SOLICITATION 
 
9.60.010 - Definitions. 
A.  "Aggressive manner" is defined as follows: 
1.  Approaching, speaking to, or following a person in a manner as would cause a reasonable person to fear bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon the person, or upon property in the person's immediate possession; or 
2.  Touching another person without such person's consent in the course of soliciting; or 
3.  Continuing to solicit from a person after such person has made a negative response or otherwise indicated a desire not to contribute; or 
4.  Intentionally blocking or interfering with the safe or free passage of the person solicited by any means, including causing such person to take evasive action to avoid physical contact or preventing such person from departing the location of the solicitation; or 
5.  Intentionally following the person solicited, without such person's consent, for the purpose of continuing to solicit after such person has made a negative response or indicated a desire not to contribute; or 
6.  Making any statement, gesture, or other communication which a reasonable person in the situation of the person solicited would perceive to be a threat of bodily harm; or 
7.  Rendering any service to a motor vehicle, including but not limited to cleaning, washing, protecting, guarding or repairing of said vehicle or any portion thereof, without the prior consent of the owner, operator or occupant of such vehicle, and thereafter soliciting payment for the performance of such service, regardless of whether such vehicle is stopped, standing or parked on a public street or upon other public or private property; or 
8.  Intentionally blocking, preventing, impeding or interfering with the free and unobstructed ability of the person solicited to enter into or emerge from any vehicle during the course of soliciting, or following a negative response by the person solicited to any such solicitation; or 
9.  Intentionally blocking, preventing, impeding or interfering with the operation or movement of any vehicle operated or occupied by the person solicited, during the course of soliciting, or following a negative response by the person solicited to any such solicitation. 
B.  "Solicitation" includes, but is not limited to, asking or begging by means of the spoken, written, or printed word or such other act, conducted for the purposes of obtaining an immediate donation of money or thing of value, signature or endorsement whether for personal use or as a charitable contribution to any individual or organization, or for any other purpose. 
(Ord. No. 2959, § 1, 11-9-10)  
9.60.020 - Prohibited acts. 
No person shall solicit any other person in an aggressive manner in any place open to the general public, whether publicly or privately owned, including but not limited to any sidewalks, streets, alleys, driveways, parking lots, parks, plazas, buildings, doorways and entrances to buildings, gasoline service stations, and the grounds around or enclosed by buildings. 
(Ord. No. 2959, § 1, 11-9-10)  
9.60.030 - No restriction on free speech. 
This chapter is not intended to restrict the exercise of protected free speech. 
(Ord. No. 2959, § 1, 11-9-10)  
Chapter 9.61 - SHOPPING CARTS 
Sections: 
 
9.61.010 - Purpose—Declaration of nuisance. 
Many retail establishments provide shopping carts for the convenience of customers while shopping on the premises of such businesses. However, shopping carts removed from the premises of such businesses and left abandoned on public or private property throughout the city constitute a public nuisance and a potential hazard to the health and safety of the public. The proliferation of lost, stolen or abandoned shopping carts on public and private property causes blighting conditions in the community, clogs storm drains, results in the obstruction of free access to public and private sidewalks, streets, parking lots and other ways, interferes with pedestrian and vehicular traffic on public and private streets, and impedes emergency services. For the aforesaid reasons, such lost, stolen or abandoned shopping carts are hereby declared to be a public nuisance, which shall be subject to abatement in the manner set forth in this chapter or in any other manner provided by law. The purpose of this chapter is to set forth regulations to ensure that reasonable measures are taken by the owners and operators of businesses which provide shopping carts for the convenience of customers to either prevent the removal of shopping carts from business premises and parking lots, or provide for the prompt retrieval of lost, stolen or abandoned shopping carts, to complement and supplement provisions of state law, and to adopt local regulations to the extent not otherwise preempted by state statute. 
(Ord. No. 3092 , § 1, 7-24-18)  
9.61.020 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following words or phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the following meanings ascribed to them: 
A.  "Abandoned shopping cart" means any cart that has been removed without written permission of the owner or on-duty manager from the premises of the business establishment, regardless of whether it has been left on either private or public property. Written permission shall be valid for a period not to exceed seventy-two hours. This provision shall not apply to carts that are removed for purposes of repair or maintenance. 
B.  "Cart" means a basket, which is mounted on wheels, or a similar device provided by a business establishment for use by a customer for the purpose of transporting goods of any kind, including, but not limited to grocery store shopping carts. This definition shall exclude from enforcement under this chapter those devices, which do not have a "basket" mounted on wheels in which goods can be placed for transport. This shall not apply to laundry carts typically found at self-service laundromats. 
C.  "Containment plan" means a document submitted by the owner of the shopping cart pursuant to Section 9.61.120 of this chapter. 
D.  "Code enforcement supervisor" means the supervisor of the code enforcement department or his/her designee. 
E.  "City" means the city of Whittier. 
F.  "City council" means the city council of the city. 
G.  "Enforcement personnel" means any police officer, code enforcement officer, or other city of Whittier employee designated by the city manager. 
H.  "Identified cart" means a cart that has a permanently affixed sign that identifies, in accordance with Business and Professions Code Section 22435.1, the owner of the cart or the retailer, or both; notifies the public of the procedure to be utilized for authorized removal of the cart from the owner's premises; notifies the public that the unauthorized removal of the cart from the cart owner's premises or cart owner's parking area or the unauthorized possession of the cart, is a violation of state law; lists a valid telephone number or address for returning the cart to the owner or retailer. 
I.  "Owner" means any person or entity, who in connection with the conduct of a business, owns, leases, possesses, uses, or otherwise makes any cart available to customers or the public. For purposes of this chapter, owner shall also include the owner's onsite or designated agent that provides the carts for use by its customers. 
J.  "Premises" means the entire area owned, leased, or rented and utilized by the business establishment that provides carts for use by customers, including any parking lot or other property provided by the owner for customer parking. 
K.  "Shopping cart retrieval service" means a contract with a commercial service to retrieve and return shopping carts to their respective owners, which meets minimum service requirements as established by the code enforcement supervisor. A contract with a commercial service to retrieve and return shopping carts to the owners, which fails to meet minimum service requirements established by the code enforcement supervisor, is not a shopping cart retrieval service within the meaning of this chapter. 
L.  "Unidentified cart" means a cart that is not an owner-identified cart, or an identified cart of a retail establishment located outside the city. 
(Ord. No. 3092 , § 1, 7-24-18)  
9.61.030 - Required signs on carts. 
Every cart owned or provided by any business establishment in the city must have a sign permanently affixed to it that contains the following information: 
A.  Identifies the owner of the cart or the name of the business establishment, or both; 
B.  Notifies the public of the procedure to be utilized for authorized removal of the cart from the business premises; 
C.  Notifies the public that the unauthorized removal of the cart from the premises or parking area of the business establishment is a violation of state and city law; 
D.  Lists a telephone number to contact to report the location of the abandoned cart; and 
E.  Lists an address for returning the cart to the owner or business establishment. 
(Ord. No. 3092 , § 1, 7-24-18)  
9.61.040 - Unauthorized cart removal, abandonment, alteration, possession prohibited. 
It is unlawful to do any of the following if a cart has a permanently affixed sign as set forth in Section 9.61.030: 
A.  Remove a cart from the business premises with the intent to temporarily or permanently deprive the owner or retailer of possession of the cart. 
B.  To be in possession of any cart that has been removed from the business premises, with the intent to temporarily or permanently deprive the owner or retailer of possession of the cart. 
C.  To be in possession of any cart with owner identification information removed, obliterated, or altered, with the intent to temporarily or permanently deprive the owner or retailer of possession of the cart. 
D.  To leave or abandon a cart at a location other than the business premises with the intent to temporarily or permanently deprive the owner or retailer of possession of the cart. 
E.  To alter, convert, or tamper with a cart, or to remove any part or portion thereof or to remove, obliterate or alter owner identification information on a cart, with the intent to temporarily or permanently deprive the owner or retailer of possession of the cart. 
F.  To be in possession of any cart while that cart is not located on the business premises of a business establishment, with the intent to temporarily or permanent deprive the owner or retailer of possession of the cart. 
(Ord. No. 3092 , § 1, 7-24-18)  
9.61.050 - Removal of unidentified carts. 
Once an unidentified cart is discovered on public or private property, the city or its authorized contractor may remove and impound said cart. If the removal is from private property, the city or its authorized contractor must first obtain the property owner's consent. The unidentified cart shall be marked with a tag indicating the date and location of its discovery and shall be stored for thirty calendar days at a location selected by the city. Any claims for an unidentified cart shall be presented to the code enforcement supervisor and shall be accompanied by proof of ownership of the cart. A person demonstrating proof of ownership of an unidentified cart stored by the city shall pay the city's nuisance abatement fee prior to the cart being released by the city. 
(Ord. No. 3092 , § 1, 7-24-18)  
9.61.060 - Removal of identified carts. 
A.  The city, or its authorized contractor, may remove and impound any abandoned identified shopping cart from any public property, or from private property with the property owner's consent, provided that the identified cart is located outside the premises or parking area of the retail establishment, which owns the cart. 
B.  In the event the city, or its authorized contractor, removes and impounds an identified cart, the city, or its authorized contractor, shall provide actual notice to the owner of the identified cart or his or her representative within twenty-four hours following the impound of the cart, indicating the location where the cart may be claimed. 
C.  Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, the city or its authorized contractor may remove and impound any identified cart from any public or private property in instances where the location of the cart may impede emergency services. 
(Ord. No. 3092 , § 1, 7-24-18)  
9.61.070 - Disposal. 
A.  Any identified or unidentified cart not reclaimed from the city within thirty days of receipt of a notice of impoundment by the owner of the cart, may be sold or otherwise disposed of by the city. 
B.  In the event a cart remains unclaimed, is disposed of or destroyed, the city reserves the right to collect any applicable redemption fees and/or fines from the cart owner. 
(Ord. No. 3092 , § 1, 7-24-18)  
9.61.080 - Nuisance abatement cost recovery and/or fine. 
A.  Cost Recovery. The city may recover from the owner of a shopping cart, actual costs incurred in impounding the shopping cart pursuant to California Business and Professions Code Section 22435.7(d). 
B.  Fine. In addition to the payment of the city's costs as set forth in subsection A, the owner of a shopping cart may also be subject to a fine in the maximum amount established by Business and Professions Code Section 22435.7(f), as may be amended from time to time, for each occurrence in excess of three during any six-month period for failure to retrieve identified carts in accordance with this chapter. An occurrence includes all identified carts impounded by the city or its authorized contractor in a one-day period. 
(Ord. No. 3092 , § 1, 7-24-18)  
9.61.090 - Redemption by owner. 
A.  A cart owner or authorized representatives may, upon prior appointment, inspect impounded carts to determine if any of the owner's carts are present and may redeem such carts upon proof of ownership and payment of all applicable cost recovery or administrative fines. 
B.  An impounded cart may be redeemed by the owner at any time during normal business hours prior to disposal or destruction. The owner shall be entitled to receive the cart upon payment of all applicable cost recovery or administrative fines. 
C.  Any impounded cart redeemed by the owner or authorized representative within three business days following the date of actual notice of impoundment shall be released and surrendered to the owner or authorized agent at no charge. 
D.  Any impounded cart redeemed by the owner or authorized representative within three business days following the date of actual notice of impoundment shall not be deemed an occurrence for purposes of Section 9.61.080(B) of this chapter. 
E.  Any impounded cart that is not redeemed by the owner or authorized representative within three business days following the date of actual notice of impoundment shall be subject to any applicable cost recovery or administrative fines imposed pursuant to Section 9.61.080 of this chapter, commencing on the fourth business day following the date of the notice of impoundment. 
F.  No cart shall be released to a person seeking to redeem an impounded cart, unless such person submits, to the sole satisfaction of the city, proof of ownership or right to possession of the impounded cart. 
G.  Any release of a cart to a person deemed by the city to be entitled thereto, shall be an absolute defense of the city against any other person claiming to be entitled thereto. 
(Ord. No. 3092 , § 1, 7-24-18)  
9.61.100 - Appeals of cart impound. 
A person who can demonstrate that they are the owner of an impounded cart may appeal the imposition of the nuisance abatement cost recovery or administrative fine by presenting evidence that the cart removal and storage was not performed substantially in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Appeals shall be made in writing to the code enforcement supervisor within ten calendar days of paying the cost recovery or fine. An office hearing will be held within thirty calendar days of the receipt of a request for an appeal. The cart owner or authorized representative shall appear and be heard on the matter. If the code enforcement supervisor determines that the shopping cart was not removed and stored in substantial accordance with the provisions of this chapter, the nuisance abatement cost recovery or administrative fine shall be refunded. The decision of the code enforcement supervisor or his or her designee shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 3092 , § 1, 7-24-18)  
9.61.110 - Cart containment plan. 
Every owner shall develop and implement a containment plan to prevent the removal of carts from the business premises. 
A.  Existing businesses: Each person who owned or controlled a business in existence within the city's jurisdiction on the effective date of this ordinance who provided ten or more shopping carts for use by customers or the public, shall submit a written containment plan to the code enforcement supervisor for review within one hundred twenty days of the effective date of this ordinance. 
B.  New businesses: 
1.  For new businesses established after the effective date of this ordinance that have a minimum of ten carts, the owner shall be required to submit a written containment plan to the code enforcement superior for review within thirty days after establishing the new business. 
2.  This subsection shall not apply to existing businesses that relocate, operating under the same name, to another location in the city. Said business shall not be closed for more than thirty days. 
(Ord. No. 3092 , § 1, 7-24-18)  
9.61.120 - Containment plan contents. 
At a minimum, the containment plan must include the following elements and a detailed description of how they will be implemented: 
A.  Notice to customers. Written notification shall be provided to customers that removal of carts from the premises and parking lots are prohibited and a violation of state and city law. This notice may be provided in the form of flyers, warnings on shopping bags, or any other form of written notification that will effectively notify customers of the prohibition. 
B.  Signs. Signs shall be placed in conspicuous locations proximate to exits and shopping cart collection areas that warn customers that cart removal is prohibited and constitutes a violation of state and city law. 
C.  Loss prevention measures. A description of the specific effective measures the owner will implement to prevent shopping cart removal from the premises. These measures may include, but are not limited to, electronic or other disabling devices on the shopping carts so they cannot be removed from the premises, use of courtesy clerks to accompany customers and return carts to the store, use of security personnel to prevent cart removal, security deposit for use of cart, or other demonstrably effective measures acceptable to the code enforcement supervisor, likely to prevent shopping cart removal from the premises. 
D.  Mandatory cart retrieval. 
1.  Nine or fewer carts. Cart retrieval is mandatory; however, the owner shall be responsible for retrieving their own carts. 
2.  Every owner who maintains ten or more carts for use by customers shall provide evidence of a contract with a shopping cart retrieval service with terms requiring collection of abandoned shopping carts within twenty-four hours of removal. The retrieval service must be approved by the code enforcement supervisor and the owner shall not place limits on daily loads or days per week to retrieve carts within the city. 
3.  As an alternative to subsection (2) above, stores with ninety carts or less may elect to retrieve their own carts rather than enter into a contract with a shopping cart retrieval service. Abandoned shopping carts shall be retrieved within twenty-four hours of removal. At the discretion of the code enforcement supervisor, should carts not be retrieved within twenty-four hours, the owner shall enter into a contract with a shopping cart retrieval service. 
E.  After hours cart containment. A plan for securing shopping carts whenever the store is not open for business. 
(Ord. No. 3092 , § 1, 7-24-18)  
9.61.130 - Code Enforcement Supervisor review of containment plan. 
The code enforcement supervisor may approve, conditionally approve, or deny the proposed plan, and notify the owner of such decision in writing, within thirty days after receipt of the plan. 
A.  If approved, the containment plan shall be implemented by the owner no later than thirty days from the date of approval. 
B.  If conditionally approved, the owner may accept in writing the conditions stipulated by the code enforcement supervisor, after which the owner shall implement the conditionally approved containment plan within thirty days of the date of conditional approval. 
C.  If the submitted containment plan is denied, the reasons for denial shall be set out in writing and the owner shall have fifteen days to revise and resubmit the plan. 
D.  Even though approved, a containment plan may be reevaluated at any time by the code enforcement supervisor if operation of the plan demonstrates that the plan's insufficiency or inadequacy in preventing removal of carts from the premises. 
(Ord. No. 3092 , § 1, 7-24-18)  
9.61.140 - Containment plan basis for denial. 
The code enforcement supervisor may deny a containment plan based upon any of the following grounds: 
A.  Implementation of the containment plan would violate provisions of the building, zoning, health, safety, fire, police or other provisions of the city's code, or any county, state, or federal law which substantially affects public health, welfare or safety; 
B.  The containment plan fails to include all the information required by this chapter; 
C.  The containment plan is insufficient or inadequate to prevent removal of carts from the owner's premises; 
D.  The containment plan fails to address any special or unique conditions due to the geographical location of the premises as they relate to shopping cart retention and prevention efforts; 
E.  Implementation of the containment plan would violate a term or condition of another city policy or requirement of the municipal code; 
F.  The owner has knowingly made a false statement of fact, or omits a fact required to be revealed in the application for the containment plan, or in any addendum or report or other information required to be provided regarding the containment plan; 
G.  If the containment plan is rejected as incomplete or inadequate, then the code enforcement supervisor shall indicate the areas of incompleteness or inadequacy, and the owner shall have an additional fifteen days in which to resubmit a corrected containment plan; or 
H.  An owner who fails to submit a complete containment plan, or fails to implement approved plan measures, or fails to comply with the approved plan measures, shall be subject to enforcement of these requirements through any lawful means available to the city, including without limitation, institution of the administrative remedies provided for in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 3092 , § 1, 7-24-18)  
9.61.150 - Containment plan modification. 
At any time subsequent to the code enforcement supervisor's approval of a containment plan, the owner may submit to the code enforcement supervisor a request of a modification of the previously approved plan to address a change in circumstances, address an unanticipated physical or economic impact of the plan or modify an inadequate or ineffective plan. The code enforcement supervisor may also modify an approved plan, which has been demonstrated to be ineffective or inadequately implemented. Grounds for code enforcement supervisor modification include, but are not limited to, a high number of abandoned shopping carts. The code enforcement supervisor may require the owner to install and maintain electronic or other geographic disabling devices to prevent carts from being removed from the premises. The code enforcement supervisor shall notify the owner of a proposed modification of a previously approved plan and provide the owner an opportunity to respond within a ten-day period prior to the code enforcement supervisor's decision. 
(Ord. No. 3092 , § 1, 7-24-18)  
9.61.160 - Failure to prevent removal of carts. 
In the event that owner(s) fail to utilize the shopping cart retrieval service or to follow cart prevention measures which result in shopping carts being abandoned off premise resulting in city personnel picking up and storing shopping carts, and/or shopping carts are not being collected within twenty-four hours, the owner may be required to either submit a new containment play or install a standardized cart containment system with a wheel locking or stopping mechanism that is used in conjunction with an electronic or magnetic barrier along the perimeter of the store premises. The wheel locking or stopping mechanism would activate when the shopping cart crosses the electronic or magnetic barrier. 
(Ord. No. 3092 , § 1, 7-24-18)  
9.61.170 - Maintenance requirements for cart disabling devices. 
If an owner has equipped carts with disabling devices, either voluntarily or by order from the city, the owner shall conduct regular maintenance to ensure the disabling devices are working properly. If at any time, the owner determines the disabling device installed on a cart is not working properly, the cart shall be pulled from circulation until it is repaired. The owner shall inspect, test, and repair all abandoned carts returned to the owner prior to making the returned carts available for use. 
(Ord. No. 3092 , § 1, 7-24-18)  
9.61.180 - Penalties. 
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is subject to being charged with (i) a misdemeanor or infraction, (ii) subject to the administrative penalty and citation process set forth in Chapter 1.09 of this code, and (iii) subject to a civil penalty of fifty dollars for every day of non-compliance in excess of three during a six-month period. 
The remedies and penalties provided herein are cumulative, alternative and nonexclusive. The use of one does not prevent the use of any other civil or administrative remedy or penalty authorized by, or set forth in the Whittier City Municipal Code. None of the penalties or remedies authorized by or set forth in the city's municipal code shall prevent the city from using other penalty or remedy under state statute which may be available to enforce this chapter or to abate a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 3092 , § 1, 7-24-18)  
Title 10 - VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC 
Chapters:  
Chapter 10.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 
 
10.04.010 - Definitions. 
A.  Whenever any words or phrases used in this title are not defined in this section, but are now defined in the Vehicle Code, such definitions are incorporated in this section and shall be deemed to apply to the words and phrases used in this title as though set forth in this section in full. 
B.  The following words and phrases, when used in this title, shall, for the purpose of this title, have the meaning respectively ascribed to them in this section: 
1.  Alley. Any public street twenty-five feet or less in width and running between or over property lines and at the rear of lots facing upon a public street is an alley. 
2.  Central Traffic District. All that area bounded by Hadley Street on the north, Painter Avenue on the east, Penn Street on the south, and Pickering Avenue on the west, is designated the central traffic district. 
3.  Holidays. Within the meaning of this title, holidays include municipal holidays as set forth by resolution of the city council and all official California state and federal holidays. 
4.  Loading Zone. The space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials is a loading zone. 
5.  Official Time Standard. Whenever certain hours are named in this title, they mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use in the city. 
6.  Parkway. "Parkway" means that portion of a street other than a roadway or a sidewalk. 
7.  Passenger Loading Zone. The space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers is a passenger loading zone. 
8.  Pedestrian. "Pedestrian" means any person afoot. 
9.  Person. "Person" means as defined in subsection 21 of Section 1.04.220. 
10.  Police Officer. "Police officer" means every officer of the police department of the city or any person authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violation of traffic regulations. 
11.  Stop. "Stop," when required, means complete cessation of movement. 
12.  Stop or Stand. "Stop or stand," when prohibited, means stopping or standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police officer or official traffic-control device. 
13.  Traffic Signals. "Traffic signals" include all power-operated traffic-control devices, except flasher, signs and markings by which traffic is warned or is directed to take some specific action. 
14.  Vehicle Code. "Vehicle Code" means the Vehicle Code of the state. 
(Ord. 2577 § 22, 1992; Amended during 1984 codification; prior code §§ 3420.1—3420.7, 3420.9—3420.16) 
( Ord. No. 3027, § 1 , 3-10-15)  
10.04.020 - Bicycles and animals. 
Every person riding a bicycle or riding or driving an animal upon a highway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by this title, except those provisions which by their very nature can have no application. 
(Prior code § 3420.32)  
10.04.030 - Resolution continued. 
Resolutions heretofore adopted establishing boulevards, stop intersections, limited parking areas, passenger loading zones, loading zones, bus zones, taxicab stands, crosswalks, prohibited parking at specific places, and parking meter zones are continued in full force and effect until changed or repealed in the manner prescribed by this code for the establishing of such regulations. 
(Prior code § 3420.230)  
10.04.040 - Penalty for violation. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this title shall be guilty of an infraction and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in Chapter 1.08 of this code. 
(Amended during 1984 codification; prior code § 3420.231)  
Chapter 10.08 - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
Sections: 
 
10.08.010 - Police department duties. 
It shall be the duty of the chief of police and the members of the police department to enforce the street traffic regulations of the city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in the city, to make arrests for traffic violations, to investigate traffic accidents, and to cooperate with the city traffic engineer and other officers of the city in the administration of the traffic laws and in developing ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out those duties specially imposed upon the chief of police and the members of the police department by this title. 
(Prior code § 3420.20)  
10.08.020 - Traffic engineer. 
The office of city traffic engineer is established. The city traffic engineer shall be appointed by the city manager and he shall exercise the powers and duties as provided in this title and in the traffic ordinances of the city. 
(Prior code § 3420.24)  
10.08.030 - Traffic direction. 
A.  Officers of the police department or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police are authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or other signal in conformance with traffic laws; provided, that in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department may direct traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions of this title and the traffic laws. 
B.  Officers of the county fire department, when at the scene of a fire or when in the course of their duties they are protecting the persons or equipment of the county fire department, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic. 
(Amended during 1984 codification; prior code § 3420.30)  
10.08.040 - Unauthorized traffic direction. 
No persons other than an officer of the police department or members of the county fire department or a person authorized by the chief of police or a person authorized by the law shall direct or attempt to direct traffic by voice, hand or other signal except that person may operate, when and as provided in this title, any mechanical push button signal erected legally. 
(Amended during 1984 codification; prior code § 3420.33)  
10.08.050 - Government employees. 
The provisions of this title shall apply to the operator of any vehicle owned by or used in the service of the United States government, this state, any county or city and it is unlawful for any operator to violate any of the provisions of this title except as otherwise permitted in this title or by the Vehicle Code. 
(Prior code § 3420.34)  
10.08.060 - Excepted vehicles. 
A.  The provisions of this title regulating the operation, parking and standing of vehicles shall not apply to any vehicle of the police department or county fire department, any public ambulance or any public utility vehicle or any private ambulance, which public utility vehicle or private ambulance has qualified as an authorized emergency vehicle, when any vehicle mentioned in this section is operated in the manner specified in the Vehicle Code in response to an emergency call. 
B.  The exemptions in subsection A of this section shall not, however, relieve the operator of any such vehicle from the consequences of his wilful disregard of the safety of others. 
C.  The provisions of this title regulating the parking or standing of vehicles shall not apply to any vehicle of a city department or public utility while necessarily in use for construction or repair work. 
(Amended during 1984 codification; prior code § 3420.35)  
10.08.070 - Accident studies. 
Whenever the accidents at any particular location become numerous, the traffic bureau shall cooperate with the city traffic engineer in conducting studies of such accidents and determining remedial measures. 
(Amended during 1984 codification; prior code § 3420.21)  
10.08.080 - Accident reports. 
The traffic bureau of the police department shall maintain a suitable system of filing traffic accident reports. Accident reports or cards referring to them shall be filed alphabetically by location. The reports shall be available for the use and information of the city traffic engineer. 
(Amended during 1984 codification; prior code § 3420.22)  
10.08.090 - Annual report. 
The traffic bureau shall annually prepare a traffic report which shall be filed with the city council. Such a report shall contain information on traffic matters in the city as follows: 
A.  The number of traffic accidents, the number of persons killed, the number of persons injured, and other pertinent traffic accident data; 
B.  The number of traffic accidents investigated and other pertinent data on the safety activities of the police; 
C.  The plans and recommendations of the division for future traffic safety activities. 
(Amended during 1984 codification; prior code § 3420.23)  
10.08.100 - Removal of vehicles from streets. 
Any regularly employed and salaried officer of the police department of the city may remove or cause to be removed: 
A.  Any vehicle parked or left standing upon a street or highway for seventy-two or more consecutive hours; 
B.  Any vehicle which is parked or left standing upon a street or highway when the parking or standing is prohibited by ordinance or resolution of this city and signs are posted giving notice of such removal; 
C.  Any vehicle which is parked or left standing upon a street or highway where the use of the street or highway or a portion thereof is necessary for the cleaning, repair or construction of the street or highway, or for the installation of underground utilities, or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is authorized for a purpose other than the normal flow of traffic, or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is necessary for the movement of equipment, articles or structures of unusual size and the parking of the vehicle would prohibit or interfere with such use or movement, and signs giving notice that the vehicle may be removed are erected or placed at least twenty-four hours prior to the removal; 
D.  Any vehicle parked or left standing in violation of an ordinance or resolution of the city prohibiting such parking, where signs have been posted giving notice of such removal; 
E.  Any vehicle which is removed, pursuant to subsections A, B, C or D of this section shall be stored, processed and thereafter released only in accordance with Section 22850 et seq. of the Vehicle Code. 
(Amended during 1984 codification; prior code § 3420.37)  
10.08.110 - Private streets and roads. 
A.  The city council finds and determines that the following named streets and roads within and near the Whittwood Mall in the city are privately owned and maintained streets and roads, which are generally held, open for the use for the public for the purposes of vehicular traffic. The streets and roads are so connected with the highways and public streets that the general public cannot determine that the privately owned and maintained streets and roads are not public highways and public streets. The following privately owned and maintained streets and roads, located in the Whittwood Mall and described, are the streets and roads affected by this section and referred to: 
Street 	From 	To 
		
Whittwood Parkway 	Whittwood Drive 	Santa Gertrudes Avenue 
Cullen Street 	Scott Avenue 	Santa Gertrudes Avenue 
La Forge Street 	Whittwood Drive 	Santa Gertrudes Avenue 
Whittwood Drive 	Whittier Boulevard 	La Forge Street 
Woodstead Avenue 	Whittwood Parkway 	La Forge Street 
Messina Drive 	Cullen Street 	La Forge Street 
Santa Gertrudes Avenue 	Whittier Boulevard 	Whittwood Parkway 
 
B.  Pursuant to the provisions of Section 21107.5 of the Vehicle Code, which section is entitled "Private Roads Opened for Public Use," the city council declares that the provisions of the title and the provisions of the Vehicle Code shall apply to the aforementioned and above-described privately owned and maintained streets and roads unless there is posted on the private street or road a notice of such size, shape and color as to be readily legible during the daylight hours from a distance of one hundred feet, to the effect that the private street or road is privately owned and maintained and that it is not subject to public traffic regulation and control. 
C.  The city council further finds and determines that so long as the abovementioned streets and roads are not so posted that the city shall provide traffic law enforcement on the streets and roads and that the streets and roads shall be subject to all of the provisions of this title and the Vehicle Code. The city does not and it shall not be deemed to have assumed any responsibility or liability for the maintenance, care or repair of the privately owned and maintained streets and roads, nor shall the city be liable for any damages or liability resulting from any defective conditions on the privately owned and maintained streets and roads or any disrepair thereof. 
D.  The city traffic engineer is authorized and directed to obtain, post and maintain the usual and necessary signs notifying the general public of the traffic regulations on the privately owned and maintained streets and roads. Such signs shall be in accordance with and pursuant to the provisions of the Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. 2761 § 1, 2000: prior code § 3539)  
Chapter 10.10 - COST RECOVERY FOR VEHICLE REMOVAL 
Sections: 
 
10.10.010 - Purpose. 
The provisions of this chapter are adopted in accordance with the determination made and the authority granted by the state of California under Section 22850.5 of the Vehicle Code to allow for the imposition of a charge equal to the city's administrative costs, relating to the removal, impound, storage or release of properly impounded vehicles in connection with the city's enforcement of the provisions contained in Section 14602.6 of the Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. 2709 § 2, 1997)  
10.10.020 - Scope. 
The provisions of this chapter shall only apply to the registered owner or the agents of that registered owner and shall not include the following: 
A.  Any vehicle towed pursuant to the abatement provisions contained in Chapter 10.56 of this code; or 
B.  Any vehicle sold at a lien sale pursuant to Sections 3068.1 to 3074, inclusive of, and Section 22851 of the California Vehicle Code unless the sale proceeds are sufficient to pay both the lien holder's total charges and the city's administrative costs. 
(Ord. 2869 § 33, 2006; Ord. 2709 § 3, 1997)  
10.10.030 - Administrative costs. 
The city council shall from time to time deter-mine and fix an amount to be assessed as administrative costs under this chapter, which amount shall be set by city council resolution at a fixed rate per vehicle in connection with the city's enforcement of the provisions contained in Section 14602.6 of the Vehicle Code. The administrative costs shall be collected by the city from the registered owner or the agents of that registered owner at the time of release. 
(Ord. 2709 § 4, 1997)  
10.10.040 - Waiver of administrative costs. 
Upon request by the registered owner of the vehicle or the agents of that registered owner, the chief of police may grant a waiver of the administrative costs under this chapter where verifiable proof is presented to show that the vehicle in question was reported stolen at the time the vehicle was removed. 
(Ord. 2709 § 5, 1997)  
Chapter 10.12 - TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES 
Sections: 
 
10.12.010 - Installation authority. 
A.  The city traffic engineer shall have the power and duty to place and maintain or cause to be placed and maintained official traffic-control devices when and as required to make effective the provisions of this title. 
B.  Whenever the Vehicle Code requires for the effectiveness of any provision thereof that traffic-control devices be installed to give notice to the public of the application of such law, the city traffic engineer is authorized to install or cause to be installed the necessary devices subject to any limitations or restrictions set forth in the law applicable thereto. 
C.  The city traffic engineer may also place and maintain or cause to be placed and maintained such additional traffic-control devices as he may deem necessary or proper to regulate traffic or guide and warn traffic, but he shall make such determination only upon the basis of traffic engineering principles and traffic investigations and in accordance with such standards, limitations and rules as may be set forth in this title or as may be determined by ordinance or resolution of the city council. 
(Prior code § 3420.40)  
10.12.020 - Placement required for enforcement. 
No provision of the Vehicle Code or of this title for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator unless appropriate legible signs are in place giving notice of such provisions of the traffic laws. 
(Prior code § 3420.41)  
10.12.030 - Traffic signal installation. 
A.  The city traffic engineer is directed, subject to budgetary limitations, to install and maintain official traffic signals at those intersections and other places where traffic conditions are such as to require the flow of traffic to be alternately interrupted and released in order to prevent or relieve the traffic congestion or to protect life or property from exceptional hazard. 
B.  The city traffic engineer shall ascertain and determine the locations where such signals are required by field investigation, traffic counts and other traffic information as may be pertinent, and his determinations therefrom shall be made in accordance with those traffic engineering and safety standards and instructions set forth in the California Maintenance Manual issued by the Department of Transportation. The determinations shall also be in compliance with any policy approved by the council. 
(Ord. 2577 § 23, 1992; prior code § 3420.43)  
10.12.040 - Lane markings. 
The city traffic engineer is authorized to mark center lanes and lane lines upon the surface of the roadway to indicate the course to be travelled by vehicles and may place signs temporarily designating lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction regardless of the centerline of the highway. 
(Prior code § 3420.44)  
10.12.050 - Restricted use of left side of roadway markings. 
The city traffic engineer is authorized to place and maintain distinctive roadway markings as described in the California Vehicle Code on those streets or parts of streets where the volume of traffic or the vertical or other curvature of the roadway renders it hazardous to drive on the left side of the marking or signs and markings. The marking or signs and markings shall have the same effect as similar markings placed by the Department of Transportation pursuant to the provisions of the California Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. 2577 § 24, 1992: prior code § 3420.45)  
10.12.060 - Removal, relocation or discontinuance. 
The city traffic engineer is authorized to remove, relocate or discontinue the operation of any traffic-control device, not specifically required by the Vehicle Code or this title, whenever he determines in any particular case that the conditions which warranted or required the installation no longer exist or obtain; provided, further, that his decisions in this regard will not violate a policy approved by the council. 
(Prior code § 3420.46)  
10.12.070 - Hours of operation. 
The city traffic engineer shall determine the hours and days during which any traffic-control device shall be in operation or be in effect, except in those cases where the hours or days are specified in this title; provided, further, that they shall not be in conflict with any policy which has been approved by the council. 
(Prior code § 3420.47)  
10.12.080 - Unauthorized curb markings prohibited. 
No person, unless authorized by the city traffic engineer, shall paint any street or curb surface; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to the painting of numbers on a curb surface by any person who has complied with the provisions of any resolution or ordinance of the city pertaining thereto and who has obtained permission from the city council. 
(Prior code § 3420.48)  
Chapter 10.16 - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING 
Sections:  
Article I. - General Provisions 
 
10.16.010 - Applicability. 
A.  The provisions of this chapter prohibiting the stopping, standing or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times specified in this chapter, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic-control device. 
B.  The provisions of this chapter imposing a time limit on standing or parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions of the Vehicle Code or the ordinances of the city prohibiting or limiting the standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times. 
(Prior code § 3420.100)  
10.16.020 - Parking on city property. 
A.  Whenever the city council determines that the orderly and efficient conduct of the city's business requires that parking or standing of vehicles on real property being a part of or serving municipal buildings or facilities shall be prohibited, limited or restricted, then the city council shall have the power and authority to order signs to be erected or posted indicating that the parking of vehicles on such real property is prohibited, limited or restricted. 
B.  When signs authorized by the provisions of this section are in place, or notice thereof, no person shall park or stand any vehicle contrary to the directions or provisions of such signs. 
C.  When parking space markings are placed and established on real property serving municipal buildings or facilities, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than within a single parking space and within the lines designating the parking space. When "Park Head In" signs are placed on the parking lots or parking structures, no person shall park a vehicle in a parking space except headed in to the front of the parking space. 
(Prior code § 3420.190)  
10.16.030 - Parking on private property. 
No person shall park a vehicle in a private driveway or on private property without the direct or implied consent of the owner or person in lawful possession of the driveway or property. 
(Prior code § 3420.191)  
10.16.040 - City parking lots. 
A.  Parking lots or facilities owned or leased by the city and to be used for the parking of motor vehicles by the general public shall be subject to regulations by signs or parking meters as determined by the council by formal resolution. The council may establish charges for the use of the parking spaces or may install parking meters and when authorized signs, markings or parking meters are in place no person shall park or use the parking space contrary to the signs, markings or parking meters. The parking fees established shall be paid by the person parking the motor vehicle in a parking lot or facility and failure to pay the fees shall constitute a violation of this title. 
B.  When parking space markings are placed and established on parking lots or parking structures, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than within a single parking space and within the lines designating the parking space. When "Park Head In" signs are placed on the parking lots or parking structures, no person shall park a vehicle in a parking space except headed in to the front of the parking space. 
(Prior code § 3420.180)  
10.16.050 - No stopping zones and no parking areas. 
A.  The city traffic engineer is authorized to maintain, by appropriate signs or by paint upon the curb surface, all no stopping zones, no parking areas, and restricted parking areas, as defined and described in this title. 
B.  The city traffic engineer shall post or mark established no stopping zones by placing and maintaining appropriate signs indicating that stopping of vehicles is prohibited and indicating the hours and days when stopping is prohibited. 
C.  During the hours and on the days designated on the signs, it is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop the vehicle on any of the streets or parts of streets established by resolution of the council as no stopping zones. 
D.  The city traffic engineer is authorized to install and maintain parking space markings to indicate parking spaces adjacent to curbings where authorized parking is permitted. 
E.  When the parking space markings are placed on the street, subject to other and more restrictive limitations, no vehicle shall be stopped, left standing or parked other than within a single space unless the size or shape of the vehicle makes compliance impossible. 
(Prior code §§ 3420.102, 3420.136, 3420.137)  
10.16.060 - Emergency parking signs. 
A.  Whenever the chief of police or city traffic engineer determines that an emergency traffic congestion is likely to result from the holding of public or private assemblages, gatherings or functions, or for other reasons, the chief of police or city traffic engineer shall have power and authority to order temporary signs to be erected or posted indicating that the operation, parking or standing of vehicles is prohibited on such streets and alleys as the chief of police or city traffic engineer directs during the time the temporary signs are in place. The signs shall remain in place only during the existence of the emergency and the chief of police or city traffic engineer shall cause the signs to be removed promptly thereafter. 
B.  When signs authorized by the provisions of this section are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall operate, park or stand any vehicle contrary to the directions and provisions of the signs. 
(Prior code § 3420.112)  
10.16.070 - Diagonal parking. 
A.  On any of the streets or portions of streets established by resolution of the council as diagonal parking zones, when signs or pavement markings are in place indicating the diagonal parking, it is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to park the vehicle except: 
1.  At the angle to the curb indicated by signs or pavement markings allotting space to parked vehicles and entirely within the limits of the allotted space; 
2.  With the front wheel nearest the curb within six inches of the curb. 
B.  The provisions of this section shall not apply when the vehicle is actually engaged in the process of loading or unloading passengers, freight or goods, in which event the provisions applicable to subsection D of Section 10.16.080 shall be complied with. 
(Prior code § 3420.135)  
10.16.080 - Parking on one-way streets. 
A.  Subject to other and more restrictive limitations, a vehicle may be stopped or parked within eighteen inches of the left-hand curb facing in the direction of traffic movement upon any one-way street unless signs are in place prohibiting such stopping or standing. 
B.  In the event a highway includes two or more separate roadways and traffic is restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of such one-way roadway unless signs are in place permitted such standing or parking. 
C.  The city traffic engineer is authorized to determine when standing or parking shall be prohibited upon the left-hand side of any one-way street or when standing or parking may be permitted upon the left-hand side of any one-way roadway of a highway having two or more separate roadways and shall erect signs giving notice thereof. 
D.  The requirement of parallel parking imposed by this section shall not apply in the event any commercial vehicle is actually engaged in the process of loading or unloading freight or goods, in which case the vehicle may be backed up to the curb; provided, that the vehicle does not extend beyond the centerline of the street and does not block traffic thereby. 
(Prior code § 3420.134)  
10.16.090 - Handicapped parking in private off-street parking facilities. 
A.  Pursuant to Section 21107.8 of the Vehicle Code, the city council finds and declares that there are within the city a number of privately owned and maintained off-street parking facilities (hereafter "facilities") that are generally held open for use by the public for vehicular parking. The protection of the public peace and safety requires that the provisions of Section 22507.8 of the Vehicle Code shall be made applicable to such facilities. 
B.  The facilities to which this section applies are as described in Exhibit A, attached to the ordinance codified in this section and incorporated in this section by reference. 
Exhibit A 
WHITTWOOD CENTER, Los Angeles County Assessor's Map No. 86 recorded in Assessor's Map Book 1, Pages 50 and 51. 
WHITTIER QUAD, Shown on the 1979-80 Assessor's roll as Parcels 8164-1-34, 44; 8164-3-4, 5; 8164-4-1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 31. 
C.  When the provisions of subsections A and B of this section becomes applicable to any privately owned and maintained off-street parking facility, located on any of the real property described in Exhibit A, referred to in subsection B of this section, it is unlawful for any person to park, stop, stand or leave standing any motor vehicle in a stall or space designated for physically handicapped persons if, immediately adjacent to and visible from the stall or space, there is posted a sign, complying with the signing requirements of Section 22507.8 of the California Vehicle Code, unless the motor vehicle displays either distinguishing license plate or a placard issued pursuant to California Vehicle Code Sections 5007, 22511.55 and 22511.59. 
(Ord. 2869 § 34, 2006; prior code §§ 3420.113, 3420.114)  
Article II. - Limited Parking 
 
10.16.100 - Parking time limited on certain designated streets during certain designated periods. 
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, parking shall be limited as specified per authorized signs or curb markings. 
A.  Twenty-minute parking. 
1.  Green curb markings means no standing or parking for a period of time longer than twenty minutes at any time between nine a.m. and six p.m. on any day except Sundays and holidays 
2.  When the authorized signs or curb markings are in place on any street or part of a street lying and being within the central traffic district, giving notice of a twenty-minute parking limitation, then no person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle in such street or part of a street between the hours of nine a.m. and six p.m. on any Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday or Saturday, nor shall they stop, stand or park any vehicle in any such street between the hours of nine a.m. and nine p.m. on any Monday or Friday for a period of time longer than indicated by the signs or curb markings. 
B.  Two-hour parking. 
1.  When authorized signs or curb markings are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park the vehicle on any portion of any public street for a period of time longer than indicated by such signs or curb markings. 
2.  The Parking and Transportation Commission, by resolution, may limit parking on all or any portion of any public street during any day, and during any hour of any day. When the Parking and Transportation Commission by resolution sets a limit on the amount of time that a vehicle may stop, stand, or park on any portion of the public street, the commission will cause signs to be erected at the appropriate portions of the affected public streets. The signs shall conform to all the requirements for parking limitations signs set forth in the California Vehicle Code. 
3.  This section shall be enforced by the Whittier Police Department. 
4.  Any violation of this section shall be an infraction. 
(Prior code § 3420.130) 
(Ord. No. 2963, § 4, 2-8-11)  
10.16.120 - Parking time unlimited for metered parking areas. 
When signs are erected giving notice of metered parking areas as specified per Section 10.16.310 herein, parking time shall be unlimited. 
(Ord. 2888 § 2, 2007) 
(Ord. No. 2963, § 5, 2-8-11)  
10.16.130 - Successive acts of parking. 
On any day, successive acts of parking within a distance of three hundred feet when the vehicle is moved merely for the purpose of avoiding the parking limitations prescribed by this chapter shall be deemed a single act of parking within the meaning of this chapter, subject to the longest parking limitation applicable to the portion of the public parking lot, street or streets lying between the parking spaces so used. Successive acts of parking on any given day shall create a rebuttable presumption that the parking is done with intent to circumvent the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2451 § 1, 1988: prior code § 3420.133)  
10.16.135 - Removal of chalk marks. 
Any person who intentionally removes, obliterates or conceals any chalk mark or other distinctive mark or indicator used by any police officer or other employee of the city in connection with the enforcement of the parking regulations of this title, is guilty of an infraction. 
(Ord. 2415 § 2, 1987)  
10.16.140 - All-night parking prohibited. 
A.  When the proper signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle on any street for a period of time longer than thirty minutes between the hours of two a.m. and six a.m. of any day. 
B.  In addition to the provisions of subsection A of this section, and regardless of the erection of any sign giving notice, no person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle with a gross weight of six thousand pounds or more on any street or alley in the city for a period of time longer than thirty minutes between the hours of two a.m. and six a.m. of any day. 
C.  This section shall not apply to any emergency vehicle or a vehicle owned by any state or governmental agency, or any public utility, actually engaged in making an emergency stop, nor shall it apply to any vehicle owned by a licensed physician while engaged in making professional calls. 
(Prior code § 3420.138)  
10.16.150 - Nonprofit organizations exempt by permit. 
A.  A vehicle may be parked overtime contrary to the provisions of this chapter when the vehicle is owned, operated, maintained and used solely for the purposes of a nonprofit organization and when the vehicle is parked in a space on a public street overtime and contrary to the provisions of this chapter pursuant to a permit granted by the parking and transportation commission of the city. An application for a permit to overpark may be filed with the parking and traffic commission or the secretary thereof requesting a permit for the overparking. The application shall contain the following information: 
1.  The location of the space where the vehicle proposes to overpark; 
2.  The time during which the overparking will take place; 
3.  The name of the organization seeking the overparking privilege with a statement of the purposes and activities of the organization, together with proof that it is a nonprofit organization; 
4.  The general character of the advertising on the vehicle to be overparked; 
5.  Such other information as the parking and traffic commission may require to be put in the application. 
B.  The parking and transportation commission upon receipt of the application shall hear and determine the application and may grant or deny a permit in whole or in part. A permit may be granted upon the terms and conditions which the parking and transportation commission deems advisable for the protection of the public peace, health and safety of the citizens of the city. Full power and authority to hear and determine the applications and to grant or deny permits is conferred upon the parking and transportation commission by the city council. The parking and transportation commission shall adopt such rules and regulations as it deems necessary for the hearing of the applications and the granting or denying of a permit. A copy of the rules and regulations shall be filed with the city clerk and may be furnished to any person seeking to file an application. 
C.  If a permit is granted, it shall be conspicuously displayed on or about the vehicle granted the privilege of overparking and thereafter the vehicle may overpark notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter so long as the overparking is in accordance with the terms and conditions of the permit granted by the parking and transportation commission. 
(Ord. 2638 § 6, 1994: prior code § 3420.139)  
10.16.155 - Military veteran parking. 
A.  Pursuant to Section 22511.3 of the California Vehicle Code, a military veteran displaying special license plates issued under VC 5101.3, 5101.4, 5101.5, 5101.6, or 5101.8, may park his/her motor vehicle, weighing not more than six thousand pounds gross weight, without charge, in a metered parking space. 
B.  This section does not exempt a vehicle meeting the requirements in subdivision A from compliance with any other state law or local ordinance, including but not limited to vehicle height restrictions, zones that prohibit stopping, parking or standing of all vehicles, parking time limitations, and street sweeping. 
(Ord. No. 2921, § 1, 3-10-09)  
10.16.160 - Funeral zones. 
No operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park the vehicle for any period of time longer than is necessary for the loading or unloading of passengers and not to exceed three minutes at any place between the limit markers or signs placed within the projected real property boundaries of any undertaking establishment, private residence, or any public or private place at any time during or within forty minutes prior to the beginning of any funeral or funeral service, unless the operator of the vehicle is directed by or has received permission from the director or any other person in charge of the funeral or funeral service to park the vehicle in such place; provided, that the director or person in charge has placed and maintained prior to and during the time limit specified in this section two approved portable signs, one at each extremity of the place, upon the sidewalk or pavement area and within two feet of the curb. 
(Prior code § 3420.201)  
10.16.170 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3101 , § 3, adopted May 14, 2019, repealed § 10.16.170, which pertained to parking by peddlers or vendors and derived from prior code, § 3420.111; and Ord. 2401, § 2, adopted in 1987.  
Article III. - Prohibited Parking 
 
10.16.180 - No parking areas. 
No operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand, park or leave standing the vehicle in any of the following places, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police officer or other authorized officer or of a traffic sign or signal: 
A.  Within any divisional island unless authorized and clearly indicated with appropriate signs or markings; 
B.  On either side of any street between the projected property lines of any public walk, public stops, street, or thoroughfare terminating at such street, when the area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface; 
C.  In any area where the city traffic engineer determines that the parking or stopping of a vehicle would constitute a traffic hazard or would endanger life or property, when the area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface; 
D.  In any area established by resolution of the council as a no parking area, when the area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface; 
E.  Upon, along or across any railway track in such manner as to hinder, delay or obstruct the movement of any car traveling upon the track; 
F.  In any area where the parking or stopping of any vehicle would constitute a traffic hazard or would endanger life or property; 
G.  On any street or highway where the use of the street or highway or a portion thereof is necessary for the cleaning, repair or construction of the street or highway or the installation of underground utilities or where the use of the street or highway or the installation of underground utilities or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is authorized for a purpose other than the normal flow of traffic or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is necessary for the movement of equipment, articles or structures of unusual size, and the parking of the vehicle would prohibit or interfere with such use or movement; provided, that signs giving notice of the no parking are erected or placed at least twenty-four hours prior to the effective time of the no parking; 
H.  At any place within twenty feet of a point on the curb immediately opposite the midblock end of a safety zone, when the place is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface; 
I.  At any place within twenty feet of a crosswalk at an intersection in any business district when the place is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface except that a bus may stop at a designated bus stop; 
J.  Within twenty feet of the approach to any traffic signal, boulevard stop sign or official electric flashing device. 
K.  At any place within fifteen feet of a driveway that is used by certain emergency vehicles to enter or exit a police department, ambulance service provider facility, or general acute care hospital, except as specified, when the place is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface and also including areas as indicated by appropriate "keep clear" signage and pavement markings on the roadway delineating the prohibited areas. 
(Prior code § 3420.103) 
(Ord. No. 3063 , § 1, 2-28-17)  
10.16.190 - Advertising or displaying for sale. 
No operator of any vehicle shall park the vehicle upon any street in the city for the principal purpose of advertising or displaying it for sale, unless authorized by the council. 
(Prior code § 3420.105)  
10.16.200 - Parking adjacent to schools. 
A.  The city traffic engineer is authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon that side of any street adjacent to any school property when the parking would, in his opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation. 
B.  When official signs are erected prohibiting parking upon that side of a street adjacent to any school property, no person shall park a vehicle in any such designated place. 
(Prior code § 3420.108)  
10.16.210 - Parking on grades. 
No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle unattended on any street when upon any grade exceeding six percent without blocking the wheels of the vehicle by turning them against the curb or by other means. 
(Prior code § 3420.110)  
10.16.220 - Parking on narrow streets. 
A.  The city traffic engineer is authorized to place signs or markings indicating no parking upon any street when the width of the roadway does not exceed twenty feet, or upon one side of a street as indicated by such signs or markings when the width of the roadway does not exceed thirty feet. 
B.  When official signs or markings prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow streets as authorized in this section, no person shall park a vehicle upon any such street in violation of any such sign or marking. 
(Prior code § 3420.109)  
10.16.230 - Parkways. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within any parkway. 
(Prior code § 3420.101)  
10.16.240 - Repairing vehicles in streets. 
No person shall construct or cause to be constructed, repair or cause to be repaired, grease or cause to be greased any vehicle or any part thereof upon any public street in the city. Temporary emergency repairs may be made upon a public street. 
(Prior code § 3420.106)  
10.16.250 - Washing or polishing vehicles in streets. 
No person shall wash or cause to be washed, polish or cause to be polished any vehicle or any part thereof upon any public street in the city when a charge is made for the service. 
(Prior code § 3420.107)  
10.16.260 - Taxicab stands. 
A.  The council shall, by resolution, establish taxicab stands and determine the location thereof. 
B.  The curb surface within each taxicab stand shall be painted white and marked "Taxicab Stand" in red lettering, or shall be designated by signs of a type and size approved by the chief of police. 
C.  No operator of any vehicle, other than a taxicab or automobile for hire, shall park a vehicle in a taxicab stand. 
(Prior code § 3420.210)  
Article IV. - Uptown Whittier Park Once District 
 
10.16.270 - Establishment of district and district boundaries. 
The Uptown Whittier Park Once District is hereby established and described as follows: 
A.  The boundaries include the south side of Hadley Street on the north to the north side of Penn Street on the south from midblock between Friends and Washington Ave on the east to mid-block between Milton and Newlin Avenues on the west. 
B.  The boundaries of the district shall be the same as the Uptown Whittier Specific Plan as approved by the city council in November 2008, as it may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 2963, § 3, 2-8-11)  
10.16.280 - Purpose. 
The Uptown Whittier Park Once District is established to manage public parking supply and demand within the district boundaries as well as improve transportation and parking related facilities and programs. 
(Ord. No. 2963, § 3, 2-8-11)  
10.16.290 - Acquisition, installation, maintenance, regulation, or meters; role of city manager. 
The city manager is hereby directed to provide for the purchase, acquiring, installation, operation, maintenance, supervision, regulation and use of the parking meters provided for in this division and to maintain the meters in good workable condition. 
(Ord. No. 2963, § 3, 2-8-11)  
10.16.300 - Location and operation of meters. 
Each pay-by-space machine shall conspicuously display the applicable parking rates and instructions for use of the machine. Each pay-by-space shall, upon the deposit of the appropriate United States coins, currency, credit card, or city prepaid parking card with respect to a parking meter space controlled thereby, dispense a receipt showing the amount of time purchased and when the lawful parking period will expire for that space. Upon expiration of the lawful parking period, the right of a vehicle to occupy the space shall cease. 
(Ord. No. 2963, § 3, 2-8-11)  
10.16.310 - Marking of individual parking spaces; vehicles to be parked within marked lines. 
The city manager shall have lines or markings painted or placed upon the curb, right-of-way or parking lot adjacent to each parking meter for the purpose of designating the parking space for which the parking meter is to be used. Spaces regulated by pay-by-space machines shall be assigned numbers, which shall be clearly painted or placed onto the curb next to each such space. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this division to park any vehicle across any such line or marking or to park the vehicle in such position that the same shall not be entirely within the area so designated by such lines or markings. 
(Ord. No. 2963, § 3, 2-8-11)  
10.16.320 - Use of meter required. 
When a vehicle is parked in any space controlled by a pay-by-space machine and payment is required pursuant to Section 10.16.380 the operator of the vehicle shall, upon entering the parking space, immediately purchase time by depositing coins indicated on such meter or by depositing other forms of payment which may be accepted at pay-by-space machines such as dollar bills, credit cards, or prepaid city parking cards as specified on such machines. Failure to put the meter in operation by purchasing time shall constitute a violation of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2963, § 3, 2-8-11)  
10.16.330 - Injuring or tampering with meters. 
It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this division for any person to deface, injure, tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking meter installed under the provision of this division or post supporting such parking meter. 
(Ord. No. 2963, § 3, 2-8-11)  
10.16.340 - Use of slugs and similar devices prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this division to deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter any slugs, device or metallic substance, or any other substitute for any of the coins or other payment types specified in Section 10.16.300. 
(Ord. No. 2963, § 3, 2-8-11)  
10.16.350 - Overtime parking. 
A.  If the vehicle shall remain parked in any such parking space beyond the time for which payment has been made, the parking meter shall indicate such illegal parking and in that event, such vehicle shall be considered as parked overtime and beyond the period of legal parking time and the parking of a vehicle overtime or beyond the period of legal parking time in any such part of a street where any such meter is located shall be a violation of this division. 
B.  It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this division for any person to cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in the name of, or operated by such person to be parked overtime or beyond the period of legal parking time established for any parking meter area. 
(Ord. No. 2963, § 3, 2-8-11)  
10.16.360 - Duty of police where vehicle parked overtime; issuance of citation. 
It shall be the duty of each police officer or parking enforcement officer to take the number of any meter at which any vehicle is over-parked, as provided in Section 10.16.350; the state vehicle license of such vehicle; the time and date of such over-parking, and make of such vehicle; and issue, in writing, a citation for illegal parking in the same form and subject to the same procedure provided for by the laws of the state applicable to the traffic violations within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2963, § 3, 2-8-11)  
10.16.370 - Provision for temporary suspension of meter rates. 
The provisions of this division may be suspended from time to time by motion of the city council in any case where the council finds that strict compliance would not serve the public interest, including, but not limited to, the use of public streets and sidewalks for celebrations, special public events, celebration of holiday seasons and other such activity or purpose as the city council in its sole discretion shall determine. 
(Ord. No. 2963, § 3, 2-8-11)  
10.16.380 - Establishment of Uptown Whittier Park Once meter rates for on-street parking areas. 
Under that authority of California Vehicle Code section 22508, the city council hereby establishes the following base meter rates for the following on-street parking areas within the Uptown Whittier Park Once District: 
Street 	Side 	Limits 	Base Meter Rate (per hour) 
			Monday—Saturday 10:00 AM to 9:59 PM; Sunday Noon to 9:59 PM 	Monday—Saturday 10:00 PM to 9:59 AM; Sunday 10:00 PM to 11:59 AM 
Greenleaf Avenue 	Easterly 	Hadley Street and Penn Street 	$1.00 	Free 
Greenleaf Avenue 	Westerly 	Hadley Street and Penn Street 	$1.00 	Free 
Bailey Street 	Northerly 	Comstock Avenue and Washington 
Avenue 	$1.00 	Free 
Bailey Street 	Southerly 	Comstock Avenue and Washington 
Avenue 	$1.00 	Free 
Philadelphia Street 	Northerly 	Comstock Avenue and Washington 
Avenue 	$1.00 	Free 
Philadelphia Street 	Southerly 	Comstock Avenue and Washington 
Avenue 	$1.00 	Free 
Wardman Street 	Northerly 	Comstock Avenue and Bright Avenue 	$1.00 	Free 
Wardman Street 	Southerly 	Comstock Avenue and Bright Avenue 	$1.00 	Free 
 
(Ord. No. 2963, § 3, 2-8-11)  
10.16.390 - Periodic adjustment of downtown meter zone meter rates. 
Under the authority of California Vehicle Code section 22508, the city council hereby adopts the following process for adjusting Uptown Whittier Park Once District meter rates from time to time to manage the use and occupancy of the parking spaces for the public benefit in all parking areas within the metered area. 
A.  To accomplish the goal of managing the supply of parking and to make it reasonably available when and where needed, a target occupancy rate of eighty-five percent is hereby established. 
B.  At least annually and not more frequently than quarterly, the city manager or designatee shall survey the average occupancy for each parking area in the Uptown Whittier Park Once District that has parking meters. Based on the survey results, the parking manager or designated city staff shall adjust the rates up or down in twenty-five cent increments to seek to achieve the target occupancy rate. The base parking meter rate, and any adjustments to that rate made pursuant to this ordinance [Ordinance No. 2963], shall become effective upon the programming of the parking meter for that rate. A current schedule of meter rates shall be available at the city clerk's office. 
C.  The hourly meter rate shall not exceed one dollar and fifty cents without the express approval of the city council. 
D.  This section does not apply to off-street parking facilities as described in Section 10.16.020. 
(Ord. No. 2963, § 3, 2-8-11)  
10.16.400 - Establishment of parking revenue fund. 
A.  Establishment and Purpose of Fund. There is hereby established a special fund in the treasury of the city of Whittier to be known as the Uptown Whittier Park Once District Revenue Fund (referred to hereafter as the "fund"). Subject to the restrictions provided in this section, the fund is hereby established for the purpose of financing the Uptown Whittier Park Once District Program and other parking-related projects, including without limitation: 
1.  Capital expenditures for acquisition, construction completion of leasing of public parking lots, storage space, garages, single-or multi-level structures, and other off-street parking facilities on, under, or above the surface of any property, including public parks, squares, lands, easements or rights-of-way acquired or to be acquired by purchase, lease or condemnation, together with buildings, structures equipment, approach roads, entrances, exits, fencing, off-street parking meters, and other works, property or structures for the accommodation of automotive vehicles, and necessary or convenient for parking facilities to relieve congestion and facilitate, regulate and control traffic within the city of Whittier; 
2.  The payment of the costs of engineering and related studies and surveys; 
3.  The payment of the costs, operation and maintenance of parking facilities and related structures hereafter acquired or constructed, including the payment of possessory interest taxes required by any agreement authorized by city council; 
4.  The sole pledge for the servicing of past or future indebtedness incurred by the issuance of bonds or other instruments by or on behalf of the city of Whittier for the acquisition, construction and completion of off-street parking facilities; 
5.  The sole additional pledge augmenting a pledge of parking revenue for the servicing of past or future indebtedness incurred by the issuance of revenue bonds or other revenue instruments by or on behalf of the city of Whittier for the acquisition, construction and completion of on- and off-street parking facilities; payment of the costs of engineering, construction and installation of meters and on-street parking bays in parking meter areas within Uptown Whittier by sidewalk narrowing after adoption of appropriate legislation by city council; 
6.  Payment of the administrative and operating expenses of the Uptown Whittier Park Once District; 
7.  Payment to the general fund for supplemental traffic regulation and control within the Uptown Whittier Park Once District; 
8.  Capital and operational expenditures to be used for activities benefiting the Uptown Whittier Park Once District as provided in Section 10.16.410 from amounts remaining in said special funding after making provision for the requirements under (1) through (7) above. 
B.  Deposit of Monies Into the Fund; Segregated Accounts within Fund. 
1.  Twenty percent of the net revenue collected from the on-street parking meters ("parking meter revenue") shall be deposited into the treasury of the city of Whittier and credited to the fund in a segregated account known as the "parking meter revenue account." 
2.  Twenty percent of the net revenue collected from the parking meter revenue shall be deposited into the treasury of the city of Whittier and credited to the fund in a segregated account known as the "Off-Street Parking Revenue Account." To the extent practicable, all net revenues from off-street parking facilities (including surface parking) operated on city-owned property shall be credited to the off-street parking revenue account. 
3.  Sixty percent of the net revenue collected from the parking meter revenue shall be deposited into the treasury of the city of Whittier and credited to the fund in a segregated account known as the "Uptown Whittier Park Once District Account." 
4.  Use of Monies in the Parking Meter Revenue Account. The use of monies deposited into the parking meter revenue account pursuant to (B)(1) of this section, and any and all interest earned thereon, shall be expended: Monies will be used for the payment in any fiscal year of all principal, interest, premium and all other payments required pursuant to any documents authorizing any indebtedness or obligations issued or created by, or on behalf of, the city of Whittier in connection with the financing of the construction, acquisition and/or equipping of on-street parking facilities including pay-by-space meters or if no said indebtedness or obligations exists, the monies may be allocated to the "Off-Street Parking Revenue Account" and the "Park Once District Account" in amounts deemed appropriate by the city council. 
5.  Use of Monies in Off Street Parking Revenue Account. The monies deposited into the off-street parking revenue account pursuant to (B)(2) of this section and any and all interest earned thereon, shall be expended for the purposes set forth in subsection (A)(1) and/or (A)(2) of this section, in any order of priority. 
6.  Use of Monies in Park Once District Revenue Account. The monies deposited into the Park Once District Revenue Account pursuant to (B)(3) of this section and any and all interest earned thereon, shall be expended for the purposes set forth in Section 10.16.410. 
7.  Definitions. When used in this section, the term "net revenues" shall mean, with respect to each facility, all income, revenue, interest earnings and other money of every nature arising out of or in connection with or derived from the ownership, operation or leasing of such facility in such fiscal year less maintenance and operation costs of such facility. The term "maintenance and operation costs" shall mean, with respect to each facility, the reasonable and necessary costs of operation and maintenance, calculated on sound accounting principles, including (among other things) salaries and wages, 3rd party fees for services, costs of materials, supplies and fuel, reasonable expenses of management, legal fees, accounting fees, repairs and other expenses necessary to maintain and preserve the facility in good repair and working order, and reasonable amounts for administration, overhead, insurance, taxes (if any), and other similar costs, but excluding in all cases (i) depreciation and obsolescence charges or reserves therefor; (ii) amortization of intangibles premiums, discounts, or other bookkeeping entries of a similar nature, (iii) costs of capital additions, replacement, betterments, extensions or improvements to the facility, which under generally accepted accounting principles are chargeable to a capital account or to a reserve for depreciation; and (iv) amounts paid from sources other than the fund. 
(Ord. No. 2963, § 3, 2-8-11)  
10.16.410 - Use of Uptown Whittier Park Once District Revenue Account. 
Revenues generated from on-street within the Uptown Whittier Park Once District boundaries shall be accounted for separately from other city funds and may be used for the following purposes. 
A.  All expenses of administration of the parking program including transportation and parking planning, marketing and education programs. 
B.  All expenses for the control of traffic (including pedestrian and vehicle safety, comfort and convenience) which may affect or be affected by the parking of vehicles in the metered area. 
C.  For improving, operating and maintain on- or off-street parking facilities 
D.  For installation and maintenance of landscaping, pedestrian linkages, sidewalk cleaning, street furniture, wayfinding systems, and traffic-control devices and signals. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the revenue deposited shall be expended as provided for in this ordinance [Ordinance No. 2963]. 
(Ord. No. 2963, § 3, 2-8-11)  
Chapter 10.18 - Preferential Parking Program 
Sections: 
 
10.18.010 - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(a)  "Residence" means a house, apartment, condominium, mobile home or other type of dwelling, in conformance with the city's zoning ordinance and related zoning maps, having an address assigned consistent with the house numbering maps maintained by the city. An apartment having numbers or letters assigned in addition to the street address shall be deemed to be a residence. 
(b)  "Guest" means any person visiting or intending to visit, for any purpose, either a resident or merchant located in a preferential parking district. 
(c)  "Merchant" means a person who, as proprietor, operates a commercial business involved in the retailing of goods or services within a preferential parking district. 
(d)  "Permit" means a permit issued to an individual to park in a preferential parking district in the city. 
(e)  "Preferential parking district" or "district" means certain streets or portions thereof, including residences and businesses adjacent thereto, designated by the resolution establishing the district, wherein vehicles displaying a valid permit applicable to that district shall be exempt from parking restrictions established pursuant to this chapter. 
(f)  "Resident" means a person who lives in a residence located in a preferential parking district. 
(Ord. No. 2997, § 1, 2-26-13)  
10.18.020 - Establishment of districts. 
The city council may, by resolution, and at its discretion or upon receipt of a petition signed by no less than two-thirds of all property owners of record and/or lawful lessees of properties comprising all developed frontage of the street or streets proposed for designation, designate a street or portion thereof, together with residences and/or businesses adjacent thereto, as a preferential parking district. Any person signing such a petition may be required to provide satisfactory evidence that he or she satisfies the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2997, § 1, 2-26-13)  
10.18.030 - Issuance of permits. 
(a)  Permits shall be issued by the director of public works or his or her designee (herein in this chapter). Each permit issued shall remain property of the city at all times. 
(b)  The number of permits to be issued to any one residence or to any merchant's business establishment, including its employees, shall be determined by the number of residents and merchants, as well as the parking conditions within each district, and shall be set forth in the resolution establishing the district. 
(c)  Permits may be issued only to the following persons: residents, merchants, employees of merchants, or guests within specified districts. 
(Ord. No. 2997, § 1, 2-26-13)  
10.18.040 - Posting signs in preferential parking districts. 
Upon the adoption by the city council of a resolution designating a preferential parking district and the specific parking regulations applicable thereto, the city manager shall cause signs to be erected in the district, indicating prominently thereon the parking restrictions and the fact that motor vehicles with valid permits shall be exempt therefrom. 
(Ord. No. 2997, § 1, 2-26-13)  
10.18.050 - Exemption from parking restrictions. 
(a)  A motor vehicle displaying a valid permit affixed to the vehicle's interior rear-view mirror, or displayed as otherwise directed by the director of public works, may park or be parked in the district for which the permit is issued without being subject to parking restrictions in this chapter or the resolution establishing the preferential parking district; provided, however, that nothing herein shall affect or excuse a violation of any other provision of this code, the California Vehicle Code, the Streets and Highway Code, or any other laws applicable to the parking of motor vehicles. 
(b)  A preferential parking permit shall not guarantee or reserve to the permittee an on-street parking space within any district. 
(Ord. No. 2997, § 1, 2-26-13)  
10.18.060 - Vehicles excepted from this chapter. 
No person shall, without a permit, park any motor vehicle in a preferential parking district in violation of any parking restrictions set forth herein or in a resolution establishing a preferential parking district, excepting the following: 
(a)  Repair, maintenance, refuse, utility, fuel or delivery vehicles doing business in the district. 
(b)  Vehicles delivering life support and health commodities to residential areas or schools located in the preferential parking district. 
(c)  Police vehicles and other public safety or emergency vehicles operated by or under the authority of a governmental entity while engaged in the performance of official duties. 
(d)  Any other vehicle expressly authorized by law to park within the district, notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2997, § 1, 2-26-13)  
10.18.070 - Application for and term of permit. 
(a)  Each person desiring to obtain a permit shall submit an application on such form as may be provided by the city, together with the filing fee as established by resolution of the city council. No permit shall be issued unless the applicant is at least eighteen years of age, possesses a valid California driver's license, and is a resident or merchant within the district to be established. Residency shall be established by a valid driver's license or at least two utility bills. Permit issuance is subject to terms and conditions as may be set forth in this chapter or in the resolution establishing the district. 
(b)  Each permit shall be valid for the period set forth in the resolution establishing the district, and may be renewed in accordance with procedures set forth in that resolution or in the manner provided for a new permit if no such procedures have been established. 
(Ord. No. 2997, § 1, 2-26-13)  
10.18.080 - Prohibited activities. 
(a)  Unless exempted by provisions of this chapter, no person shall park a motor vehicle in any preferential parking district in violation of any parking restrictions set forth in this chapter or resolution establishing a preferential parking district. 
(b)  No person shall falsely represent himself/herself as eligible for a parking permit or furnish false information in an application for a permit. 
(c)  No permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall thereafter be assigned, transferred or used for any consideration, monetary or otherwise. Only the person to whom a permit has been issued or his/her minor child with a valid California driver's license or learner's permit may use the permit. This section does not apply to guest permits, which are governed by Section 10.18.100. 
(d)  No person shall copy, produce or create a facsimile or counterfeit parking permit, nor shall any person use or display a facsimile or counterfeit preferential parking district permit. 
(e)  No person shall display a permit that has been revoked. 
(Ord. No. 2997, § 1, 2-26-13; Ord. No. 2999, § 1, 6-11-13; Ord. No. 3005, § 2, 6-11-13)  
10.18.090 - Permit revocation. 
(a)  The permit of any permittee who has violated the provisions of subsection (b), (c) or (d) of Section 10.18.080 may be immediately revoked upon written notice by the city of the permit revocation. Upon notification of such revocation, the permittee shall, within fifteen business days of the date of such notice, either surrender the permit or file a written request with the city clerk for a hearing before the city manager or his or her designee. 
(b)  Any written request for a hearing must be received within said fifteen-day period to be considered timely, and upon receipt of a timely request, the revocation shall be stayed pending a final decision following the hearing. 
(c)  A hearing shall be held by the city manager or designee, unless continued by agreement, no less than ten business days after the date notice of the hearing is mailed by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the permittee. At the hearing, any person may present evidence or argument as to whether the permit should be revoked. 
(d)  The city manager or designee, may give oral notice of the decision at the close of the hearing, or may send notice of the decision by mail to the permittee. The decision shall be final. If the decision to revoke is sustained following the hearing, the permittee shall, within twenty-four hours, surrender the permit to the city clerk. 
(e)  Any revoked permit not timely surrendered shall immediately be deemed null and void, and of no force or effect. 
(f)  No permittee who has had a permit revoked may re-apply for another permit for twenty-four months following the effective date of the revocation. 
(Ord. No. 2997, § 1, 2-26-13)  
10.18.100 - Guest permits. 
Any rules governing the issuance of guest permits shall be as set forth in the resolution establishing the district. 
(Ord. No. 2997, § 1, 2-26-13)  
10.18.110 - Dissolving a district. 
The procedures set forth in Section 10.18.020 of this chapter shall be utilized by the city council in determining whether to dissolve a preferential parking district. 
(Ord. No. 2997, § 1, 2-26-13)  
10.18.120 - Penalties. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision, or fail to comply with any of the requirements of subsections (a) through (e) of Section 10.18.080. Any person violating any said subsections or failing to comply with any of their requirements shall be deemed guilty of an infraction, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by: (a) a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for a first violation; (b) a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars for a second violation within one year; or (c) a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars for each additional violation within one year. 
(b)  Civil Remedies Available. A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a nuisance and may be abated by the city through civil process by means of restraining order, preliminary or permanent injunction, or in any other manner provided by law for the abatement of such nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 2997, § 1, 2-26-13; Ord. No. 2999, § 2, 6-11-13; Ord. No. 3005, § 3, 6-11-13)  
Chapter 10.20 - SPECIAL STOPS 
Sections: 
 
10.20.010 - Stop sign placement. 
Whenever any ordinance or resolution of the city designates and describes any street or portion thereof as a through street or boulevard or any intersection at which vehicles are required to stop at one or more entrances thereto, or any railroad grade crossing at which vehicles are required to stop, the city traffic engineer shall erect and maintain stop signs as follows: 
A stop sign shall be erected on each and every street intersecting such through street or portion thereof so designated and at those entrances of other intersections where a stop is required and at any railroad grade crossing so designated. Every such sign shall conform with, and shall be placed as provided in, the Vehicle Code. 
(Prior code § 3420.70)  
10.20.020 - Through streets. 
A.  Those streets and parts of streets established by resolution of the council are declared to be through streets for the purposes of this chapter. 
B.  The provisions of this chapter shall also apply at one or more entrances to the intersections as such entrances and intersections are established by resolution of the council. 
C.  The provisions of this chapter shall apply to those highway railway grade crossings as established by resolution of the council. 
(Ord. 2869 § 35, 2006: prior code § 3420.71)  
Chapter 10.24 - TURNING MOVEMENTS 
Sections: 
 
10.24.010 - Marker placement. 
A.  The city traffic engineer is authorized to place markers, buttons or signs within or adjacent to intersections and indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections, and the city traffic engineer is authorized to locate and indicate more than one lane of traffic from which drivers of vehicles may make right-hand or left-hand turns, and the course to be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law or ordinance. 
B.  When the authorized markers, buttons or other indications are placed within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of the indications. 
(Prior code § 3420.50)  
10.24.020 - Restricted turn signals. 
The city traffic engineer is authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left or U-turn and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours. 
(Prior code § 3420.51)  
10.24.030 - Compliance required. 
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left or U-turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any such sign. 
(Prior code § 3420.52)  
10.24.040 - Right turns against signals. 
A.  No driver of a vehicle shall make a right turn against a red or stop signal at any intersection which is signposted giving notice of the restriction as provided in this section. 
B.  The city traffic engineer shall post appropriate signs giving effect to this section where he determines that the making of right turns against a traffic signal stop indication would seriously interfere with the safe and orderly flow of traffic or pedestrian movements. 
(Prior code § 3420.53)  
Chapter 10.28 - ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS 
Sections: 
 
10.28.010 - Designation and compliance. 
Whenever any ordinance or resolution of the city council designates any one-way street or alley, the city traffic engineer shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof and no such regulation shall be effective unless the signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movements of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. When the authorized signs or markings are in place on any street or part of a street giving such notice, then no person shall drive any vehicle in any direction except as authorized by such signs. 
(Prior code § 3420.60)  
Chapter 10.32 - LOADING AND UNLOADING ZONES 
Sections: 
 
10.32.010 - Establishment authorized. 
A.  The city traffic engineer is authorized to determine and mark loading zones and passenger loading zones as follows: 
1.  At any place in the central traffic district or any business district; 
2.  Elsewhere in front of the entrance to any place of business or in front of any hall or place used for the purpose of public assembly. 
B.  In no event shall more than one-half of the total curb length in any block be reserved for loading zone purposes. 
C.  Loading zones shall be indicated by yellow paint upon the top or face of all curbs within the zones. 
D.  Passenger loading zones shall be indicated by white paint upon the top or face of all curbs in the zone. 
(Prior code § 3420.120)  
10.32.020 - Curb markings. 
The city traffic engineer is authorized, subject to the provisions and limitations of this title, to place, and when required in this chapter shall place, the following curb markings to indicate parking or standing regulations, and the curb markings shall have the meanings as set forth in this section: 
A.  Red means no stopping, standing or parking at any time except as permitted by the Vehicle Code, and except that a bus may stop in a red zone marked or signed as a bus zone. 
B.  Yellow means no stopping, standing or parking at any time between seven a.m. and six p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers or materials; provided, that the loading or unloading of passengers shall not consume more than three minutes nor the loading or unloading of materials more than twenty minutes. 
C.  White means no stopping, standing or parking for any purposes other than loading or unloading of passengers, or for the purpose of depositing mail in an adjacent mailbox, which shall not exceed three minutes and the restrictions apply at all times except when the zone is in front of a theater the restrictions apply at all times except when the theater is closed. 
D.  When the city traffic engineer as authorized under this chapter has caused curb markings to be placed, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb marking in violation of any of the provisions of this section. 
(Prior code § 3420.121)  
10.32.030 - Time limits. 
A.  Permission granted in this chapter to stop or stand a vehicle for purposes of loading or unloading of materials shall apply only to commercial vehicles and shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor, and in no event for more than twenty minutes. 
B.  The loading or unloading of materials shall apply only to commercial deliveries, also the delivery or pickup of express and parcel post packages and United States mail. 
C.  Permission granted in this chapter to stop or park for purposes of loading or unloading passengers shall include the loading or unloading of personal baggage but shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor and in no event for more than three minutes. 
D.  Within the total time limits specified in this section the provisions of this section shall be enforced so as to accommodate necessary and reasonable loading or unloading but without permitting abuse of the privileges granted by this chapter. 
(Prior code § 3420.122)  
10.32.040 - Loading zone use. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any yellow loading zone for any purpose other than loading or unloading passengers or material for such time as is permitted in Section 10.32.030. 
(Prior code § 3420.123)  
10.32.050 - Passenger loading zone use. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any passenger loading zone for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers for such time as is specified in Section 10.32.030. 
(Prior code § 3420.124)  
10.32.060 - Alley use. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any alley for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of persons or material. 
(Prior code § 3420.125)  
10.32.070 - Bus zones. 
A.  The city traffic engineer is authorized to establish bus zones opposite curb space for the loading and unloading of buses or common carriers of passengers and to determine the location thereof. 
B.  Coach zones shall normally be established on the far side of an intersection. 
(Prior code § 3420.126)  
Chapter 10.36 - RESTRICTED USE OF CERTAIN STREETS 
Sections: 
 
10.36.010 - Central traffic district. 
A.  No person shall operate any of the following vehicles in the central traffic district between the hours of nine a.m. and six p.m. of any day: 
1.  Any freight vehicle more than eight feet in width, with load, or any freight vehicle so loaded that any part of its load extends more than twenty feet to the front or rear of the vehicle; 
2.  Any vehicle carrying building material that has not been loaded, or is not to be unloaded, at some point within the central traffic district. 
B.  Provided, that the chief of police may by written permit authorize the operation of any such vehicle to or from points within the central traffic district. 
(Prior code § 3420.140)  
10.36.020 - Advertising vehicles. 
No person shall operate or drive any vehicle used for advertising purposes or any advertising vehicle equipped with a sound-amplifying or loudspeaking device upon any street or alley at any time within the city without first obtaining a permit to do so from the chief of police, who shall prescribe and impose such conditions and regulations as he deems necessary to protect public peace, health and safety. 
(Prior code § 3420.141)  
10.36.030 - Truck routes. 
A.  Whenever any resolution of the city designates and describes any street or portion thereof as a street the use of which is permitted by any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of three tons, the city traffic engineer is authorized to designate the street or streets by appropriate signs as "truck routes" for the movement of vehicles exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of three tons. 
B.  When any such truck route or routes are established and designated by appropriate signs, the operator of any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of three tons shall drive on the route or routes and none other except that nothing in this section shall prohibit the operator of any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight of three tons coming from a truck route having ingress and egress by direct route to and from restricted streets when necessary for the purpose of making pickups or deliveries of goods, wares and merchandise from or to any building or structure located on the restricted streets or for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of any building or structure upon the restricted streets for which a building permit has previously been obtained therefor. 
C.  The provisions of this section shall not apply to: 
1.  Passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission; or to 
2.  Any vehicle owned by a public utility while necessarily in use in the construction, installation or repair of any public utility. 
(Prior code § 3420.142)  
10.36.040 - Overweight and overheight permits. 
The city engineer is authorized to issue permits for the use of any public street or highway for the operation of a vehicle or combination of vehicles or mobile equipment of a size or weight exceeding the maximum specified in this code or the California Vehicle Code. Such permits shall be granted pursuant to the provisions of Section 35780 et seq. of the California Vehicle Code. The city manager shall establish the amount of the filing and processing fee for the permits in an amount sufficient to defray the actual and overhead cost to the city. 
(Ord. 2577 § 25, 1992: prior code § 3420.87)  
Chapter 10.40 - COMMERCIAL VEHICLES 
Sections: 
 
10.40.010 - Streets restricted from. 
A.  Whenever any ordinance of the city designates and describes any street or portion thereof as a street the use of which is prohibited by any commercial vehicle, the city traffic engineer shall erect and maintain appropriate signs on those streets affected by the ordinance. 
B.  Those streets and parts of streets established by ordinance of the council are declared to be streets, the use of which is prohibited by any commercial vehicle. 
C.  The provisions of this section shall not apply to passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission. 
(Prior code § 3420.143)  
10.40.020 - Parking. 
A.  No person shall park or leave standing any commercial vehicle having a manufacturer's gross weight rating of ten thousand pounds or more, or any truck tractor on any street. 
B.  No person shall park or leave standing unattached, on any street, any trailer, semitrailer, trailer coach, special construction equipment, or special mobile equipment on any street, except as permitted in subsection C of this section, unless the same is attached to a vehicle capable of moving the same in a normal manner. 
C.  The provisions of this section shall not apply to any vehicle owned by the city or a public utility or licensed contractor while necessary in use in the construction, installation or repair of any public utility, or to any commercial vehicle actually being used for the pickup or for the delivery of goods, wares and merchandise, or for the delivery of materials to be used in the repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of any building. 
D.  It shall be unlawful to park or store any commercial vehicle, of an unladen gross vehicle weight in excess of fourteen thousand pounds, tow trucks, trailers, or other related equipment on private property within residential zones within the city. A limit of one commercial vehicle fourteen thousand pounds or less is allowed per residential lot or residence, whichever is less, within residential zones. The provisions of this subparagraph do not apply to passenger vehicles, pickup trucks, passenger or cargo vans, recreational vehicles or utility trailers. 
E.  For the purpose of this section, the phrases "commercial vehicle," "trailer," "semitrailer," "trailer coach," "special construction equipment", "special mobile equipment", and "tow truck" (including dismantlers' or repossessor's tow vehicles) shall be defined as set forth in the Vehicle Code of the State of California. 
(Ord. 2577 § 26, 1992; Ord. 2338 § 1, 1984: prior code § 3420.144) 
( Ord. No. 3018, § 1 , 3-23-14)  
10.40.030 - Using sidewalks or driveways. 
No person shall operate or drive a commercial vehicle in, on or across any private driveway approach or sidewalk area or the driveway itself without the consent of the owner or occupant of the property, if a sign or markings are in place indicating that the use of the driveway is prohibited. 
(Prior code § 3420.82)  
Chapter 10.44 - VEHICLES TRANPORTING HAZARDOUS MATERIALS 
Sections: 
 
10.44.010 - Leaving unattended prohibited. 
A vehicle transporting a hazardous material or substance within the city as identified in Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations must be attended at all times by its driver or a qualified representative of the motor carrier that operates it, and shall not be parked on any highway, highway shoulder, street, alley, public way or public place, or within five feet of the traveled portion thereof, within a residential zone or within one thousand feet of any school or within three hundred feet of any bridge or tunnel, except for brief periods when mechanical or equipment failure or disablement or malfunction of the vehicle, or the necessities of operation require the vehicle to be parked and make it impractical to park the vehicle in any other place. 
(Prior code § 3300(A))  
10.44.020 - Exemptions. 
Repair, maintenance, refuse, utility, termite and pesticide vehicles, fuel delivery vehicles and vehicles delivering life support and health commodities, while servicing residential areas or schools, are exempt from the provisions of Section 10.44.010. Additionally, such exempt vehicles need not be attended while the drivers are performing duties that are evident and necessary as the operator of the vehicle or the provider of the service. 
(Prior code § 3300(B))  
10.44.030 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter: 
A.  A motor vehicle is attended when the person in charge of the vehicle is on the vehicle, awake, and not in a sleeper berth, or is within one hundred feet of the vehicle and has it within his unobstructed field of view. 
B.  A qualifed representative of a motor carrier is a person who: 
1.  Has been designated by the carrier to attend the vehicle; 
2.  Is aware of the nature of the hazardous material or substance contained in the vehicle he attends; 
3.  Has been instructed on the procedures he must follow in emergencies concerning hazardous materials or substances; 
4.  Is authorized to move the vehicle and has the means and ability to do so. 
(Prior code § 3300(C))  
10.44.040 - Other laws not superseded. 
The rules of this chapter do not relieve a driver from any obligation imposed by federal, state or local laws relating to the transportation of hazardous materials or explosive, motor carrier safety regulations or the placement of warning signs or devices when a motor vehicle is stopped on a public street or highway. 
(Prior code § 3300(D))  
Chapter 10.48 - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
Sections: 
 
10.48.010 - Barrier and sign placement. 
No person, public utility or department in the city shall erect or place any barrier or sign on any street unless of a type approved by the street maintenance superintendent or disobey the instructions, remove, tamper with or destroy any barrier or sign lawfully placed on any street by any person, public utility or by any department of the city. 
(Prior code § 3420.85)  
10.48.020 - Driving on new pavement or markings. 
No person shall ride or drive any animal or any vehicle over or across any newly made pavement or freshly painted markings in any street when a barrier sign, cone marker or other warning device is in place warning persons not to drive over or across the pavement or marking, or when any such device is in place indicating that the street or any portion thereof is closed. 
(Prior code § 3420.84)  
10.48.030 - Driving on sidewalk or curb. 
A.  No person shall ride, drive, propel, or cause to be propelled, any vehicle across or upon any curb or sidewalk excepting over permanently constructed driveways. When it is necessary for any temporary purpose to drive a vehicle across a curb or sidewalk, a written permit shall first be obtained from the city engineer before any person may ride, drive or propel any vehicle on, over or across any curb or sidewalk. 
B.  Any person desiring a permit to drive on, over or across any curb or sidewalk shall file a written application therefor with the city engineer, which application shall state the location and duration of time required, and such other information as the city engineer requires. 
C.  The minimum fee for each such permit at each such location shall be established by a resolution of the city council; provided, that the city manager, where circumstances warrant, shall set a fee in excess of such an amount if necessary to defray the filing and processing of the applications. 
D.  The permit issued pursuant to this section shall be deemed to be conditionally issued to the following effect: that the permittee shall be responsible to the city for any damage occasioned to any public improvement by reason of activities authorized pursuant to the permit. Payment of damage, where so occasioned, shall be made within ten days from the submission by the city to permittee of a notice of the damage. The obligation to pay for the damage shall be enforceable as a civil debt. 
(Ord. 2638 § 7, 1994; prior code § 3420.83)  
10.48.040 - Obstruction of crosswalk or intersection. 
No operator of any vehicle shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control signal indication to proceed. 
(Prior code § 3420.86)  
10.48.050 - Shrubbery obstructing intersection. 
Whenever the city engineer finds that any hedge, shrubbery or tree growing in a parkway obstructs the view of any intersection of any traffic upon the streets approaching the intersection he shall cause the hedge, shrubbery or tree to be immediately removed or reduced in height. 
(Amended during 1984 codification; prior code § 3420.220)  
10.48.060 - Trains blocking crossings. 
No person shall cause or permit any railway train or railway cars or similar vehicle on rails to stop or stand or to be operated in such a manner as to prevent the use of any street for the purpose of travel for a period of time longer than ten minutes, except that this provision shall not apply to railway trains, cars or similar vehicles on rails while blocking or obstructing a crossing because of an accident which requires the operator of the train, car or similar vehicle on rails to stop at or near the scene of the accident. 
(Prior code § 3420.151)  
10.48.070 - Prohibited use of public property. 
A.  No person shall use or permit the use of any street, public property, or public place for a permanent or temporary place of habitation. 
B.  No person shall place upon any street, public property or public place, permanently or temporarily, any building, structure or vehicle including, but not limited to, any motor vehicle, trailer, mobile home, coach or similar vehicle, which is required to be licensed pursuant to the provisions of the Vehicle Code of the state (hereafter "vehicle") and which is designed for use and/or which is used, for the habitation of one or more persons, whether permanently or temporarily; provided that, any such vehicle may be parked upon any street, public property or public place for the purpose of immediate loading and unloading. 
C.  Subdivision B of this section shall not apply to designated mobile home or recreational vehicle parks. 
D.  As used in this section: 
1.  "Building" and "structure" shall be defined as set forth in Chapter 18.06 of this code. 
2.  "Habitation" and "reside" shall be defined as set forth in Chapter 12.42 of this code. 
3.  "Public property" shall be defined as set forth in Chapter 12.42 of this code. 
4.  "Public place" shall be defined as set forth in Chapter 12.42 of this code. 
5.  "Street" shall be defined as set forth in Chapter 12.42 of this code. 
(Ord. 2348 § 1985) 
(Ord. No. 2946, § 2, 1-26-10)  
Chapter 10.52 - SKATEBOARDS, BICYCLES AND MOTORCYCLES 
Sections: 
 
10.52.010 - Purpose and intent. 
The council of the city of Whittier finds and declares that the purpose of this chapter is to promote the public peace, morals, health, safety and general welfare of persons in the city by regulating the activity of skateboarding on private property which is assessable to the general public. 
(Ord. 2751 § 1 (part), 1999)  
10.52.020 - Definitions. 
A.  "Uptown Whittier district" has the same meaning as that set forth in Chapter 5.06 of this code. 
B.  "Civic Center district" has the same meaning as set forth in general plan, land use plan, Exhibit 2-2, generally described as that area bounded by Penn Street on the North, Painter Avenue on the East, Washington Avenue on the West and Walnut Street on the South. 
C.  "Public park" means any park, reservation, playground, recreation center or any other area in the city-owned, maintained or used by the city for the purpose of public rest, play, enjoyment, active or passive recreation, or assembly, and shall include all buildings and structures located thereon or therewith. 
D.  "Educational institution" means any public, private or parochial, elementary, junior high, high school, university or other school giving general academic instruction in the several branches of learning. 
E.  "Nuisance" means any activity which: 
1.  Threatens injury or damage to persons or property; or 
2.  Creates an obstruction or presents a hazard to the free use of public or private property by pedestrians or motorists. 
F.  "Skateboard" means all wheeled objects, coasters, toys, conveyances, or similar devices used for transportation or sport which are propelled by human power and which are not classified as bicycles, roller skates, in-line skates or rollerblades. 
G.  "Bicycle" means any device upon which one or more persons may ride, propelled by human power, through a belt, chain or gears, and having two or three wheels in a tandem or tricycle arrangement. 
(Ord. 2751 § 1 (part), 1999)  
10.52.030 - Skateboarding prohibited. 
A.  The city council may by resolution prohibit skateboarding on public streets, sidewalks, parking lots and other public property when it is determined to be necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of pedestrians, motorists or persons operating said skateboards on said streets and sidewalks. 
B.  No person shall skateboard on public streets, sidewalks, parking lots and other public property located in the Uptown Whittier district, Civic Center district, any public park or educational institution. 
C.  No person shall skateboard on any privately owned property which is posted with "No Skateboarding" signs as required by this chapter, without the express consent of the property owner or property management. 
D.  No person shall use a skateboard in a manner which creates a nuisance. 
E.  A police officer or person authorized to issue citations shall have the authority to impound the skateboard of a person who violates this chapter. The citation shall serve as a receipt for the skateboard. 
F.  Upon presentation of the citation to a police department representative, the owner may claim the skateboard at the police department during business hours. Upon receipt of the impounded skateboard, the owner shall be provided a copy of Section 10.52.030 of the Municipal Code, and be advised that for any subsequent violations of this chapter, the city will impound the skateboard, and seek a court order declaring the skateboard a nuisance and authorizing the city to destroy said skateboard. If the owner of the skateboard is a minor, his/her parents or legal guardian may claim the skateboard as described above. No fee will be assessed to the owner or to the owner's parents or guardian for the enforcement of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2866 § 1—2, 2005; Ord. 2751 § 1 (part), 1999)  
10.52.040 - Bicycles prohibited on sidewalks. 
No person shall ride a bicycle on any portion of any public sidewalk or other public place where signs are erected and or notices placed giving notice of such prohibition. 
(Ord. 2751 § 1 (part), 1999)  
10.52.050 - Bicycle and motorcycle speed limit in privately owned parking areas. 
No person shall use, operate or ride any bicycle, motor-driven cycle or motorcycle in excess of ten miles per hour upon, over or through any privately owned parking area or parking structure designated for use by the general public for the parking of motor vehicles and any such act shall be deemed a nuisance. 
(Ord. 2751 § 1 (part), 1999)  
10.52.060 - Exhibition riding of motorcycles and bicycles. 
No personal shall ride, drive or operate any bicycle, motorcycle or motor-driven cycle in a race, trial, exhibition, competition or in any reckless or careless manner on, over or through any privately owned parking lot, parking structure or building designated, used and operated for use by the general public as a parking facility for the parking of motor vehicles. 
(Ord. 2751 § 1 (part), 1999)  
10.52.070 - Posting of notices. 
A.  The city manager or his designee is authorized to post or erect, or cause to be posted or erected, signs prohibiting skateboarding or the use of skateboards on public streets and sidewalks so designated by resolution of the city council. 
B.  A property owner shall post or erect, or cause to be posted or erected, at the property owner's sole cost and expense, signs which are readily visible to the general public in a form reasonably as follows: 
A no skateboarding policy exists for this private property. No person shall skateboard on this property without the express consent of the property owner or property management. For inquiries please contact the management office at _______ WMC § 10.52.020. 
(Ord. 2751 § 1 (part), 1999)  
10.52.080 - Penalty for violation. 
A.  Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to be an infraction, and punishable as such, notwithstanding the fact that at the discretion of the city or district attorney, the violation of any section of this chapter may be filed as a misdemeanor. The complaint charging such violation shall specify whether the violation is a misdemeanor or an infraction. Each day a violation of any provision of this chapter shall continue to be a new and separate violation. 
B.  A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a nuisance and may be abated by the city through civil process by means of restraining order, preliminary or permanent injunction or in any other manner provided by law for the abatement of such nuisances. 
(Ord. 2751 § 1 (part), 1999)  
Chapter 10.56 - ABANDONED VEHICLES 
Sections: 
 
10.56.010 - Purpose. 
The provisions of this chapter shall govern the abatement and removal of motor vehicles, or parts thereof, which are abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative. "Motor vehicle," as used in this chapter, shall be defined as set forth in the Vehicle Code of the state. 
(Ord. 2292 § 1 (part), 1983: prior code § 8525)  
10.56.020 - Nuisance declared. 
Any motor vehicle or parts thereof (hereinafter "vehicle") which is abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative, located on any real property, publicly or privately owned, excluding highways, in the city, is declared to be a public nuisance. 
A.  Abatement. Where the vehicle is found to constitute a public nuisance, by reason of its condition and location, as provided in this chapter, the nuisance shall be abated and the vehicle shall be removed and disposed of as provided in this chapter. 
B.  Declaration. Whenever the city manager finds that any vehicle is being maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter by reason of its condition and location, he shall give the notice required in this chapter. 
(Ord. 2292 § 1 (part), 1983: prior code § 8526)  
10.56.030 - Hearing procedure. 
A.  Notice. Prior to removal of any such vehicle, the city manager shall give a ten-day notice of his intention to abate the nuisance, by removal. The notice shall contain the information required pursuant to Section 22660 et seq. of the Vehicle Code, and shall describe the vehicle involved, and the property whereon it is located, including but not limited to, the identification number and license number thereof, if available. The notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in the Vehicle Code. 
B.  Request for Hearing. Within ten days after the mailing of the notice, the owner of the lot upon which the vehicle is located, or the owner of the vehicle, may file a written request, as provided in the Vehicle Code, with the city manager, requesting a hearing on the matter. If no such request is made, the city manager shall abate the nuisance as provided in the notice relating thereto. 
C.  Notice. Notice of the hearing, if requested within the time permitted, to determine whether a vehicle constitutes a public nuisance, shall be given to the owner of the land whereon the vehicle is located, whose name appears, as such, on the last equalized assessment roll, and to the vehicle owner as shown on the last registration of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. The notice shall be given by United States Postal Service, certified or registered, with a five-day return requested and postage thereon prepaid. "Owner," as used in this chapter, includes any person in possession of the affected premises, and any person having or claiming to have any legal or equitable interest in the premises, as disclosed by a title search from any accredited title company. The failure of any person to receive the notice shall not affect the validity of any proceedings under this chapter. 
D.  Hearing. If a request for a hearing is made, it shall be held by a hearing officer, designated as such by the city manager. At the time and place of hearing, the hearing officer shall hear and consider all relevant evidence, including, but not limited to, applicable staff reports, objections or protests relative to the existence of the alleged public nuisance and the manner proposed for abatement of it. The hearing may be continued from time to time, without further written notice. 
Upon conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall, based upon the evidence presented at the hearing, determine whether the vehicle, as maintained, constitutes a public nuisance, as defined in this chapter. If the hearing officer finds that a public nuisance exists, he shall, in writing, order it abated within a reasonable time to be set in the order. 
The owner of the land on which the vehicle is located may appear in person at the hearing, or present a written statement in time for consideration at the hearing, denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, together with his reasons for the denial. If the hearing officer determines that the vehicle was placed upon the land without the consent of the landowner, and the landowner has not subsequently acquiesced in its presence, the cost of abatement thereof shall not be levied against the property. 
The determination of the hearing officer shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. 2292 § 1 (part), 1983: prior code § 8527)  
10.56.040 - Order service. 
A copy of the order of abatement of the nuisance shall be served upon the owners of the property in accordance with the provisions of Section 10.56.030, together with a list of abatement methods. 
(Ord. 2292 § 1 (part), 1983: prior code § 8528)  
10.56.050 - Abatement required. 
After a final determination that a motor vehicle constitutes a public nuisance within the meaning of this chapter, the owner of the vehicle and/or the owner of the property whereon the vehicle is located, shall abate the public nuisance by removing it in the time set forth in the order of abatement relating thereto. If the person or persons fail to abate the public nuisance, the city manager shall abate it by city forces or private contract in the time and manner permitted by Section 22660 et seq. of the Vehicle Code of the state. 
(Ord. 2292 § 1 (part), 1983: prior code § 8529)  
10.56.060 - City abatement. 
Where the abatement of a public nuisance pursuant to this chapter is accomplished by city forces, the provisions of Sections 8.08.100 through 8.08.120 of this code shall be applicable to the proceedings. 
(Ord. 2292 § 1 (part), 1983: prior code § 8530)  
10.56.070 - Administration. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be administered by the city manager. 
(Ord. 2292 § 1 (part), 1983: prior code § 8531)  
10.56.080 - Disposal of vehicles. 
Vehicles declared to be a public nuisance pursuant to this chapter shall be disposed of in the manner provided by Sections 22661 and 22662 of the California Vehicle Code; provided that after a vehicle has been declared to be a public nuisance, and has been removed from the premises where located, it shall not be reconstructed or otherwise made operable, except as provided in said Sections 22661 and 22662. 
(Ord. 2869 § 36, 2006: Ord. 2577 § 27, 1992: amended during 1984 codification; Ord. 2292 § 1 (part), 1983: prior code § 8532)  
10.56.090 - Notice to state. 
Within five days after the date of removal of a vehicle, the city manager shall cause to be forwarded to the Department of Motor Vehicles of the state notice identifying the vehicle and any evidence of registration available, including but not limited to, registration certificates of title or license plates on any such vehicle. 
(Ord. 2292 § 1 (part), 1983: prior code § 8533)  
10.56.100 - Exceptions. 
This chapter shall not apply: 
A.  To a vehicle which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner, where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property; and/or 
B.  To a vehicle which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in conjunction with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer or a junkyard; provided, however, that this latter exception shall not authorize the maintenance of any real property contrary to the provisions of this code. 
(Ord. 2292 § 1 (part), 1983: prior code § 8534)  
Chapter 10.60 - PROHIBITION OF CRUISING 
Sections: 
 
10.60.010 - Cruising defined. 
Cruising shall be defined as the repetitive driving of a motor vehicle past a traffic control point within a six-hour period in traffic which is congested at or near the traffic control point as determined by the ranking police officer on duty within the affected area, and after the operator or passenger has been given a written notice that further driving past the control point will be a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2810 § 1 (part), 2002: Ord. 2809 § 1, 2002)  
10.60.020 - Traffic control point. 
The ranking police officer on duty, patrolling an area affected by traffic congestion, shall have the authority to establish a traffic control point at or near the area(s) of traffic congestion for the purpose of regulating vehicle cruising. 
(Ord. 2810 § 1 (part), 2002: Ord. 2809 § 1, 2002)  
10.60.030 - Required signs. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not be enforced until signs have been placed at the beginning and end of any street or portion of any street or other roadway where traffic laws are enforced that are determined to be subject to cruising controls. Such signs shall briefly and clearly state the appropriate provisions of this chapter and of Cal. Veh. Code § 21100(K). 
(Ord. 2810 § 1 (part), 2002: Ord. 2809 § 1, 2002)  
10.60.040 - Written notice required. 
Any person who, as the operator of, or passenger in, any motor vehicle driven in a particular direction past a traffic control point established pursuant to Section 10.60.020 shall be given written notice that further driving past the traffic control point within a six-hour interval will be a violation of Section 10.60.050. 
(Ord. 2810 § 1 (part), 2002: Ord. 2809 § 1, 2002)  
10.60.050 - Cruising prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, as a driver or passenger of a motor vehicle, to engage in cruising, as defined in Section 10.60.010, on any public or private street, alley or other roadway where the traffic laws of the city of Whittier are enforced, and which has been posted pursuant to Section 10.60.030. After written notice pursuant to Section 10.60.040 has been provided to a driver or passenger, each successive trip within a six-hour period past the traffic control point established pursuant Section 10.60.020 shall constitute a separate violation and no additional written notice shall be required for such separate violation. 
(Ord. 2810 § 1 (part), 2002: Ord. 2809 § 1, 2002)  
10.60.060 - Exemptions. 
This section shall not apply to: 
A.  Persons who reside within a designated No-Cruising area; 
B.  Authorized emergency vehicles as defined in Cal. Veh. Code § 165; 
C.  Vehicles licensed for public transportation; 
D.  Publicly owned vehicles of any city, county, district, state or federal agency. 
(Ord. 2810 § 1 (part), 2002: Ord. 2809 § 1, 2002)  
10.60.070 - Penalties for violation. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of the Whittier Municipal Code, it is a misdemeanor for any person to violate the provisions of Section 10.60.050 of this chapter, and upon conviction thereof such person shall be punished by imprisonment in the county jail for not less than five days nor more than six months, or by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars. In the sole discretion of the city, a violation of this chapter may instead be prosecuted as an infraction. 
(Ord. 2810 § 1 (part), 2002: Ord. 2809 § 1, 2002)  
Chapter 10.64 - PEDESTRIANS 
Sections: 
 
10.64.010 - Business district restrictions. 
No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than by a crosswalk in any business district in the city. 
(Ord. 2810 § 2 (part), 2002: Ord. 2809 § 2, 2002)  
10.64.020 - Intersections—Obedience to traffic signals. 
At intersections where traffic is directed by a traffic sign or signal, or by a traffic officer from the city, county or state, no pedestrian shall cross the roadway other than with released traffic. 
(Ord. 2810 § 2 (part), 2002: Ord. 2809 § 2, 2002)  
10.64.030 - Stopping and standing on streets and sidewalks. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter or stand or sit in or upon any public highway, alley, sidewalk or crosswalk so as to in any manner hinder or obstruct the free passage of, or to in any manner annoy, accost or molest any persons or vehicles passing thereon along the same. 
B.  This section shall not apply to any police officer, surveyor, street-sweeper or other public employee or agent, when necessarily acting in the line of duty. 
(Ord. 2869 § 37, 2006; Ord. 2810 § 2 (part), 2002: Ord. 2809 § 2, 2002)  
10.64.040 - Improper use of benches, public structures and landscaped areas. 
A.  No person, after having been notified by a peace officer or city employee that he or she is in violation of this section shall: 
1.  Walk or stand upon any public bench; 
2.  Walk, stand, sit or lie upon any monument, decoration, artwork, drinking fountain, bike rack, trash receptacle, median, fire hydrant, planter, berm, utility cabinet, railing, fence or upon any other public structure not designed or customarily used for such purposes; or 
3.  Walk, stand, sit or lie upon any public lawn, landscaped area or planted area posted with signs that forbid such conduct. 
B.  For purposes of this section, the following definitions apply: 
1.  "Benches" means any device made of wood, metal, concrete or a combination thereof, provided by the city and designed for the seating of pedestrians. 
2.  "Public structure" means any device provided by the city and affixed to the ground or a building including, but not limited to benches, tables, sculptures, artwork, lampposts, railway structures, hydrants, or tree box. 
3.  "Landscaped areas" means an area that contains outdoor plants, turf or other vegetation, including the design features adjacent to the landscaped area, which may or may not include an irrigation system. 
4.  "Peace officer" means any peace officer of the Whittier Police Department, as provided in the California Penal Code. 
5.  "City employee" means any employee of the city of Whittier acting within the course and scope of his or her employment. 
( Ord. No. 3007, § 1, 8-13-13 )  
Title 12 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES  
Chapter 12.08 - NEWSRACKS 
 
12.08.010 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and phrases shall be defined as set forth in this section, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended: 
A.  "Newsrack" means any self-service coin-operated box, container, storage unit or other dispenser, installed, used or maintained for the display or sale of any written or printed material, including but not limited to, newspapers, news periodicals, magazines, books, pictures, photographs and records. 
B.  "Parkway" means that portion of any public street other than the area included within the roadway. 
C.  "Permit" means a permit issued to a person allowing the placement of a newsrack within a specifically designated portion of a parkway. 
D.  "Public property" means any real property which is owned by the city in fee, or as to which the city has the right to possession by reason of a leasehold estate, or by an easement. 
E.  "Roadway" means that portion of a public street improved, designed and/or customarily used for vehicular travel. 
F.  "Street" means all that area dedicated to public use for public street purposes and includes but is not limited to, roadways, parkways and sidewalks. 
G.  "Public place" means any area that is used or held out for use of the public whether owned or operated by public or private interests, but not including indoor areas; and does not include areas excluded to minors. 
H.  "Blinder rack" is defined as an apparatus containing any publication or printed material for purposes of sale to the public, constructed or modified so that the bottom two-thirds is obscured from view. 
I.  "Matter" means any book, magazine, newspaper, video recording or other printed or written material or any picture, drawing, photograph, motion picture, or other pictorial representation or any statue or other figure, or any recording, transcription or mechanical, chemical or electrical reproduction or any other articles, equipment, machines or materials, as defined in the Penal Code Section 313(b). 
J.  "Exhibit" means to show, as defined by the Penal Code Section 313(f). 
(Ord. 2683 § 1(part), 1996; prior code § 4510)  
12.08.020 - Permit—Required. 
A.  No person shall install, place or maintain a newsrack in any parkway without first obtaining a permit therefor pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. Any person desiring to obtain such a permit shall file a written application therefor with the city manager, and contemporaneously shall pay a filing and processing fee, in an amount set by the city council. The city manager shall cause an investigation to be conducted to determine whether the permit, if granted, allowing installation and maintenance of a newsrack at the requested location, will conform to all provisions of this chapter. All applications for permits shall be acted upon within five working days of receival of an application. 
B.  The city manager may impose, as conditions of approval upon the issuance of a permit, such conditions as he deems reasonably necessary to insure compliance with this chapter. Each permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed to have imposed, as express conditions of approval, the following: 
1.  That the permittee shall forthwith execute a document, approved as to form by the city attorney, agreeing to hold the city, its officers, employees and agents free and harmless from any claim, demand or judgment in favor of any person arising out of the location of any newsrack located in any public parkway; and 
2.  That prior to the effective date of the permit issued, the permittee deposit with the city manager a certificate of insurance evidencing that a liability insurance policy in minimum amounts set by the city manager, has been issued, naming the city as co-assured, and containing a provision that the policy cannot be canceled except upon thirty days' prior written notice to the city of the fact of the cancellation; and 
3.  That if the insurance is canceled at any time during the term of the permit, it shall be grounds for revocation of the permit. 
C.  The city manager shall decline to issue any permit if he finds that the issuance would be contrary to the provisions of this chapter, in violation of any other applicable law, or would, by reason of its location, constitute an unreasonable interference with the free use of a parkway. A person who feels that his permit was issued in error may request a hearing with the city manager or his representative at a scheduled day and time, at which time the applicant may have the opportunity to appeal the decision of the city manager. The city manager, after hearing the appeal, may maintain his decision to not issue the permit or may rescind his previous decision and issue the permit. The determination of the city manager shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. 2684 § 1, 1996; prior code § 4512)  
12.08.030 - Permit—Location requirements. 
No permit shall be issued for the placement of a newsrack unless all of the following conditions are met: 
A.  That the location for the placement is within a portion of the public parkway; and 
B.  That the specific location will not endanger the safety of persons or property; and 
C.  That the placement will not unreasonably: 
1.  Interfere with or impede the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, nor 
2.  Interfere with or impede ingress or egress from any residence or place of business located adjacent to the parkway, nor 
3.  Interfere with any public utility facility located within the parkway or in close proximity thereto. 
(Prior code § 4513)  
12.08.040 - Installation and maintenance standards. 
Any newsrack which, in whole or in part, rests upon, in or over any public parkway, shall comply with each of the following standards: 
A.  No newsrack shall exceed five feet in height, thirty inches in width, or two feet in thickness. 
B.  Newsracks shall only be placed near a curb or adjacent to a wall of a building. Newsracks placed near a curb shall be placed no less than eighteen inches nor more than twenty-four inches from the edge of the curb. Newsracks placed parallel to a wall or building shall be placed not more than six inches from the wall or building. No newsrack shall be placed or maintained in a parkway opposite one or more newsracks. 
C.  Newsracks may be placed next to each other; provided, that no group of newsracks shall extend more than ten feet along a curb or wall and a space of no less than three feet shall separate each such group of newsracks from another group of newsracks. 
D.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, no newsrack shall be placed, installed, used or maintained: 
1.  Within five feet of any marked crosswalk; 
2.  Within fifteen feet of the curb return of any unmarked crosswalk; 
3.  Within five feet of any fire hydrant, fire call box, police call box or any other emergency facility; 
4.  Within five feet of any driveway; 
5.  Within five feet ahead of or twenty-five feet to the rear of any sign marking a designated bus stop; 
6.  Within six feet of any bus bench; 
7.  In any location whereby the cross space or the passageway of pedestrians is reduced to less than six feet; 
8.  Within three feet of any area improved with lawn, flowers, shrubs or trees, or within three feet of any display window or any building abutting the sidewalk or parkway or in such manner as to impede or interfere with the reasonable use of the window for display purposes; 
9.  Within one hundred feet of any other newsrack on the same side of the street within the same block containing the same edition of the same publication; 
10.  Within any area of a street, except a parkway; 
11.  At any location creating a vision obstruction as determined by the city traffic engineer. 
E.  No newsrack shall be used for advertising material other than that dealing with the display, sale or purchase of the publication sold therein. 
F.  Each newsrack shall be maintained in a clean, neat and attractive condition and in good repair at all times, and no issue or edition of any publication shall be allowed to remain in any such newsrack for a period in excess of seven days after the date of the initial issuance or publication. 
G.  Every newsrack permitted by the issuance of a permit under this chapter shall be securely anchored to the ground. Each such newsrack shall be constructed, installed and maintained as provided elsewhere in this section. 
H.  Newsracks which exhibit harmful matter on their covers which fall under the definitions of "harmful matter" as that term is defined in Section 313(a) of the Penal Code of the state of California, and which are located in a public place other than a public place from which minors are excluded, shall have devices which are commonly known as "blinder racks" in front of the material, so that the lower two-thirds of the matter is not exposed to view. 
(Ord. 2683 § 1(part), 1996; prior code § 4514)  
12.08.050 - Permit—Revocation. 
A.  Whenever the city manager is advised that a newsrack is being maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter, he shall notify the permitholder of the purported violation. The notice shall state therein the nature of the violation and give the permittee a reasonable period of time, not to exceed seven consecutive calendar days, to remedy the violation. If the violation is not cured within the period of time allotted, the city manager shall deliver to the permittee an order to show cause which shall state therein the time and place of an informal hearing to be conducted by the city manager to determine whether or not the permit should be revoked or, to allow the permittee to show cause why the revocation should not take place. If the evidence presented at the time of the hearing shows that the newsrack is being maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter, the city manager shall revoke the permit and shall promptly give written notice of the revocation to the permittee and shall give the permittee a period of not less than seventy-two hours, after the giving of the notice, to remove the newsrack which was the subject of the revoked permit. If the owner of the newsrack fails within the time permitted to remove the machine after the permit has been revoked, the city manager shall take the steps necessary to cause the newsrack to be removed and impounded. 
B.  The owner, or other person entitled to possession of an impounded newsrack who fails, within thirty days of the giving of notice by the city manager of the fact of the impounding, to make application to the city manager and to pay the costs and fees required pursuant to this section, shall be deemed, conclusively, to have abandoned the machine, and it shall be disposed of in the manner prescribed by the law for the disposal of abandoned personal property. 
C.  Any person who is aggrieved by a determination made by the city manager pursuant to the provisions of this section may file with the city clerk a written appeal, appealing the decision of the city manager to the city council. Such an appeal shall be deemed timely filed if it is filed with the city clerk not later than the tenth consecutive day from and after the day of giving notice of the decision which is the subject of the appeal. Upon receipt of such a timely filed appeal, the city clerk shall set the matter for hearing at the next most convenient meeting of the city council. The appealing party and any other interested person shall be given a reasonable opportunity to be heard in conjunction with the appeal. The city council shall determine whether the action taken by the city manager was within the scope of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 4515)  
12.08.060 - Notice service. 
Notices required pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be given by personal services, or by United States Postal Service, postage prepaid, addressed to the person to be notified at his last known address, and deposited in the course of transmission of the United States Postal Service. The giving of notice under this section shall be deemed to have occurred as of the date of personal service, or as of the date of deposit of the written notice in the course of transmission of the United States Postal Service. 
(Prior code § 4518)  
12.08.070 - Identification. 
A.  Immediately prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the city manager shall take such steps as may be reasonably necessary to ascertain the name and address of the owner of each newsrack located on any public property within the city, which do not have thereon the name, address and telephone number of the owner. He shall advise the persons, as he is able to identify, of the requirement of Section 17570 of the Business and Professions code and of this chapter, and of the result of the failure to comply with the Business and Professions Code or this chapter. 
B.  Where the city manager finds that a newsrack located on any public property does not have the name, address and telephone number of the owner thereof placed upon the newsrack, in compliance with Section 17570 et seq. of the Business and Professions Code of the state he shall make every reasonable effort to ascertain the owner thereof; if he is unable to determine ownership, he shall impound the newsrack and hold it for disposal as abandoned and unclaimed property. 
(Prior code § 4517)  
12.08.080 - Existing newsracks. 
Any person owning, or entitled to possession of any newsrack located within the city, as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, shall within ninety days thereafter, either remove the newsrack, or alternatively, obtain a permit pursuant to this chapter allowing the continued maintenance at the location of the newsrack. If any such newsrack remains in place, without a permit having been issued therefor, after the expiration of the ninety-day period, the city manager shall conduct a hearing in the time and manner provided for in Section 12.08.050; if at the hearing he finds that the newsrack has been placed and/or maintained without the issuance of a permit therefor, he shall give a notice to the owner or person entitled to possession, if ascertained, requiring removal of the newsrack within a reasonable time, in no case less than twenty-four hours. If the order is not complied with within the time set therefor, the city manager shall cause the newsrack to be removed and impounded. The owner or other person entitled to possession of the newsrack may obtain possession of it in the time and manner set forth in Section 12.08.050. 
(Prior code § 4519)  
12.08.090 - Impoundment—Disposal. 
The owner of any newsrack which is impounded by the city manager pursuant to this chapter, who fails to recover the machine in the time permitted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, shall be deemed to have abandoned it and the newsrack shall be disposed of in the time and manner prescribed by law for abandoned personal property. 
(Prior code § 4520)  
12.08.100 - Impoundment—Release. 
No newsrack which has been impounded shall be restored to the owner thereof or other person entitled to possession unless and until the owner or person entitled to possession has paid to the city a fee in an amount equal to the cost of removal, and the cost of storage of the newsrack, all as determined by the city manager. The determination of the city manager as to the fee shall be final and conclusive. 
(Prior code § 4516)  
12.08.110 - Public property use. 
No person shall place or locate a newsrack in or upon any public property except as provided in Section 12.08.020. 
(Prior code § 4511)  
Chapter 12.12 - PARADES AND PROCESSIONS 
 
12.12.010 - Permit—Required. 
A.  No person, firm, corporation or association shall hold, conduct, manage, participate in or carry on any parade, march or procession on any public street or alley in the city or beat any drum, gong, triangle or tambourine, or blow, use or play and wind or stringed musical instrument upon any public street or alley in the city unless such person, firm, corporation or association has first made a written application for and received from the parking and transportation commission of the city a permit, in writing, authorizing the person, firm, corporation or association so to do. 
B.  All applications for any such permit shall set forth the following information: 
1.  The route along which any such parade, march or procession proposed to travel; 
2.  The time of the proposed starting and termination of the same; 
3.  The names of the persons in control of the same or responsible therefor; 
4.  The purpose for which any such parade, march or procession is held; 
5.  The general character of the parade, the units marching or parading therein; 
6.  Such other information as the parking and transportation commission may require on a form of application to be furnished by the commission. 
(Amended during 1984 codification; prior code § 3450)  
12.12.020 - Permit—Conditions of issuance. 
The parking and transportation commission shall consider any such application and may grant or deny a permit. It may grant a permit upon such terms and conditions as the parking and transportation commission deems advisable for the protection of the public peace, health and safety of the citizens of the city. Full power and authority to hear and determine the applications and to grant or deny a permit is conferred upon the parking and transportation commission by the city council. The parking and transportation commission shall within thirty days after the passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter formulate rules and regulations for holding, conducting or carrying on any parade, march or procession. The rules and regulations shall be reduced to writing and a copy thereof shall be filed with the city council, the chief of police, the chief of the county fire department and the city clerk. 
(Amended during 1984 codification; prior code § 3450.1)  
12.12.030 - Permit—Copy filing. 
Immediately upon the granting or denying of a permit as provided in this chapter, the parking and transportation commission shall send a copy of its decision to the applicant and if a permit is granted, a copy of the permit shall be filed with the city clerk, the chief of police and the county fire chief. 
(Amended during 1984 codification; prior code § 3450.2)  
12.12.040 - Permit—Denial appeal. 
The denial of any such permit as is authorized in this chapter, in whole or in part, may be appealed to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal within twenty days after the denial of the permit and addressed to the city council. The appeal shall be heard at the next regular council meeting following the filing of the notice of appeal and no further notice of the hearing need be given. The city council may hear and determine evidence and argument made at the hearing on appeal and may grant or deny the permit or any part thereof as the city council deems to be for the advantage and best interest of the public peace, health and safety. 
(Ord. 2362 § 2, 1985: amended during 1984 codification; prior code § 3450.3)  
Chapter 12.16 - STREET DEDICATION AND IMPROVEMENT 
 
12.16.010 - Findings. 
Failure to have curbs, gutters and sidewalks on state highways, arterial streets and collector streets in the city gives poor drainage, puddles of water, difficult street cleaning, the accumulation of filth and causes hazards to vehicular traffic. Without such improvements pedestrians and particularly children are forced to walk in a public thoroughfare which is normally heavily traveled with motor vehicle traffic and is the cause of accidents and injury not only to vehicular traffic, but to pedestrians using the street. Failure to have such curbs, gutters, sidewalks and improved streets is found and declared by the city council to be against the best interests of and injurious to the public health, peace and safety of the inhabitants of the city. 
(Prior code § 7111)  
12.16.020 - Dedication and improvement required. 
A.  No building or structure shall be erected or enlarged, no existing building or portion thereof shall be converted from a residential use to a commercial or manufacturing use, and no building permit shall be issued therefor on any lot or parcel of land in any zone except for a one-family dwelling unit on a lot or parcel in an R-E or R-1 zone, as defined and set forth in Title 18 of this code, if the lot or parcel of land abuts a state highway, arterial street or collector street, as shown on the map of the select street system for Whittier, unless one-half of the highway or street which is located on the same side of the center of the highway or street as the lot has been dedicated and improved for the full width of the lot or parcel of land so as to meet the standard for the highway or street provided in Section 12.16.080, or the dedication and improvement has been assured and guaranteed to the satisfaction of the city engineer. As used in this section, "the center of the highway or street" means the centers of those highways and streets as shown on the street and highway maps now on file in the city engineer's office of the city. 
B.  The maximum area of land required to be so dedicated shall not exceed twenty-five percent of the area of any such lot or parcel of land which was of record on April 1, 1966, in the county recorder's office. In no event shall the dedications reduce the lot below sixty percent of the required width and required area of the zone in which the lot is located. 
C.  No such dedication shall be required with respect to those portions of such a lot occupied by a main building which was existing on April 1, 1966. 
D.  No additional improvements shall be required on or in front of such a lot where complete roadway, curb, gutter and sidewalk improvements exist within the present dedication contiguous thereto. 
(Prior code § 7112)  
12.16.030 - Exceptions. 
The provisions of the foregoing sections of this chapter shall not apply to the following construction: 
A.  One single-family dwelling with customary accessory buildings when erected on a vacant lot; 
B.  Additions and accessory buildings incidental to a residential building legally existing on the lot provided no additional dwelling units or guest rooms are created; 
C.  Additions and accessory buildings incidental to other than a residential building existing on the lot on April 1, 1966; provided, that the total cumulative floor area of all such additions and accessory buildings shall not exceed two hundred square feet. 
(Prior code § 7113)  
12.16.040 - Required for building permit issuance. 
A.  When all dedication and improvements required by this chapter have been completed, or satisfactorily assured, as certified by the city engineer, a building permit may be issued. Otherwise, no such permit shall be issued for the construction of any building or structure on the lot. 
B.  No fee shall be charged for the rendering of any service by the city in connection with any dedication or improvement required by the provisions of this chapter and the improvement is not a part of a subdivision proceeding. 
(Prior code § 7117)  
12.16.050 - Notice of applicability. 
Whenever the city engineer determines that the provisions of this chapter are applicable to any building permit application, he shall notify the building permit applicant of his determination of the specific requirements of this chapter which he determines to be applicable thereto and of the procedure for appeal of his determination to the city council. 
(Prior code § 7123)  
12.16.060 - Dedication procedure. 
Any person required to dedicate real property by the provisions of this chapter shall make an offer to dedicate property executed by all parties owning any interest therein, including beneficiaries and trustees of any deed of trust, as shown by a current preliminary title report prepared by a title company approved by the city engineer for that purpose. The report shall be furnished by the applicant. The offer shall be on a form approved by the city attorney and the city engineer and shall be in such terms as to be binding upon the owner, his heirs, assigns or successors in interest and shall continue until the city council accepts or rejects the offer. The offer shall provide that the dedication will be completed upon acceptance by the city council. Before acceptance of the dedication, the offering party shall either complete the improvement required in this chapter or make satisfactory arrangements for the improvement and the completion thereof with the city engineer. 
(Prior code § 7115)  
12.16.070 - Improvement procedure. 
A.  Any person required to make improvements by the provisions of this chapter shall either make and complete them to the satisfaction of the city engineer or shall file with the city engineer a surety bond in such amount as the city engineer estimates and determines to be necessary to complete all of the improvements required. 
B.  The bond shall be executed by a company authorized to act as surety in California. It shall be payable to the city and shall be conditioned upon the faithful performance of any and all work required to be done and should the work not be done or completed within the time specified, then the city may do the improvement or cause it to be done or completed and the parties executing the bond shall be firmly bound under a continuing obligation for the payment of all necessary costs and expenses incurred in the construction of the improvements. The bond shall be executed by the owner of the lot as principal and by the corporation authorized to act as surety. 
C.  The owner may, in lieu of a surety bond, deposit a cash bond in an amount to be fixed by the city engineer, and the owner shall agree that in the event of any default on his part the city may use any or all of the deposit money to cause all of the required work to be done or completed and to pay for all such costs and expenses. If there is not sufficient money on deposit, then the owner shall pay any deficiency upon demand. Any money remaining on deposit after the completion of the work shall be refunded to the owner. 
D.  Whenever a surety bond has been filed in compliance with the provisions of this section, the city is authorized in the event of any default on the part of the principal to enforce collection under the bond for any and all damages sustained by the city by reason of the failure of the principal to faithfully and properly complete the required improvements. 
E.  The term of the bond shall begin on the date of the deposit of the cash or the filing of the surety bond and shall end upon the date of the completion of the work of improvement to the satisfaction of the city engineer. The fact of the completion shall be noticed by a statement thereof signed by the city engineer and the bond may be cancelled thereafter or the cash deposit returned. 
(Prior code § 7116)  
12.16.080 - Improvement standards. 
All streets required to be improved pursuant to this chapter shall be constructed and improved in accordance with the provisions of this code and the following standards: 
A.  Width of Various Streets and Highways. 
1.  State highways shall be dedicated to a minimum width of one hundred feet and improved with eighty feet of roadway and twenty feet of sidewalk, including parkway. Each one-half of the highway shall consist of forty feet of graded roadway, curbs and gutters, and ten feet of sidewalk and parkway, with at least five feet thereof paved. 
2.  Arterial streets shall be dedicated to a minimum width of eighty feet with sixty-four feet of roadway and sixteen feet of sidewalk, including parkway. Each one-half of the highway shall consist of thirty-two feet of graded roadway, curbs and gutters, and eight feet of sidewalk and parkway with at least five feet thereof paved. 
3.  Collector streets shall be dedicated to a minimum width of sixty feet with forty feet of roadway and twenty feet of sidewalk, including parkway. Each one-half of the highway shall consist of twenty feet of graded roadway, curbs and gutters, and ten feet of sidewalk and parkway, with at least five feet thereof paved. 
No property owner required to make a dedication under this chapter shall be required to pay any paving costs of the roadway required in this section. 
B.  Street Construction. All construction and improvement of streets required to be made by this chapter shall be done in accordance with the latest standard specifications of the county road department entitled "Standard Specifications," three copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk, or any specifications hereafter adopted by the city council and filed with the city clerk. 
C.  Variations. The city engineer may approve and allow such variations and deviations from the requirements of improvement and construction as he may determine to be necessary where the variation is caused by a condition of the terrain and the existing improvement contiguous to the real property involved. 
(Prior code § 7119)  
12.16.090 - Cost sharing. 
Upon a written application to the city council by any affected property owner and for good cause, the city council may provide for a contribution by the city toward the cost of making improvements required by the provisions of this chapter where the cost of the improvements greatly exceeds the cost to other property owners who are required to make improvements under the provisions of this chapter in the immediate vicinity of the improvement. 
(Prior code § 7121)  
12.16.100 - Appeal. 
A.  Any person required to dedicate land or make improvements under the provisions of this chapter may appeal any determination made by the city engineer in the enforcement of administration of this chapter to the city council. Such an appeal shall be made in writing and shall state in clear and concise language the grounds therefor. The appeal must be made within twenty days after the ruling or decision by the city engineer. The city council may affirm, modify or reject all or any part of the determination of the city engineer. 
B.  Within twenty days after the filing of such an appeal, the city council shall hear and determine the appeal after giving at least ten days' notice to the applicant that at the hearing the city council may consider all of the records and files in connection with the matter and any testimony, oral or written, submitted by the city engineer's office or by the appellant. The city council may grant or deny the appeal or it may modify or amend the decision and ruling of the city engineer. It may grant waivers of all or any part of any decision or determination by the city engineer which they deem necessary in order to prevent any unreasonable hardship under the facts of the case. 
(Prior code § 7120)  
12.16.110 - Building location. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter no building or structure shall be erected on any lot or parcel of land after April 1, 1966 within the dedication required by the terms of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 7114)  
12.16.120 - New lot lines. 
Where the ultimate street lines have been determined under the provisions of this chapter, all required yards, setbacks, parking area, loading space and building locations for new buildings or structures or additions thereto shall be measured and calculated from the new lot lines being created by the widening. 
(Prior code § 7118)  
12.16.130 - Determination of street alignment. 
Whenever any uncertainty exists as to the proper application of the provisions of this chapter in the matter of street alignment, the city engineer shall determine their application in conformity with the spirit and intent of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 7122)  
Chapter 12.20 - ENCROACHMENTS AND EXCAVATIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3060 , § 1, adopted Dec. 13, 2016, amended the title of Ch. 12.20 to read as herein set out. Formerly, Ch. 12.20 was titled, "Construction and Repair of Streets and Sidewalks." 
 
12.20.010 - Permit—Required. 
A.  No person shall make any excavation or encroach in, lay, construct, reconstruct, remove or repair, place soil or materials, in any improved or unimproved street, alley or other public place in the city, or in, over or through any property or rights-of-way owned by the city, any curb, sidewalk, gutter, driveway, graded and oiled roadway, macadamized roadway, pavement, sanitary sewer, storm drain or culvert without first obtaining a permit in writing so to do from the city engineer and without first obtaining the lines and grades therefore from the city engineer. Within a village design district, as established by ordinance of the city, raised landscape planters may be placed or constructed and maintained within a public right-of-way in accordance with the standards established for planters within such districts after first obtaining a permit from the city engineer. 
B.  The city engineer may vary the terms of this chapter in the event the provisions of this chapter cause any undue hardship upon a property owner. In granting any such variance, the city engineer shall take into consideration the physical condition of the real property, the traffic congestion upon any street to which the curb is being cut, the nature of the surrounding property, trees, buildings and occupational density of surrounding property and shall only grant the variance where it is necessary and in accordance with the intent of this chapter. The decision of the city engineer upon the granting or denying of any variance may be appealed by an interested party to the city council by written notice of appeal filed with the city clerk within ten days after the decision and setting forth the nature and grounds of the appeal, the request for any reversal or modification, and the payment to the city clerk of a fee established by a resolution of the city council for the privilege of filing the appeal, which fee shall be paid at the time the notice of appeal is filed with the city clerk. The city council may affirm, modify or reverse the decision of the city engineer and upon such terms and conditions as it deems advisable. 
C.  The city engineer may designate the time of day or night when work is to be done if in his judgment it is necessary to prevent undue interference with traffic or danger to the safety of persons using the same. 
D.  The holder of any permit and any agent, servant or employee working for the permit holder on any excavation and fill shall inform himself and obtain all necessary information as to the existence and location of all underground pipes, lines, manholes, wires, substructures and appurtenances of any utility and the city shall be protected by the permittee against any damage by reason of any excavation or fill. Any damage caused to the underground installations appurtenances or substructures shall be paid for by the permittee. Such repairs as are required shall be made or be caused to be made by the city and billed to the permittee, who shall pay them upon receipt of a statement of the cost of the repair, replacement or reconstruction of the damaged substructures or appurtenances. 
E.  Encroachments on City Streets. 
1.  Whenever street reconstruction or rehabilitation has occurred within the five years after completion or from the recordation of a notice of completion, immediately preceding a permit request, the permittee shall resurface the street within the limits of the longitudinal excavation to the satisfaction of the city engineer. 
2.  Whenever a street is slurry sealed within the past two years immediately preceding a permit request, the permittee shall resurface the entire street within the limits of the longitudinal excavation to the satisfaction of the city engineer. 
3.  The above-noted provisions may be waived by the city council in cases in which the city engineer has determined that there are exceptional circumstances warranting such a waiver. 
F.  It shall be a public nuisance and a violation of the code for any person, as principal, agent, employee, or otherwise, to violate or fail, neglect, or refuse to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter. 
G.  Permit Required for Encroachment. 
1.  No person shall construct, maintain or place any encroachment without complying with the terms of this chapter. No building permit, zoning permit, use permit, variance or public right-of-way permit for any construction in the public right-of-way will be issued until the encroachment permit has been obtained. 
2.  Except as provided in Section 12.20.30, no major encroachment shall be allowed except in compliance with the terms of a permit to be granted to the property owner of abutting real property or his authorized agent by resolution of the city council. This resolution shall be granted in the sole discretion of the city council. 
3.  Except as provided in Section 12.20.30, no minor encroachment shall be allowed except in compliance with the terms of a permit to be granted to the property owner of abutting real property or his authorized agent by the city engineer. 
4.  The city engineer shall have authority to decide the classification of an encroachment and his decision shall be final. 
5.  The city engineer may require that a separate permit be obtained for each separate project for the installation of an encroachment. 
H.  A fee for encroachment permits may be established by resolution of the city council and shall be paid to the city at the time of application for issuance or renewal of any encroachment permit, including but not limited to permit riders. Public utility companies operating under franchise agreement with the city may pay monthly or periodic permit fees, or provide a deposit in advance for the estimated volume of permit applications subject to an agreement approved by the city engineer. 
I.  If in the course of events the owner of a previously approved encroachment finds that emergency repairs are necessary to protect the facility, or to protect the investment of the owner and/or to provide continuing service to the public, and the owner of the facility finds that the city office that would issue the encroachment permit is not open, the owner may, notify the police department the nature of any encroachment into the public roadway that may affect vehicle traffic or pedestrians, after notifying the Regional Notification Center (Underground Service Alert), conduct such work as is necessary to cause the needed repairs, provided that the owner of the facility requests a permit for the work conducted on the next day that the city office that issues encroachment permits is open. Notwithstanding any other provisions in this chapter, no emergency work may be done if the police department determines that the proposed work would represent an unreasonable threat to the public health, welfare or safety or the city engineer determines that the work does not constitute an emergency. 
(Ord. 2638 § 8, 1994; prior code § 7210) 
(Ord. No. 3060 , § 2, 12-13-16)  
12.20.020 - Definitions. 
A.  "Encroach" means constructing or placing structures of improvements over, upon, under, or using any public right-of-way in any manner other than its intended use. 
B.  "Encroachment" shall include any of the following acts: 
1.  Erecting or maintaining any flag, banner, decoration, post, sign, pole, bollard, fence, guard-rail, wall, loading platform, mailbox, pipe, conduit, wire, wireless/telecommunication facilities such as cellular phone towers, or other structure on, over, or under a public right-of-way; 
2.  Constructing, placing, or maintaining, on, over, under, or within the public right-of-way any subsurface drainage structure or facility, groundwater monitoring well, gas/soil/groundwater vapor probes, piezometers, any pipe, conduit, wire or cable; 
3.  Constructing, placing, or installing sidewalks, curbs, gutters, driveways, or hardscape improvements; 
4.  Constructing an arbor which is a shelter of vines or branches of latticework covered with climbing shrubs, vines, or other forms of landscape; 
5.  Placing or maintaining any forms of outdoor dining facilities. 
6.  Placing or storing materials such as pavers, aggregate, pipe, and construction materials. 
C.  "Major encroachment" means any permanent improvement attached to a structure or constructed in place so that it projects into the public right-of-way such as basement vaults, bridges, earth retaining structures over three feet above grade, structure connected planter boxes, ramps, or fences over six feet above grade, or façade improvements. Projections over any part of the public right-of-way that are not permitted by or which are in excess of the limitations specified in the city of Whittier building code shall also be classified as major encroachments, including theatre marquees, signs suspended above the sidewalk, oriel windows, balconies, cornices and other architectural projections. 
D.  "Minor encroachment" means encroachment into the public right-of-way resting on or projecting into the sidewalk area such as subsurface tiebacks, soil nails, concrete stairs, disabled access ramps where more than six feet of sidewalk area is preserved, subsurface foundations extending less than two feet from the property line, level landings for garages, landscape features less than two feet in height, conduit for privately owned phone and data lines connecting buildings owned by the permittee, landscape amenities, clocks, bus shelters, telecommunication facilities and equipment, bike racks, fences less than six feet above grade, earth retaining structures less than three feet above grade, benches and curbs around planter areas, outdoor dining, monument signs, driveways, and drainage culverts. Any encroachment which is not a minor encroachment is a major encroachment. 
E.  "City engineer" includes the city engineer and his/her authorized delegate. 
F.  "Permittee" means any person, persons, firm, company, corporation, association, public agency, public utility, or organization and the permittee's successors-in-interest which has been issued a permit for said encroachment by the city engineer. All obligations, responsibilities, and other requirements of the permittee as herein described, shall be binding on successors-in-interest of the original permittee and subsequent owners of the property benefitted by the encroachment unless otherwise specified in the permit. 
(Ord. No. 3060 , § 3, 12-13-16) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3060 , § 3, adopted Dec. 13, 2016, amended § 12.20.020 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 12.20.020 pertained to permit application and derived from prior code, § 7210.2.  
12.20.030 - Permit procedures. 
A.  The permit procedure for a major encroachment is as follows: 
1.  A separate application must be filed by the property owner or his authorized agent for each permit for a major encroachment. Application for a permit to install a major encroachment shall be filed in the office of the city engineer. After filing of the application, the city engineer shall cause an investigation to be made of the site where the proposed encroachment would be installed. The application must be accompanied by a sketch or plan showing the dimensions and exact location of the proposed encroachment and its relationship to the remainder of the structure and the street lines. A plan shall be required in all cases in addition to a brief written description of the encroachment. Certain major encroachments will require a legal description and plan to accompany the legal description. 
2.  When such application for a major encroachment permit and the details shown upon the accompanying sketch or plan comply with the terms of this chapter and any further requirements set by the city engineer, the applicant shall post a notice of intent to encroach adjacent to the encroachment site. Any and all responses to this notice will be forwarded to the city engineer for evaluation in recommendation of permit approval, conditional approval, or denial. All responses, recommendations and findings will be forwarded to the city council. 
3.  The city council, by license agreement, if it determines to authorize a major encroachment permit, may prescribe special conditions for granting a conditional revocable permit in compliance with the terms of this chapter and such other conditions as it deems necessary for the preservation or maintenance of the public health, safety and welfare to the extent that it will not substantially impair franchise rights previously granted to a public utility. Such license agreement constitutes a conditional revocable permit for encroachment which shall take effect when all other conditions set forth therein and of this chapter shall have been complied with and such permit shall remain in effect as long as the permittee complies with all conditions established for the granting of such permit. 
B.  The permit procedure for a minor encroachment is as follows: 
1.  A separate permit application must be filed for each minor encroachment in the office of the city engineer. Such application shall be accompanied by a sketch or plan showing the dimensions and exact location of the proposed encroachment and its relationship to any structure, and the sidewalk area. A plan shall be required in all cases in addition to a brief written description of the encroachment. After filing of the application, the City Engineer shall cause an inspection to be made of the site where the proposed encroachment would be installed. 
2.  When such application for a minor encroachment permit and the details shown upon the accompanying sketch or plan comply with the terms of this chapter and any further requirements set by the city engineer for public health, safety and appearance reasons, the applicant shall post a notice of intent to encroach adjacent to the encroachment site. The city engineer shall consider any and all responses to the notice in making his decision to deny, conditionally approve, or approve the encroachment. Such approval constitutes the granting of a conditional revocable permit for a minor encroachment and such permit shall remain in effect as long as the permittee complies with all conditions established for the granting of such permit. 
3.  Any person aggrieved by the refusal of a minor encroachment permit required by this chapter may appeal to the city council. All appeals must be filed with the city clerk within thirty days of the mailing of the decision of the city engineer for scheduling on the city council's calendar. 
4.  Upon completion of the excavations and/or encroachment permit work as provided in this chapter, the permit holder shall give written or email notice thereof to the city engineer. 
C.  Security deposit—Required amount. 
1.  A deposit may be required prior to the issuance of a permit. The deposit shall be a cashier's check, certificate of deposit, surety bond or applicable forms of a security issued by a company authorized to do business in the state of California acceptable to the city engineer. The city engineer shall set the amount of the deposit based on potential damage or cost of improvements not completed to and within the public property or rights-of-way. All deposits shall remain in force for a period of up to one year from the date of completion of work authorized by the permit. Utility companies doing work under any and all franchise agreements are exempt from making a security deposit. 
2.  Upon satisfactory completion of all the terms and conditions of a permit, the city engineer shall issue a certificate to this effect to the city controller. Upon receipt of such certificate and after the expiration of the time period established by the permit, the city controller shall be authorized and directed to return the cash deposit or bond or other security posted by the permittee to the permittee in accordance with the provisions in this chapter. Unless required by prior agreement or law, the amount returned will not include interest. 
(Ord. No. 3060 , § 4, 12-13-16) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3060 , § 4, adopted Dec. 13, 2016, amended § 12.20.030 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 12.20.030 pertained to inspection before commencement of work and derived from prior code, § 7210.5.  
12.20.040 - Charge for work commenced before permit issued. 
If any portion of the work is commenced before the issuance of a permit, an additional permit charge in the amount in accordance with the latest fee resolution adopted by the city council shall be charged and collected before a permit is issued, except as provided in Section 12.20.010(I) for emergency repairs. 
(Ord. 2545 § 1, 1991: prior code § 7210.6) 
(Ord. No. 3060 , § 5, 12-13-16)  
12.20.050 - Permit—Nontransferable. 
No permit issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be transferable, and every permit shall become and be void unless the work thereby permitted to be done is completed by the date specified therein. 
(Prior code § 7210.8)  
12.20.060 - Permit—Available at work place. 
Any person engaged in the performance of any work mentioned in Section 12.20.010 shall at all times while the work is in progress, keep at the place where the work is located the original permits for the work and must, on demand, exhibit them to the city manager, the director of public works, the city engineer or to any of his inspectors, or to any police officer. 
(Prior code § 7210.9)  
12.20.070 - Performing more work than specified. 
No person to whom a permit has been granted under the provisions of this chapter shall perform any of the work mentioned in Sections 12.20.010 and 12.20.100 in a greater amount or quantity than that specified in the permit issued therefor. 
(Prior code § 7210.10)  
12.20.080 - Prohibitions and exemptions. 
A.  The following encroachments are specifically prohibited, and no applications shall be accepted nor permits issued therefore: 
1.  Construction or maintenance of a loading dock on or in a public right-of-way; 
2.  Installation or maintenance of underground tanks, clarifiers, grease interceptors, vaults or elevators, except that underground vaults may be permitted as part of facilities owner by public utilities and public agencies; 
3.  Construction or placement of any fill, wall, pipe, column, pole, fence, tree, shrub or other thing which would obstruct and reduce the capacity of any flood control channel to carry storm water or reduce the effectiveness of stormwater quality facilities; 
4.  Erection, installation, or maintenance of posts, poles, bollards, or columns for the purpose of carrying lights intended primarily for lighting of abutting private property; 
5.  Erection or maintenance of a permanent post, pole, column, or structure for the support of advertising signs; 
6.  Installation or maintenance of signs bearing flashing or moving lights, except for temporary warning signs, barricades, or flashers required for protection of the public during construction operations; 
7.  Construction, erection, installation, or extension of a structure intended to be used for a profit-making enterprise. 
8.  Construction, erection, installation of arbors. 
B.  The following encroachments may be placed or maintained without a permit: 
1.  Mailboxes that are placed in accordance with the rules and regulations by the United States Postal Service, provided that no box is placed so as to endanger the life or safety of the traveling public. 
2.  Lawns of any grass and type not prohibited by other laws, provided that: 
a.  The lawn shall not extend into the traveled way of the public street, drainage ditches, gutters, other drainage facilities, or sidewalk. 
b.  The general public may not be denied the use of the planted area for pedestrian or other lawful travel. The city may use the planted area for any purpose whatsoever, and may issue a permit to any applicant to go thereon to perform work. If the lawn is damaged or disturbed in the course of such work, it will be removed and replaced by the permittee doing the work unless the permit specifically states otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 3060 , § 6, 12-13-16) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3060 , § 6, adopted Dec. 13, 2016, amended § 12.20.080 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 12.20.080 pertained to permit—more than one location and derived from prior code, § 7210.7.  
12.20.090 - Estimate of total expenses. 
When, in the opinion of the city engineer, the proposed work requires the making of special plans or inspections therefor, the city engineer shall make an estimate of the total expense which will be incurred by the city in connection therewith, which shall include the cost of engineering work and estimates, the preparation of plans, inspection and all other necessary work and expense, and shall make an estimate of the costs to be incurred by the city for the proposed work. The applicant shall then deposit with the city treasurer the estimated amount of the total expense in cash. 
(Prior code § 7210.3)  
12.20.100 - Construction regulations. 
A.  All construction work between the curbline of any public street and the property line shall be done in accordance with standard plans and specifications approved and adopted by resolution of the city council. 
B.  Any unused driveway depression in or along any curb in the city shall be removed and curb, gutter and sidewalk constructed to conform with the existing curb, gutter and sidewalk and a permit therefor shall be required as provided in this chapter. Whenever an application is made for a permit to construct a driveway approach from the street to private property, the city engineer shall determine whether or not any existing driveway depression shall be filled in and, if so, he shall order it done and provide therefor any new permit issued. 
C.  Whenever a commercial driveway is constructed and the existing sidewalk does not conform to the plans and specifications, then such portion of the sidewalk shall be removed and reconstructed in accordance with such requirements. 
D.  No portion of any driveway shall be permitted between the points of curvature on a curb return. 
E.  Installation of driveways shall be prohibited at locations where, in the opinion of the city traffic engineer, unusual hazards would be created by the installation of such driveways. 
F.  All driveways shall be considered "commercial" driveways if serving any business or commercial property or four or more residential units. 
G.  No part of any driveway shall be constructed beyond the line of the permittee's property unless written permission is given by the adjacent property owner, and a copy of the permit shall be attached to the application for the permit for the driveway. 
H.  No driveways shall be located where only partial ingress of vehicles onto private property, for the purpose of loading and unloading, is possible. 
I.  No driveways shall be located where no ingress of vehicles onto private property is possible. 
J.  No driveways shall be located where parking cannot be legally provided on private property. 
K.  Coloring or staining of the sidewalk, or driveway, is permitted only when authorized by the permit as approved by the city engineer. All ground surface materials shall take into account Americans with Disabilities Act standards and requirements. When a colored or stained sidewalk, or driveway, is authorized, only subdued muted earth tone colors may be used. The same color shall extend along the full frontage of the lot, including driveways, if any. Partial coloring or checkerboard patterns of two or more colors will not be permitted. 
L.  Coloring of full height curb shall not be permitted. 
M.  Portland cement concrete is the only material that may be used in the parkway area unless alternative or enhanced paving is preferred by the property owner. Bituminous materials, brick, pavers, flagstone, terrazzo, tile, etc., are prohibited unless an indemnity agreement has been approved by the city engineer and signed by the property owner. The agreement shall be attached to the encroachment permit. Enhanced paving or stamped concrete sidewalks shall not be permitted unless approved by the city engineer. 
N.  The minimum thickness of sidewalks shall be four inches. The minimum thickness for residential driveways shall be four inches. The minimum thickness for commercial driveways shall be ten inches with six inches of concrete underlain by four inches of aggregate base materials. 
O.  In case of undue hardship upon the property owner and providing the property owner delivers an agreement of indemnity as required by the city engineer, the city engineer may grant a variance in grade notwithstanding Americans with Disabilities Act standards and requirements; the variance may also include the right to install a different type and kind of sidewalk where an indemnity agreement has been approved by the city engineer and signed by the property owner. 
(Prior code § 7210.1) 
(Ord. No. 3060 , § 7, 12-13-16)  
12.20.110 - Specification compliance. 
All work mentioned in Sections 12.20.010 and 12.20.100, for which a permit has been issued as provided in this chapter, shall be performed in accordance with the specifications adopted by the city (or the special plans and specifications approved therefor by the city engineer) and referred to in the permit, and shall be performed to the satisfaction of and under the supervision of the city engineer or his authorized agent. 
(Prior code § 7210.4)  
12.20.120 - Public utility relocation. 
These regulations are subject to the existence of public utilities or other improvements, or the reserving of proper locations for their future installation as may be required by the city. If the relocating of such utilities or other improvements from their existing locations is necessary to permit a driveway approach construction, the applicant or owner of the improvement must pay for the necessary relocation. 
(Prior code § 7210.11)  
12.20.130 - Service station driveway approach. 
Permits for the construction of driveway approaches to service stations shall not be issued unless a clear distance of at least ten feet is provided between the gasoline pump block and the property line adjacent to the street, so that vehicles may be parked on private property while being serviced or served. 
(Prior code § 7210.12)  
12.20.140 - Materials and debris removal. 
No person performing any work under the provisions of this chapter shall fail, refuse or neglect to remove all materials and debris within three days after the completion of the work; provided, however, that where new work is covered with earth, the terms of the specifications of the city governing the work shall control. 
(Prior code § 7210.13)  
12.20.150 - Protection of city property. 
All paving or other improvements constructed by a property owner, within rights-of-way or property owned by the city, shall be maintained in a safe and usable condition by or at the expense of the property owner. 
(Prior code § 7210.14)  
12.20.160 - Warning devices—Traffic control. 
In any permit granted under the provisions of this chapter, the city engineer may specify traffic control devices such as lights, barriers, barricades, warning signs or other measures designated to protect the traveling public which shall be erected, maintained or provided by the permit holder as long as these requirements are not in conflict with the California Vehicle Code and/or Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices; provided, however, that any omission on the part of the city engineer to specify in a permit what traffic control devices shall be erected and maintained by the permit holder shall not excuse the permit holder from taking all reasonable and proper steps to place traffic control devices reasonably required to warn the public of any excavations or work of improvement then in progress. 
(Ord. No. 3060 , § 8, 12-13-16) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3060 , § 8, adopted Dec. 13, 2016, amended § 12.20.160 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 12.20.160 pertained to warning devices and derived from prior code, § 7210.15.  
12.20.170 - City work excepted. 
A.  This chapter shall not be construed to apply to the performance of any of the classes of work mentioned in this chapter under contracts made by the city in accordance with the provisions of the general laws of the state providing for the improvement of streets and other public places in municipalities. 
B.  The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to excavations and/or encroachments made by any department board or officer of the city in the pursuit of its or their official duty. 
(Prior code § 7210.16) 
(Ord. No. 3060 , § 8, 12-13-16)  
CHAPTER 12.24 - COMPLETE STREETS PROGRAM 
 
12.24.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to implement the general plan's goals enabling the streets of the city to provide safe, convenient and comfortable routes for walking, bicycling and public transportation that encourage increased use of these modes of transportation, enable convenient travel as part of daily activities, improve the public welfare by addressing a wide array of health and environmental problems and meet the needs of all users of the streets, including bicyclists, children, persons with disabilities, pedestrians, users of public transportation, and seniors, while continuing to maintain a safe and effective transportation system for motorists and movers of commercial goods. 
(Ord. No. 3065 , § 1, 3-28-17)  
12.24.020 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall have the meanings defined in this section unless the context clearly requires otherwise: 
A.  "Complete streets infrastructure" means design features that contribute to a safe, convenient or comfortable travel experience for users, including, but not limited to, features such as: sidewalks; shared use paths; bicycle lanes; automobile lanes; paved shoulders; street trees, landscaping and planting strips, including native plants where possible; curbs; accessible curb ramps; crosswalks; pedestrian and traffic signals, including countdown and accessible signals; signage, including pedestrian-oriented signs; pedestrian-scale lighting; street furniture and benches; bicycle parking facilities; public transportation stops and facilities; transit priority signalization and traffic calming devices. 
B.  "Street" means any right-of-way, public or private (in new construction areas), including arterials, connectors, alleys, ways, lanes and roadways by any other designation, as well as bridges, tunnels and any other portions of the transportation network. 
C.  "Street project" means the construction, reconstruction, retrofit, maintenance of any street, and includes the planning, design, approval and construction. 
D.  "Users" mean individuals that use streets, including bicyclists, children, persons with disabilities, motorists, movers of commercial goods, pedestrians, users of public transportation, seniors, youth and families. 
(Ord. No. 3065 , § 1, 3-28-17)  
12.24.030 - Infrastructure required for safe travel. 
A.  The city will make complete streets practices a routine part of everyday operations, approach every transportation project and program as an opportunity to improve public and private streets and the transportation network for all users, and work in coordination with other departments, agencies, and jurisdictions to achieve complete streets. 
B.  Consistent with the general plan, and/or approved specific plan, every street project on public or private streets will incorporate complete streets infrastructure sufficient to enable reasonably safe travel along and across the right-of-way for each category of users; provided, however, that such infrastructure may be excluded, upon written approval by city engineer or his designee where documentation and supporting data indicate one of the following bases for the exemption: 
1.  Use by a specific category of users is prohibited by law; 
2.  The cost would be excessively disproportionate to the need or probable future use over the long term; 
3.  There is an absence of current and future need; or 
4.  Significant adverse impacts outweigh the positive effects of the infrastructure. 
C.  The city engineer and/or city traffic engineer will provide an annual report to the parking and transportation commission listing the public and private street projects undertaken in the past year and briefly summarizing the complete streets infrastructure used in those projects and, if applicable, the basis for excluding complete streets infrastructure from those projects. 
D.  If the safety and convenience of users can be improved within the scope of pavement resurfacing, restriping, or signalization operations on public or private streets, such projects may include complete streets infrastructure to increase safety for users. 
E.  The community development department, public works department, and parks, recreation and community services department shall review existing plans, zoning, and subdivision codes, laws, procedures, rules, regulations, guidelines, programs, templates and design manuals, including the greenway trail, development code, general plan, standard drawings for public improvements, and standard conditions to ensure consistency with the general plan. 
F.  The public works department shall develop or revise street standards and design manuals, including cross-section templates and design treatment details, to ensure that standards support and do not impede complete streets. The public works department shall coordinate design guidelines with street classifications and revise them to include complete streets infrastructure, such as bicycle lanes, sidewalks, street crossings, and planting strips. Such revisions may be coordinated with revisions to the code, general plan, standard drawings for public improvements, and standard conditions. 
G.  The building department and engineering division shall ensure that sidewalks, crosswalks, public transportation stops and facilities, and other aspects of the transportation right-of-way are compliant with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), and shall ensure that the city ADA transition plan includes a prioritization method for enhancements, and shall revise if necessary. 
H.  The community development department and public works department shall continue to require street infrastructure consistent with the general design guidelines of the code and consistent with the policies of the general plan and/or specific plans regarding complete streets that encourage and create pedestrian-oriented activities. 
I.  The community development department and public works department shall continue to implement the general plan policies and goals to encourage complete street infrastructure, including connecting transit opportunities, pedestrian friendly commercial streets, and goals for future transportation opportunities like light rail transit or other modes of transit. 
J.  The city will make training available to community development, public works, and parks, recreation and community services personnel regarding the implementation and integration of multimodal infrastructure and techniques. 
(Ord. No. 3065 , § 1, 3-28-17)  
12.24.040 - Performance measures and implementation. 
A.  The city will evaluate the effectiveness of city streets serving each category of users through the following data collection and performance measures: 
1.  Total miles of on-street bikeways defined by streets with clearly marked or signed bicycle accommodation. 
2.  Total miles of streets with pedestrian accommodation. 
3.  Number of missing or noncompliant curb ramps along city streets. 
4.  Number of new trees planted along city streets. 
5.  Number and severity of pedestrian-vehicle and bicycle-vehicle crashes. 
6.  Number of pedestrian-vehicle and bicycle-vehicle fatalities. 
7.  Track data of students from school districts in the city and collaborate with the school districts on projects. 
8.  Comprehensive citywide sidewalk inventory. 
9.  Sales tax revenue for future funding opportunities. 
10.  Total miles of pedestrian trails throughout the city. 
11.  Number of truncated domes on sidewalks to support visually impaired residents. 
12.  Amount of air pollution (in tons) caused by automobiles. 
B.  The city shall conduct targeted outreach and encourage public participation in its decisions concerning street design and use. Community input includes: 
1.  Parking and Transportation Commission. 
2.  Parks, Recreation and Community Services Commission. 
3.  Social Services Commission. 
4.  Accessibility Committee. 
C.  The city will institute the following implementation strategy with this complete streets policy: 
1.  Advisory group. The city will utilize the parking and transportation commission and appropriate staff within the engineering division of public works as an advisory committee to oversee the implementation of this policy. The committee may also include members of community development, parks, recreation and community services department, and the city manager's or his/her designee office from the city. The committee may include representatives from the bicycling, youth and elderly community, and other advocacy organizations, as relevant. This committee will evaluate the city's progress and provide advice on implementation. 
2.  Capital improvement project prioritization. The city will reevaluate capital improvement projects prioritization to encourage implementation of bicycle, pedestrian and transit improvements. 
3.  Safe routes to school plan. The city will maintain and update safe routes to school plan and continue to encourage local community member participation. 
4.  Other plans. The city will maintain and update its bicycle transportation plan, an Americans with Disabilities Act Transition Plan, capital improvement program, and an approved street tree list and a tree preservation ordinance. 
5.  Pedestrian safety campaign. The city will maintain and support a comprehensive pedestrian safety campaign. This plan engages local community members, city leaders, and law enforcement to encourage safe walking and biking throughout the city. Campaign messages (i.e., graphic elements, road markings, signs) will support pedestrian safety efforts. 
6.  Los Angeles County Department of Regional Planning. The city may, as a resource, follow the Community Climate Action Plan developed by Los Angeles County to identify amount and trends in automobile air pollution. 
7.  Storm water management. The city will implement the Green Streets Policy as part of the complete streets policy to continue with a sustainable storm water management plan along our streets. 
8.  Traffic sign inventory. The city will maintain an inventory of all signs located throughout the city. 
9.  Staff training. The city will train advisory group members and city staff on the content of the complete streets principles and best practices for implementing the policy. 
10.  Coordination. The city will utilize inter-departmental project coordination to promote the most responsible and efficient use of fiscal resources for activities that occur within the public right-of-way. 
11.  Funding. The city will actively seek sources of appropriate funding to implement complete streets. 
12.  Initial studies, assessments and reviews. All initial planning and design studies, health impact assessments, environmental reviews, and other project reviews for projects requiring funding or approval by the city shall: 
a.  Evaluate the effect of the proposed project on safe, comfortable, and convenient travel by all users; and 
b.  Identify measures to mitigate any adverse impacts on such travel that are identified. 
(Ord. No. 3065 , § 1, 3-28-17)  
Chapter 12.28 - EXCAVATIONS AND GRADE CHANGES 
 
12.28.010 - Purpose. 
A.  The purpose of this chapter is to safeguard life, limb, health, property and the public welfare by regulating and controlling the design, construction, quality of materials, the location and maintenance of buildings and structures, and the grading and filling of land within the city. 
B.  The council declares the regulations and standards established in this chapter to be the minimum regulations necessary for the protection of the health, safety and general welfare, and that where circumstances warrant, the city engineer may establish such additional standards, procedures and other regulations as may improve the quality of the living environment, which regulations may include landscaping and the placement and maintenance of such structures and easements as are essential to accomplish these goals. The additional standards, procedures and regulations shall be adopted by the council by resolution. 
(Prior code § 7231.1)  
12.28.020 - Applicability. 
A.  No person shall commence or make any excavation or fill upon any lot, parcel, street or alley without complying with all applicable provisions of this chapter and all other regulations of the city relating to excavations, earth removal, compaction, hauling or protection of slopes. 
B.  The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the city, to any county, state or federal governmental agency, or any department, commission, board or officer thereof, but the city, county, state or federal governmental agency or any department, commission, board or officer thereof shall not be required to pay any fee pursuant to this chapter. 
C.  This chapter shall apply to all person dividing land pursuant to the subdivision regulations of this code (Title 17). The grading plan shall be submitted to the city engineer for approval prior to the approval of the final tract map. 
(Prior code § 7231.2)  
12.28.030 - Permit—Required. 
A.  No person shall raise or lower the existing grade of any lot or make excavation or fill which changes the grade of the natural slope of the surface of any lot so that it will not take natural runoff of water from adjacent lot or lots as before the excavation or fill, or so that the water drainage of the lot is changed to run onto a different lot from that on which it ran prior to the excavation or fill, or so that the surface drainage of the lot is concentrated or collected and discharged onto another lot in a different location or in greater quantity, or at an accelerated rate, or in such a way that it will probably result in damage, or in a way that creates a hazard to the public health, safety, or public property, or to such extent that the excavation or filling will require or be accompanied by the hauling of earth or other material over any public street in a vehicle with a gross weight of vehicle and load in excess of that permitted by law or ordinance, without first having obtained a written permit so to do from the street maintenance superintendent without complying with all of the terms and conditions of the permit. 
B.  Any permit issued under this chapter shall be valid for a period of time stipulated in the permit not to exceed one year. Unless the excavation or fill is commenced within one hundred eighty days after the issuance of the permit, the permit shall expire unless renewed by the city engineer, and if the earth movement, after being started, ceases for a period of one hundred eighty days, the permit shall expire unless renewed. 
(Prior code § 7231.3)  
12.28.040 - Permit—Conditions authorized. 
Every permit issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter may contain such conditions as the city engineer may impose to protect adjoining property, the public streets, or the public health and safety, including land cover and erosion control. 
(Prior code § 7231.8)  
12.28.050 - Permit—Plans and reports required. 
With the application for the permit, there shall be submitted: 
A.  A grading plan, prepared by a civil engineer registered as such by the state showing the present contours of the land and the proposed final grades. The proposed final grades shall indicate clearly cuts, fills and slopes. Estimated dates for starting and completing the work shall be stated; 
B.  A written report by a soils engineer, licensed by the state, shall indicate the types and characteristics of soils, with substantiating data and opinion as to slopes which may be carefully and safely constructed; 
C.  Details of drainage structures, walls, cribbing, surface protection, landscaping and groundcover. 
(Prior code § 7231.5)  
12.28.060 - Permit—Application fee. 
Every application for a permit for a cut or fill shall be accompanied by a filing fee for each recorded lot, or in the case of a proposed lot split or subdivision or part of a subdivision, for each lot as shown on the record or survey or tentative map. The filing fee shall be as set by the city council. All costs for inspection tests and reports shall be paid by the owner, subdivider or developer. 
(Prior code § 7231.6)  
12.28.070 - Permit—Bond required. 
Before a permit is issued for excavation or fill of five hundred cubic yards or more, the applicant shall file with the department a bond for the benefit of the city. 
A.  Type of Bond. All bonds shall be executed by the owner of the property where the work is to be undertaken and by a corporate surety insurer authorized to do business in this state as surety, or in lieu thereof, the bond shall be in writing accompanied by a deposit of cash in the amount of the bond. 
B.  Conditions of the Bond. Every bond shall be conditioned so that the permittee shall: 
1.  Comply with all of the provisions of this chapter and all applicable laws and ordinances; 
2.  Comply with all of the terms and conditions of the permit for excavation of fill to the satisfaction of the city engineer; 
3.  Complete all of the work contemplated under the permit within the time limit specified in the permit. The city engineer may, for sufficient cause, extend the time limit specified in the permit, but no such extension shall release the surety upon the bond. 
C.  Period and Termination of Bond. The term of each bond shall begin upon the date of issuance of a permit and shall remain in effect until the completion of work to the satisfaction of the city engineer. The completion shall be evidenced by issuance of a grading certificate signed by the city engineer. In the event of failure to complete the work or the failure to comply with all of the conditions and terms of the permit, the city engineer may order the work to be completed as required by the permit and as ordered by the city engineer. The surety executing the bond, or the deposit, shall continue to be firmly bound under a continuing obligation for the payment of all necessary costs and expenses that may be incurred or expended by the city in causing any and all of the required work to be done, and the surety or the depositor assents to any lawful extensions of time within which to construct and complete the work. In the case of a cash deposit, the deposit or any unused portion thereof shall be refunded to the permittee upon the issuance of a grading certificate by the city engineer. 
D.  Amount of Bond. The amount of the bond shall be determined by the city engineer, and shall equal the total estimated cost of the work required to be done under the permit. The cost shall include the cost of all drainage or other protective devices as may be required. The cost of the grading shall be based upon the number of cubic yards of material in both excavation and fill. Where fill is made with material excavated under the same permit and on the same site, the unit cost may be calculated on the quantity of the fill alone. 
(Prior code § 7231.7)  
12.28.080 - Permit—Exceptions. 
A grading permit shall not be required in the following exceptions, but in all other respects the provisions of this chapter shall apply: 
A.  An excavation which does not exceed five feet in vertical depth at its deepest point measured from the original ground surface. This exception shall not affect the applicability of this chapter to, or the requirement of a grading permit for, any fill made with the material from the excavation; 
B.  A fill not intended to support structures which: 
1.  Does not exceed two hundred cubic yards of material on any recorded lot and the surface of which has no slope at any point steeper than three feet horizontal to one foot vertical, or 
2.  Does not exceed three feet in depth, measured from the natural ground surface and the surface of which has no slope at any point steeper than three feet horizontal to one foot vertical; 
C.  An excavation below finished grade for basements and footings of a building, swimming pool, or underground structure authorized by a valid building permit from the superintendent of building and safety. This exception shall not affect the applicability of this chapter to, nor the requirement of a grading permit for, any fill made with the material from the excavation; 
D.  An excavation or fill in connection with the making of an earth fill dam regulated by the Division of Water Resources of the State Department of Public Works. 
(Prior code § 7231.4)  
12.28.090 - Committee established and duties. 
A.  There is established a committee which shall consist of the following members or their authorized representative: 
1.  The director of planning, who shall be the chairman; 
2.  The city engineer; 
3.  The superintendent of building and safety. 
B.  When the grading, excavating or filling on a site involves more than twenty thousand cubic yards, the city engineer shall refer the application for a permit to the planning director. The planning director shall arrange for a meeting of the committee and the committee shall make a written recommendation to the council. The committee meeting shall be open to the public and any interested person may attend the meeting and present appropriate matter thereat. Notice of the meeting shall be given by one published notice. The council shall act upon the recommendations of the committee, and should the council approve the application, they shall authorize the city engineer to issue a permit. 
(Prior code §§ 7231.13, 7231.14)  
12.28.100 - Slope steepness. 
A.  No excavation shall be made with a cut face steeper than that recommended by a report of a soils engineer, nor shall fills be made with slopes steeper than recommended in the report of a soils engineer. 
B.  The city engineer may require slopes less steep than those required in subsection A of this section if there is evidence that the materials to be exposed on the slopes are unusually subject to erosion, or if other conditions make the flatter slopes necessary for stability or safety. 
C.  Steeper slopes than those permitted in subsection A of this section may be permitted by the city engineer subject to the following conditions: that an additional written report by a soils engineer is received, stating that he has investigated the site, made adequate tests and calculations, together with his opinion as to the degree of cut and fill slopes which may be constructed without endangering health, safety or property. 
(Prior code § 7231.9)  
12.28.110 - Slope height. 
No cut or fill slope shall be constructed over thirty feet in height unless the city engineer is furnished evidence by a written report from a soils engineer that the slopes will be stable with a factor of at least one and five-tenths. 
(Prior code § 7231.10)  
12.28.120 - Drainage design. 
For all cut or fill slopes there shall be drainage provisions, which shall be of such design as to carry surface waters to the nearest practicable street, storm drain, or natural watercourse, or a safe place to deposit and receive such waters. The drainage provisions shall be of such design so as not to endanger the health and safety or any property, either private or public. 
(Prior code § 7231.11)  
12.28.130 - Groundcover. 
Approved groundcover shall be required on all slopes where, in the opinion of a soils engineer, there may be erosion. The groundcover work shall be started immediately after the approval of the work on the slopes. 
(Prior code § 7231.12)  
12.28.140 - Fill compaction. 
A.  All fills intended to support buildings, streets, alleys or structures and all fill slopes shall be made to a minimum of ninety percent compaction in accordance with American Association of State Highway Officials (hereinafter referred to as AASHO) Test No. T99-49, modified to use a ten-pound hammer falling twenty-five times from a height of eighteen inches on each of three equal layers in one-thirtieth of a cubic foot compaction cylinder, or other density test methods which will obtain equivalent results. Where other methods are used, evidence shall be submitted to show that for the specific materials to be used, equivalent results will be obtained. Compaction of temporary storage fills for a period of not greater than six months shall not be required, except where the city engineer determines that compaction is necessary as a safety measure to aid in preventing saturation, slipping or erosion of the fill. Where the compaction is required, it shall be done in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  Determination of field density shall be by the calibrated dry sand displacement method or other equivalent method. Other methods of determining field density may be approved by the city engineer prior to use. 
C.  All costs for compaction tests to meet the requirements of the city engineer shall be paid by the owner or subdivider. 
(Prior code § 7231.15)  
12.28.150 - Protective devices required. 
The owner of any property in hillside areas on which an excavation or fill has been made pursuant to a permit granted under this chapter, or any other person or agent in control of the property, shall maintain in good condition and repair all retaining walls, cribbing, drainage structures, groundcover and other protective devices which are not on public property or public easement, shown in the approved plans and specifications submitted with the application for a permit. 
(Prior code § 7231.16)  
12.28.160 - Grading certificate—Issuance. 
If, upon receipt of satisfactory compaction tests reported by a soils engineer and upon final inspection of any excavation or fill, it is found that the work authorized by the grading permit has been satisfactorily completed in accordance with the requirements of this chapter, a grading certificate covering the work shall be issued to the owner by the city engineer. A separate certificate shall be issued for each lot. 
(Prior code § 7231.20)  
12.28.170 - Grading certificate—Revocation. 
A.  The city engineer shall have the power to revoke any grading certificate whenever he finds that the work covered by the certificate has been materially extended or altered, without a permit so to do, or that any retaining walls, cribbing, drainage structures or other protective device as shown on the approved plans and specifications submitted with the application for a permit, have not been maintained in good order and repair. 
B.  Before the revocation, the city engineer shall first give written notice to the owner of the property involved, specifying the defective condition and stating that unless the defective condition is remedied satisfactorily within a period of three months from the date of the notice, the grading certificate will be revoked. A shorter period of time may be specified if an imminent and immediate hazard is found to exist. If the defective condition is remedied, the certificate shall not be revoked. 
(Prior code § 7231.21)  
12.28.180 - Inspection and correction of noncompliance. 
A.  Any portion of the work which does not comply with the law of this chapter shall be corrected before work proceeds. 
B.  The permittee or his agent shall notify the city engineer and confirm in writing: 
1.  Initial Inspection. When the permittee is ready to begin work on an excavation or fill. Notification shall be given to the city engineer at least two days before any grading is done; 
2.  Rough Grading. When all rough grading has been completed; 
3.  Final Inspection. When all work, including installation of all drainage structures and other protective devices has been completed. 
C.  The city engineer shall immediately approve the work inspected, or give notice in writing to the permittee or owner wherein it fails to comply with the law of this chapter. 
D.  If the city engineer finds the soil or other conditions not as stated in the application for a grading permit, he may refuse to approve further work until approval is obtained for a revised grading plan which conforms to the existing conditions. 
(Prior code § 7231.17)  
12.28.190 - Existing excavation and fills. 
Whenever the city engineer determines by inspection that any existing excavation or fill from any cause has become a menace to life or limb or endangers property or affects the safety, usability or stability of a public way, the owner of the property upon which the excavation or fill is located, or other person or agent in control of the property, upon receipt of notice in writing from the city engineer so to do, shall, within one hundred eighty days from the date of the written notice, repair or reconstruct the excavation or fill so that it will conform to the requirements set forth in this chapter, or otherwise repair, reconstruct, strengthen or eliminate the excavation or fill in a manner satisfactory to the city engineer so that it will no longer constitute a menace or danger as set forth in this section. A shorter period of time may be specified if an imminent and immediate hazard is found to exist. Any person receiving notice as set forth in this section may appeal from the notice of the city engineer to the council. 
(Prior code § 7231.19)  
12.28.200 - Compliance responsibility. 
A.  Building and grading permits shall be presumed to include the proviso that the applicant, his agents, employees or contractors, shall carry out the proposed work in accordance with the approved plans and with all requirements of this chapter and any other laws or regulations applicable thereto, whether specified or not. 
B.  No approval shall relieve or exonerate any person from the responsibility of complying with the provisions and intent of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 7231.18)  
12.28.210 - Owner responsibility. 
Compliance with the requirements or conditions of Chapter 12.24 or the granting of an application or issuance of a permit shall not be construed to relieve the owner of real property of any legal duties, obligations or liabilities incident to the ownership. 
(Prior code § 7231.22)  
Chapter 12.36 - HOUSE NUMBERING 
 
12.36.010 - Numbers required. 
All buildings having a frontage on any public street, boulevard, highway or way within the corporate limits of the city shall be numbered by the owner, agent or occupant thereof as provided in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 8400)  
12.36.020 - Establishment of numbering system. 
A.  The city engineer is authorized, empowered and directed, and it shall be his duty, to establish a system of numbers for all lots, parcels or buildings fronting on or along any public street, boulevard, highway or way within the corporate limits of the city. The system when established by the city engineer shall be reduced to writing and it shall be kept on file in his office. The numbers of all lots, parcels or buildings, when established or determined by the city engineer, shall be the official numbers therefor on any such public street, boulevard, highway or way. 
B.  Any such system of numbers so established by the city engineer shall be reduced to writing and the same shall be kept on file in his office. The numbers of all lots, parcels or buildings, when established or determined by the city engineer, shall be the official numbers therefor on any such public street, boulevard, highway or way. Any such system of numbers so established by the city engineer shall be in conformity and in accordance with the plan of numbering established by the county surveyor or the board of supervisors of the county for the numbering of lots, parcels or buildings on or along public roads in the county. 
(Amended during 1984 codification; prior code § 8400.1)  
12.36.030 - Numbers for new buildings. 
A.  All new buildings which are erected subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be numbered in accordance with the provisions of this chapter upon completion of the construction thereof. It shall be the duty of the director of building and safety to assign to the owner, agent or occupant of any such new building the property number thereof, determined in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and as established by the city engineer. The owner, agent or occupant of any such new building shall place on the building, within ten days after completion of the building, the number or numbers assigned to the building. 
B.  The number or numbers shall be placed upon the premises on which any such building is located in such a position and in such a manner as to be plainly visible from the public street, boulevard, highway or way on which the building faces. The numbers shall be not less than three inches in height and shall be of a type and color which can be easily read and are discernible to the general public. 
(Amended during 1984 codification: prior code § 8400.2)  
12.36.040 - Numbering on alleys. 
Each building located on a C or M zoned lot which lot is served by an alley shall be numbered in the rear thereof as provided in this section. Every person who owns, or who is in possession of any such building, shall place thereon the appropriate street number therefor, assigned by the city engineer pursuant to this chapter. The street number shall consist of figures not less than three inches in height which shall be placed on the building or the lot in close proximity to the building, in a conspicuous position so that it is clearly visible from the alley which serves the lot. 
(Prior code § 8400.3)  
Chapter 12.40 - TREES AND SHRUBS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3045, § 1 , adopted Jan. 12, 2016, repealed the former Ch. 12.40, §§ 12.40.010—12.40.120, and enacted a new chapter as set out herein. The former Ch. 12.40 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from prior code §§ 7220—7220.9; an amendment during the 1984 codification; Ord. 2732, §§ 1—6, adopted in 1998; Ord. 2777, §§ 1, 2, adopted in 2001; Ord. 2898, § 1, adopted in 2007; and Ord. No. 2958, §§ 3, 6, adopted Oct. 12, 2010. 
 
12.40.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "tree ordinance" and may be cited by that name. 
( Ord. No. 3045, § 1 , 1-12-16)  
12.40.020 - Director defined. 
"Director" means the director of the parks, recreation and community services department of this city or his or her authorized designee, i.e., certified arborist or manager. 
( Ord. No. 3045, § 1 , 1-12-16)  
12.40.030 - Planting. 
It shall be the duty of the director to oversee the duties to plant, trim, prune and care for all trees, shrubs, or plants and to authorize removal of all objectionable trees, shrubs or plants in and upon any street, park, alley or public place in the city, subject to the review of the city manager. Subject to said review, the director shall have the power to designate the kind or variety of trees, shrubs or plants to be planted upon any street, park, alley or public place of the city; providing, however, that the owners of property fronting on any street, alley or public place may petition the city council that such trees, shrubs or plants shall be of a certain kind or variety, but the petition shall be advisory to the action of the council. All trees planted in any public property in a new subdivision shall be in accordance with the rules and regulations of the director and shall be paid for by the subdivider. The council may require any subdivider to appropriate money for proper tree planting along the streets of any new subdivision before approving any subdivision map. 
( Ord. No. 3045, § 1 , 1-12-16)  
12.40.040 - Trimming or removing. 
No person shall cut, trim, prune, plant, remove, injure or interfere with any tree, shrub or plant upon any street, park, alley or public place of the city without a permit therefor from the director. The director is authorized to grant such permission in his or her discretion, but no such permit shall be valid for a longer period than thirty days after its date of issuance. 
( Ord. No. 3045, § 1 , 1-12-16)  
12.40.050 - Permits for trimming or removal. 
A.  Permits required in this chapter shall be issued as outlined in the parkway tree manual by the director. 
B.  Any person maintaining any overhead wires or pipes or underground conduits along or across any street, park, boulevard, alley or public place of the city, or owning any property abutting upon any street, park, or public place of the city, desiring to have any tree, shrub or plant cut, trimmed, pruned or removed may file with the director a written request that the work be done. It shall be within the discretion of the director to authorize said request and to require the petitioner to meet the guidelines as set forth in the parkway tree manual adhering to the requirements and conditions stipulated therein before the issuance of any permit under this chapter. 
C.  Such tree policies and guidelines as set forth in the parkway tree manual will be reviewed and revised as appropriate at least every fifth year by the parks, recreation and community services commission in cooperation with the director. Revised pages will reflect date of revision. 
D.  The parks, recreation and community services commission shall advertise for public hearing in the local newspaper ten days prior to the date of the meeting to hear modifications to the parkway tree manual. 
( Ord. No. 3045, § 1 , 1-12-16)  
12.40.060 - Interfering with city employees prohibited. 
No person shall interfere with the director or persons acting under his authority while engaged in planting, mulching, pruning, trimming, spraying, treating or removing any tree, shrub or plant in any street, park, alley or public place in the city, or in the removing of any stone, cement or other substance from about the trunk of any tree, shrub or plant in any such street, park, alley or public place. 
( Ord. No. 3045, § 1 , 1-12-16)  
12.40.070 - Injuring trees prohibited. 
No person shall cause, authorize or procure any brine water, oil, liquid dye or other substance deleterious to tree life to lie, leak, pour, flow or drip upon or into the soil about the base of any tree, shrub, or plant in any street, park, alley or public place of the city or onto any sidewalk, gutter, road, or pavement within the city at a point from which the substance may be lying upon or by flowing, dripping or seeping into the soil injure the tree, shrub or plant, or to otherwise harm or kill any such tree, shrub or plant. No person, without the approval of the director, shall place or maintain any stone, cement or other substance so that it will impede the free access of water or air to the roots of any tree, shrub or plant in any street, park, alley or public place of the city. 
( Ord. No. 3045, § 1 , 1-12-16)  
12.40.080 - Protection during construction. 
During the erection, repair, alteration or removal of any building, house or structure in the city, no person in charge of such work shall leave any tree, shrub or plant in any street, park, boulevard, alley or public place of the city in the vicinity of the building or structure without such good and sufficient guards or protectors as shall prevent injury to the tree, shrub or plant arising out of or by reason of the erection, repair, alteration or removal. 
( Ord. No. 3045, § 1 , 1-12-16)  
12.40.090 - Making attachments or planting vegetation. 
A.  No person, without the permission of the director, shall attach or keep attached to any tree, shrub or plant in any street, park, pleasure ground, boulevard, alley or other public place of the city, or to the guard or stake intended for the protection thereof, any wire, rope, sign or any other device whatsoever. 
B.  No person, without the permission of the superintendent, shall plant or grow or permit to be planted or grown, any ivy, geranium or other vegetation on, against or around any street tree to a height of more than six inches above the surface of the ground or curbline, whichever is lower, and the director is authorized to remove or cut back any such vegetation exceeding six inches in height. 
( Ord. No. 3045, § 1 , 1-12-16)  
12.40.100 - Inspection. 
A.  The director may inspect any tree, shrub or plant upon any street, park, alley or public place of the city or any tree, shrub or plant standing on any private property which overhangs or projects into any street, park, alley or public place of the city, to determine whether it or any part of it is in such condition as to constitute a hazard or an impediment to the progress or vision of anyone traveling on the street, park, alley or public place. 
B.  If, in the opinion of the director, any such tree, shrub or plant is hazardous to the traveling public or impedes the progress or the vision of the public on any street, park, alley or public place as outlined in the parkway tree manual, he or she may cause it or such part or parts thereof as are hazardous or an impediment to be trimmed or removed so as to remedy the condition. However, no such tree, shrub or plant standing on any private property shall be cut down or removed unless ten-day notice in writing of this intention is given by the director to the owner(s), occupant(s) or agent(s) of the property upon which the described condition exists. The only exception to the notice requirement is for a tree that is verified as dead by the city's certified arborist. It may be removed with no notice. 
C.  If the owner(s), occupant(s), or agent(s) of the private property within seven days after receipt of the notice files his objection to the removal with the director, the tree, shrub or plant shall not be cut down or removed unless the director gives the owner(s), occupant(s) or agent(s) a reasonable opportunity to be heard in support of the objection. If the objection is not sustained, the director shall thereafter approve in writing the cutting down or removal of the tree, plant or shrub. 
D.  The city will give a thirty-day written notice of this intention to remove a healthy or diseased parkway tree and post a notice upon the affected tree upon which the described condition exists as stipulated in the parkway tree manual. 
E.  If any other entity has a need to remove a parkway or public tree in the course of upgrade, renovation or new construction, they must have approval from the director and adhere to the requirements and conditions stipulated in the parkway tree manual. 
F.  Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to impose any liability upon the city, its officers or employees, nor to relieve the owner of any private property from the duty to keep any tree, shrub or plant upon his property or under his control in such a condition as to prevent it from constituting a hazard or an impediment to travel or vision upon any street, park, alley or public place within the city. 
( Ord. No. 3045, § 1 , 1-12-16)  
12.40.110 - Scenic corridor. 
The city's general plan (section 5) identifies a plan for scenic corridors. It states that "the scenic qualities of the city may be enhanced by the adoption of a program for positive identification of these resources." These corridors must strictly adhere to the requirements and conditions stipulated in the parkway tree manual. 
In keeping with the city's policy to preserve and protect healthy trees the rules contained in the parkway tree manual will be strictly adhered to relative to scenic corridors and entryways into the city. 
( Ord. No. 3045, § 1 , 1-12-16)  
12.40.120 - Bird and wildlife protection. 
The Migratory Bird Treaty Act (MBTA) of 1918 was implemented for the protection of migratory birds. Interaction with wildlife must adhere to the requirements and conditions stipulated in the parkway tree manual. 
( Ord. No. 3045, § 1 , 1-12-16)  
12.40.130 - Penalties. 
Non-compliance with permit specifications will result in penalties calculated as stipulated in the parkway tree manual. 
( Ord. No. 3045, § 1 , 1-12-16)  
12.40.140 - Appeals. 
All appeals shall be made pursuant to the parkway tree manual. 
( Ord. No. 3045, § 1 , 1-12-16)  
Chapter 12.42 - CAMPING AND STORAGE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY IN PUBLIC AREAS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3016, § 1, adopted Jan. 14, 2014, repealed the former Ch. 12.42, §§ 12.42.010—12.42.050, and enacted a new chapter as set out herein. The former Ch. 12.42 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2946, § 1, adopted Jan. 26, 2010. 
 
12.42.010 - Purpose. 
A.  The public streets and areas within the city should be readily accessible and available to residents and the public at large. The use of these areas for camping purposes and/or storage of personal property interferes with the rights of others to use the areas for which they were intended. The purpose of this chapter is to maintain the public streets and public areas in blight-free conditions, to secure access to public areas and to businesses, and to ensure that public property is used for its intended purposes and remains accessible to all citizens, businesses and visitors in the City of Whittier. 
B.  Large amounts of personal property are being left unattended in public areas throughout the city, and such personal property creates blight, obstructs the public rights-of-way, interferes with access to the public areas and to businesses, and thus negatively affects quality of life in the city, and negatively affects the profitable operation of such businesses. 
( Ord. No. 3016 , § 1, 1-14-14)  
12.42.020 - Definitions. 
Unless the particular provisions or the context otherwise requires, the definitions contained in this section shall govern the construction, meaning and application of words and phrases used in this chapter. 
A.  "Abandoned personal property" means personal property that the owner surrenders, relinquishes, or disclaims. Indicia of abandoned personal property shall include, but not be limited to: personal property that its owner has indicated he/she does not want; and personal property left on private real property for any period of time without the permission of the real property owner or current tenant. 
B.  "Alley" shall have the same meaning as Section 110 of the California Vehicle Code. 
C.  "Camp" means to pitch or to occupy camp facilities; to use camp paraphernalia. 
D.  "Camp facilities" include, but are not limited to, tents, huts or temporary shelters. 
E.  "Camp paraphernalia" includes, but is not limited to, tarpaulins, cots, beds, sleeping bags, hammocks or noncity designated cooking facilities and similar equipment. 
F.  "Chief of police" or "police chief" means the chief of police of the Whittier police department, and shall include his/her designee. 
G.  "City clerk-treasurer" shall mean the Whittier city clerk-treasurer and shall include his/her designee. 
H.  "City manager" shall mean the Whittier city manager and shall include his/her designee. 
I.  "House trailer" shall include any motor vehicle, boat, recreational vehicle or other vehicular device designed for use as a human habitation but shall not include a manufactured home, as that term is defined in 42 U.S.C. § 5402, or its successor provisions. 
J.  "Park" means a park, reservation, playground, recreation center or any other area in the city owned, maintained or used by the city for the purpose of public rest, play, enjoyment, active or passive recreation, or assembly, and shall include all buildings and structures located thereon or therewith. 
K.  "Public area" means and includes, but is not limited to, any street, alley, park, public right-of-way, recreational area, any place open to the public view or other place to which the public has access. A public area can be privately or publicly owned. 
L.  "Public works director" means the public works director of the City of Whittier or his/her designee. 
M.  "Personal property" means tangible personal belongings. Tangible personal belongings include any movable or tangible thing that is subject to ownership; property or chattels that can be seen, weighed, measured, felt, or touched, such as furniture, cooking utensils, money and books. For the purposes of this chapter, personal property shall not include real property, vehicles, bicycles or animals. 
N.  "Real property" means land and anything growing on, attached to, or erected on it, excluding anything that may be severed without injury to the land. Real property includes land, buildings and easements. 
O.  "Storage of personal property in public areas" means accumulating or putting aside personal property, placing it for safekeeping, or leaving it in public areas; or personal property that is left unattended in any public area lacking a guard, escort, caretaker, or other watcher. 
P.  "Street" shall have the same meaning as Section 591 of the California Vehicle Code. 
Q.  "Unclaimed personal property" means personal property that has been turned in to the chief pursuant to Section 12.42.040, and that has not been claimed within a period of ninety (90) days by its true owner or finder. 
( Ord. No. 3016 , § 1, 1-14-14)  
12.42.030 - Camping in public areas prohibited. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to camp, occupy camp facilities or use camp paraphernalia in the following areas, except as otherwise designated by the city manager or his/her designee: 
1.  Any street or alley; 
2.  Any public parking lot or public area, improved or unimproved; 
3.  Any park. 
B.  The prohibition of this section shall not apply: 
1.  In the event of emergencies, such as may be caused by flooding, fire, earthquake or any other natural or man-made condition. 
2.  To events that are approved or sponsored by the city. 
3.  To camping grounds and parks designated for mobile home or recreational vehicle use. 
4.  Occasional camping on residential properties, with the property owner's express permission, not to exceed three consecutive days in any ninety-day period. 
5.  Events on private property, for which the owner(s) or person(s) in lawful possession of the property has obtained a temporary use permit or conditional use permit from the city, which specifically allows the activity. 
( Ord. No. 3016 , § 1, 1-14-14)  
12.42.040 - Unlawful camping—Living in vehicles prohibited. 
A.  The use of a house trailer, whether on wheels or a foundation, for habitation purposes, either temporary or permanent, other than one located in a regularly established trailer park and in areas designated for such use, is declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited. 
B.  The use for habitation purposes of any motor vehicle, operative or nonoperative, including, but not limited to, any automobile, sport utility vehicle or van, which has a designed primary purpose of transportation, and which is parked on any street or public place or anywhere open to public view, is declared to be a public nuisance and is prohibited. 
( Ord. No. 3016 , § 1, 1-14-14)  
12.42.050 - Storage of personal property in public areas prohibited. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to store personal property in any public area, except as otherwise approved in writing by the city manager or his/her designee. Personal property stored in public areas in violation of this section shall be impounded pursuant to Sections 12.42.050 through 12.42.110 of this chapter. 
B.  Any personal property left in any city park while the park is closed to the public, whether or not the personal property is unattended, may be immediately impounded, pursuant to Sections 12.42.050 through 12.42.110 of this chapter. 
C.  Violations of this section may be punishable pursuant to the provisions of Section 1.08.010 of this code. 
( Ord. No. 3016 , § 1, 1-14-14)  
12.42.060 - Police chief to receive/store unattended personal property. 
The chief of police shall make provisions for receiving and safekeeping of personal property found unattended and coming into his or her possession. A receipt shall be issued to the person delivering such personal property, unless the personal property was found in the course of employment by an employee of the city. The police department shall notify the owner, if his or her identity is reasonably ascertainable, that it possesses the personal property and where it may be claimed. The police department may require the owner to pay a reasonable charge to defray the costs of storage and care of the personal property. 
( Ord. No. 3016 , § 1, 1-14-14)  
12.42.070 - Notice. 
A.  In the event that the personal property is found in the course and scope of employment by an employee of the city, the employee shall leave a notice in a prominent place of any personal property taken, including advising where the personal property is being kept and when it may be claimed by its rightful owner. 
B.  The city shall determine what, if any, areas of the city suffer from blight due to storage of personal property in public places, parks or streets and alleys, and erect signs in those areas so as to provide additional notice. 
( Ord. No. 3016 , § 1, 1-14-14)  
12.42.080 - Holding and disposal of stolen/unattended personal property. 
Found personal property shall be deposited in a safe place for a period of at least ninety days, and found money shall be deposited with the city clerk-treasurer for a period of not less than ninety days, unless sooner claimed by the true owner. In the event the property or money is not claimed within ninety days, it shall be deemed to be unclaimed personal property, subject to disposal as provided in this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 3016 , § 1, 1-14-14)  
12.42.090 - True owner may claim personal property. 
During the time that any found personal property is held by the city, it may be delivered or paid to the true owner as follows: 
A.  The personal property shall be delivered upon proof of ownership satisfactory to the chief of police after ten days' notice by mail to any others who have asserted a claim of ownership, at any address given by such persons. 
B.  If the personal property consists of money, it shall be paid to the true owner upon written order from the chief of police to the city clerk-treasurer. The chief of police shall make such order upon the same proof of ownership and with the same notice as prescribed in the case of property. 
C.  If ownership cannot be determined to the satisfaction of the chief of police, he or she may refuse to deliver the personal property or order the payment of such money to anyone until ordered to do so by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
( Ord. No. 3016 , § 1, 1-14-14)  
12.42.100 - Finder may reclaim property or money. 
A.  If the reported value of the personal property is two hundred fifty dollars or more, and the true owner does not appear and prove his or her ownership of the personal property within ninety days, the chief of police shall cause notice of the personal property to be published once in a newspaper of general circulation. If, after seven days following the publication of the notice, no owner appears and proves his or her ownership of the personal property, and the person who found or saved the personal property pays for the cost of publication of the notice, the title shall vest in the person who found or saved the personal property, unless the personal property was found in the course of employment by an employee of the city, wherein the personal property shall be sold at auction as provided in Section 12.42.060. 
B.  In the event the reported value of the personal property is less than two hundred fifty dollars and no owner appears to prove his or her ownership of the personal property within ninety days, the title shall vest in the person who found or saved the personal property, unless the personal property was found in the course of employment by an employee of the city, in which case the personal property shall be sold at auction as provided in Section 12.42.060. 
( Ord. No. 3016 , § 1, 1-14-14)  
12.42.110 - Unclaimed personal property to be used by city or sold at auction—Notice. 
A.  Upon expiration of the ninety-day period, any personal property received by the city and not delivered to the true owner or finder may be appropriated to the use of the City of Whittier upon order of the city manager or his or her finding that the personal property is needed for a public use, and any personal property not appropriated to city use may be sold at public auction to the highest bidder. 
B.  All unclaimed money received by the chief of police, and not delivered to the true owner or finder during the ninety-day period shall thereafter be deposited in the general fund. 
C.  Notice of sale at auction of unclaimed personal property shall be given by the city clerk-treasurer at the direction of the chief of police at least five days before the time fixed therefor by publication at least once in a newspaper of general circulation. 
( Ord. No. 3016 , § 1, 1-14-14)  
12.42.120 - Conduct of auction. 
An auction for the sale of unclaimed personal property shall be in accordance with Civil Code 2080.3, 2080.4 and city policy. 
( Ord. No. 3016 , § 1, 1-14-14)  
12.42.130 - Proceeds to be deposited in general fund. 
After any auction for unclaimed personal property is completed, the proceeds of the auction shall be delivered to the city clerk-treasurer for deposit in the general fund. 
( Ord. No. 3016 , § 1, 1-14-14)  
12.42.140 - Unsalable and unusual personal property. 
Any personal property advertised and offered for sale but not sold and not suitable for appropriation to the use of the city shall be deemed to be of no value and shall be disposed of in such a manner as the city manager deems appropriate. 
( Ord. No. 3016 , § 1, 1-14-14)  
12.42.150 - Dangerous or perishable personal property—evidence. 
Any personal property coming into the possession of the chief of police may be disposed of immediately and without notice, in a manner that the chief of police determines to be in the public interest, when such personal property is perishable, contraband pursuant to state or federal law, evidence in a criminal investigation, or constitutes an immediate threat to the public health or safety. 
( Ord. No. 3016 , § 1, 1-14-14)  
12.42.160 - Provisions not applicable. 
A.  The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to real or personal property or money subject to confiscation pursuant to state or federal law, to personal property that constitutes evidence in an ongoing criminal investigation and/or civil proceeding pursuant to state or federal law. 
B.  The provisions of this chapter shall apply to personal property or money held as evidence only where the same is unclaimed by any person and no other provisions of law are applicable concerning its disposition. 
C.  The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to personal property that has been abandoned by its owner. Abandoned property personal property shall be disposed of forthwith. 
( Ord. No. 3016 , § 1, 1-14-14)  
12.42.170 - Penalties. 
A.  Any violation of the provisions of this chapter may be punished pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 1.08 of the Whittier Municipal Code. 
B.  The remedies set forth in subsection A of this section shall be in addition to any other existing remedies for code enforcement and nuisance abatement actions, including, but not limited to, administrative citations or any action at law or equity. 
( Ord. No. 3016 , § 1, 1-14-14)  
Chapter 12.44 - PUBLIC PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS 
 
12.44.010 - Permits—Issuance. 
Permits as required in this chapter shall be issued only by the council or the director of parks, recreation and community services on application first duly made and approved. The council may delegate authority to any officer of the city to issue such permits as it deems necessary in the proper management and control of the parks and playgrounds. Permits will be granted per guidelines of the city facility usage policy. 
(Amended during 1984 codification; prior code § 7300.4) 
(Ord. No. 2958, § 3, 10-12-10; Ord. No. 3012, § 1 , 10-8-13; Ord. No. 3025, § 1 , 1-13-15)  
12.44.020 - Permit—Required. 
No company, society, group or organization shall hold or conduct any picnic, celebration, parade, service or business in any public park without a special permit granted as provided in this chapter, and no person shall take part in any picnic, celebration, parade, service or business held or conducted contrary to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 7300.1) 
( Ord. No. 3012, § 1 , 10-8-13)  
12.44.030 - Setting hours to be used. 
A.  The city council shall by resolution determine and set forth the time during which any public park or playground may be open and used by the general public and during what hours the park is available for park and playground operations. 
B.  After the adoption of the resolution and the posting of the proper notices on any particular park or playground showing the hours during which it may be used, it shall be unlawful for any person to enter, loiter or remain in any public park or playground in the city at any time when by the resolution the park or playground is closed for any use. 
(Prior code § 7300.3) 
( Ord. No. 3012, § 1 , 10-8-13)  
12.44.040 - Use regulations. 
No person shall do any of the acts specified in this section within the limits or boundaries of any public park, playground or real property of the city without written permission from the director of parks, recreation and community services or his/her designee: 
A.  Bring in, carry, discharge, display or set off in any public park or playground any firearms, firecrackers, rockets, torpedoes or other fireworks; 
B.  Make fires in any area of the parks or cook on stoves/personal barbeques in any other place except in designated gravel picnic area; 
C.  Cut, deface, remove or damage any tree, shrub, plant, turf or rock; 
D.  Swim, wade, bathe in or pollute the waters of any fountain, pond, lake or stream except any area that is designated as a play/splash area of the park; 
E.  Live, camp or lodge in any public park, playground or real property of the city; 
F.  Wound, kill or catch, feed or attempt to wound, kill, catch or feed any bird, fowl, fish or animal; 
G.  Drive or propel any automobile, motor vehicle, motor-driven scooter, go-cart, motorcycle, motor-driven device, bicycle, cycle or skateboard on or in any portion of a public park or playground, excepting those portions of a public park or playground where the use, driving and propelling of such vehicles, or any one of them, are or is permitted by the director of parks, recreation and community services of the city and such areas are posted with signs authorizing such use. The director of parks, recreation and community services is authorized and directed to determine any such area for any such vehicles or any one of them to the exclusion of all others which may be used, driven or propelled and upon such designation by the director of parks, recreation and community services all such areas and the posting thereof, they shall be lawful. The director of parks, recreation and community services may and he is authorized and directed to fix such terms and conditions to the use of any portion of a public park or playground for such purposes as he deems advisable, including but not limiting them to the hours when they may be so used, the speeds permissible in such areas, the amount of noise which may be emitted, the use of mufflers and the use or requirement of other mechanical devices on any such equipment, together with such other regulations for such use as the director of parks, recreation and community services may deem necessary in order to protect the public peace, health and safety. 
No person shall drive, operate or propel any vehicle described in this subsection in excess of five miles per hour in any park, playground or property owned by the city and used for such purposes, except where a sign has been posted allowing a higher speed. This provision shall not affect any lesser speed in any public park or playground where the speed has been fixed by the director of parks, recreation and community services of the city; 
H.  Sell or offer for sale any goods, merchandise, articles, items, services, sports clinics or private lessons whatsoever; 
I.  Practice, carry on, or conduct any trade, occupation, business or profession; 
J.  Park automobiles or other vehicles except at places especially provided or designated for such purposes; to leave automobiles or other vehicles with the engine running; park automobiles or other vehicles during hours when the park is not open to the general public; 
K.  Place and/or operate any electrical generator, including but not limited to generators in motor homes, in any park, playground or other real property of the city, or run extension cords on to the park, playground or other real property of the city from an electrical generator or other power source from outside the perimeter of any of the aforementioned city facilities or property; 
L.  Play or engage in any game except at such places as shall be especially set apart for that purpose; 
M.  Throw or deposit any bottles, tin cans, broken glass, paper, rubbish, refuse or waste material of any kind in any place except in containers designated for such purposes; 
N.  Permit or allow any animal owned by or in the custody, charge, care or control of any person to be at any time, either leashed or unleashed, in any city public park, or portion thereof, which park, or portion thereof, is posted with signs prohibiting such acts; provided that, notwithstanding the provisions of this subsection, animal shows shall be allowed in any portion of any public park if a permit for the show is first obtained from the director of parks, recreation and community services, and dogs on a maximum six-foot leash shall be allowed on the Whittier Greenway Trail, in Hellman Park and in Murphy Ranch Park; 
O.  No male person over eight years of age shall enter or use any toilet or water closet designated "For Women" nor shall any female person over eight years of age enter or use any toilet or water closet designated "For Men" in any public park or playground; 
P.  Use a loudspeaker or other form of sound amplification. 
(Ord. 2695 § 1, 1996; Ord. 2670 § 1, 1995; Ord. 2490 §§ 1—3, 1990; amended during 1984 codification; prior code §§ 7300, 7300.2) 
(Ord. No. 2922, § 1, 3-24-09; Ord. No. 2958, § 3, 10-12-10; Ord. No. 3012, § 1 , 10-8-13)  
12.44.050 - Consumption and possession of alcoholic beverages. 
No person shall do any of the acts specified in this section within the limits or boundaries of any city-owned public park or other adjacent city-owned public place: 
A.  Consume any alcoholic beverage; 
B.  Possess any bottle, can, or other receptacle containing any alcoholic beverage that has been opened, or a seal broken, or the contents of which has been partially removed. 
Any person violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of an infraction. For the purpose of this chapter, the term "alcoholic beverage" shall be as defined by the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act (hereinafter "Act"), California Business and Professions Code § 23000 et seq., as that Act now exists and may hereafter be amended, to wit: alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer, and which contains one-half of one percent or more by volume and which is fit for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined with other substances. 
This section does not apply: (a) at premises licensed by the State Board of Equalization under the Act for the sale and/or consumption of alcoholic beverages on such premises; (b) at any special event sponsored by a nonprofit organization for which a special events permit has been issued with council approval; or (c) at any special event for which a temporary license or permit has been duly issued by the Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control. This section shall not be deemed to proscribe any act that is positively permitted or prohibited by any law of the State of California. 
(Ord. 2869 § 39, 2006: Ord. 2695 § 2, 1996) 
( Ord. No. 3012, § 1 , 10-8-13)  
12.44.060 - Skate park. 
A.  Skate Park Defined. "Skate park" means any public facility that is designed for, and maintained by the city for the purpose of recreation skate use. 
B.  Skate Park Regulations. It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
1.  Enter, remain in or use any skate facility owned by the city unless that person is wearing a helmet, elbow pads, and kneepads; 
2.  Use any publicly-owned skate facility for any activity other than skateboarding, in-line skating or roller skating; 
3.  Use or be upon any publicly-owned skate facility while under the influence of any alcoholic beverage or drug or under the combined influence of any alcoholic beverage or drug; 
4.  Skate, run, stand on, or jump from, or otherwise employ any exterior wall or fence surface while using any publicly-owned skate facility; 
5.  No stunt, trick or luge skateboarding is permitted; 
6.  Use or be upon any publicly-owned skate facility while wearing any audio headset; 
7.  Introduce, employ or use any unauthorized equipment, obstacle or apparatus not specifically permitted by this chapter within any public-owned skate facility; 
8.  Enter or remain in any publicly-owned skate facility with any food or beverage; or 
9.  Play amplified music in any publicly-owned or public-operated skate facility, or on any public property adjoining any publicly-owned or public-operated skate facility; 
10.  Repealed. 
11.  Graffiti or tagging; 
12.  The hours of operation shall be sunrise to sunset. 
C.  The parks, recreation and community services department shall cause signs to be posted at the skate park providing reasonable notice of the requirements of this chapter and the penalties for failing to comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2869 § 40, 2006; Ord. 2837 § 1, 2004: Ord. 2790 § 1, 2001) 
(Ord. No. 2958, §§ 2, 3 and 5, 10-12-10; Ord. No. 3012, § 1 , 10-8-13; Ord. No. 3025, § 2 , 1-13-15)  
12.44.070 - Dog park. 
A.  Dog Park Defined. "Dog park" means a facility set aside for dogs to exercise and play off-leash in a controlled environment under the supervision of their owners. 
B.  Dog Park Regulations. It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
1.  Dogs must be accompanied by persons eighteen years old or older. Children under the age of six years old are not permitted in the off-leash area. Children six to seventeen years of age must be accompanied and supervised by an adult (18 years of age or older) while in the off-leash areas. 
2.  Dogs under the age of four months are not permitted to use the facility and may be cited. 
3.  Dogs not displaying a valid and current county issued dog license (or annual permit tag, if required) will not be permitted to use the facility and may be cited. Dogs must be current on vaccinations and licensing. Unlicensed dogs, or dogs with communicable diseases, are not allowed on park premises at any time and the owner may be cited. 
4.  No more than three dogs are allowed per adult. 
5.  Female dogs in any stage of heat are not permitted in the park. 
6.  It is the responsibility of each owner to supervise and clean up after his/her dog(s) to ensure a clean and orderly facility; dog feces are to be immediately removed by owner. 
7.  The park is a non-smoking facility. 
8.  No food (for people or canines) or toys (except toss toys such as balls and Frisbees) are allowed in the off-leash area. 
9.  Aggressive dogs are not allowed in the park. Dogs exhibiting unusually aggressive behavior are to be immediately removed. 
10.  Owners must remain with their dog(s) in the park and keep their dog(s) in sight at all times. 
11.  Owners must stop their dogs from digging. Any holes created by a dog must be filled by owner. 
12.  Dogs must be leashed at all times in the parking area; owners must carry a leash and dogs must be leashed before leaving the park. 
13.  Users and/or dog owners assume full liability and are legally responsible for any injuries resulting from their actions as well as their pet(s). 
14.  Professional dog trainers may not use this facility to conduct their business. 
15.  Owners must abide by all city ordinances and policies. 
16.  Anyone who abandons an animal is subject to a five-hundred-dollar fine and/or up to six months in jail (California Penal Code Section 597S). 
17.  Unleashing of dogs will be at the owner's own risk. 
( Ord. No. 3025, § 3 , 1-13-15)  
12.44.080 - Penalty provision. 
A violation of this chapter, or any provisions hereof, is punishable as follows: 
1.  Violations of this provision are an infraction punishable by: 
a.  A fine not exceeding fifty dollars for the first violation; 
b.  A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars the second violation of the same ordinance within one year of a first violation; 
c.  A fine not exceeding one hundred and seventy-five dollars for each additional violation of the same ordinance within one year of a first violation. 
Skate Park: 
d.  In addition to the penalties so described, any police officer or other person authorized to issue citations shall have the authority to impound any skateboard, scooter, in-line skates or roller skates of a person found violating this chapter. Upon impoundment of any skateboard, scooter, in-line skates or roller skates as provided herein, the owner of such device shall be issued a receipt. Said receipt shall state the hours, location, time frame and manner for claiming the impounded skateboard, scooter, in-line skates or roller skates, as provided in subsections (e) and (f) of this section. 
e.  Upon presentation of the receipt, the owner may claim the impounded skateboard, scooter, in-line skates or roller skates at the police department during business hours. If the owner is a minor, such owner may claim the impounded skateboard, scooter, in-line skates or roller skates if accompanied by a parent or guardian. No fee may be assessed on the owner, parent or guardian. 
f.  If the impounded skateboard, scooter, in-line skates or roller skates is/are not claimed within sixty days after the date of impoundment, the city may dispose of the item(s) by public sale at auction. 
Dog Park: 
g.  Anyone who abandons an animal at a dog park guilty of a misdemeanor under state law and is subject to a five-hundred-dollar fine and/or up to six months in jail (California Penal Code Section 597.1(a) (1)). 
( Ord. No. 3025, § 4 , 1-13-15)  
Chapter 12.46 - BUS BENCHES 
 
12.46.010 - Prohibition—Privately-owned bus benches. 
No person shall place, construct or maintain a bus bench in any public right-of-way or on any other publicly owned or controlled real property (hereafter in this chapter, "right-of-way"). "Bus bench," for the purpose of this chapter, means a device which is made of wood, metal, concrete or a combination thereof, and is provided at or near designated bus stops for any transit system, in a right-of-way, which bus bench is designed for seating of persons who are waiting at a bus stop for the arrival of a public transit conveyance. 
(Ord. 2442 § 2 (part), 1988)  
12.46.020 - Declaration of nuisance. 
The city council has heretofore determined that the location and placement of bus benches by any person, other than the city, in a right-of-way constitutes a public nuisance. The findings upon which such declaration of nuisance is based, are as described in Ordinance No. 2442, and in the staff report dated May 24, 1988, submitted to the city council at a regular meeting thereof held on June 21, 1988. 
(Ord. 2442 § 2 (part), 1988)  
12.46.030 - Notice to abate. 
The city manager shall cause written notice ("notice") of the provisions of this chapter to be given to any person who is known or believed to be the owner of, or the person entitled to possession of, any bus bench which is located in a right-of-way in the city. Such notices shall be given by personal service or by deposit in the custody of the United States Postal Service, or its successor, postage prepaid and addressed to such person at his or her last known address. Each notice shall indicate that the continued placement of a bus bench at the designated location constitutes a public nuisance and shall set a period of time, not in excess of thirty consecutive calendar days, during which such person shall abate the nuisance by causing the bus bench to which the notice relates to be physically removed from the right-of-way. 
(Ord. 2442 § 2 (part), 1988)  
12.46.040 - Abatement by city. 
The city manager shall take the steps necessary to remove any bus bench which continues to be located in a right-of-way following the period of time given for its removal, as is set forth in the notice given pursuant to Section 12.46.030. Where a bus bench is removed by city forces, or a contractor designated by the city to perform such work, the bus bench, upon its removal, shall be disposed of in such manner as the city manager may deem appropriate, giving preference to the sale of the same for its salvage value, if any. All costs of bench removal shall be a proper charge against the person who owns the bench and/or the person who is entitled to possession thereof, and all such persons shall pay to the city all costs, including, but not limited to, administrative and legal costs incurred in such removal process, less any sums recovered by way of salvage value. 
(Ord. 2442 § 2 (part), 1988)  
12.46.050 - Violation of chapter. 
Any person, other than the city, who violates any provision of this chapter by placing, maintaining, or continuing to place or maintain a bus bench in any right-of-way located within the city, after the operative date of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished in the manner prescribed by law therefor. Each calendar day during which a bus bench is placed or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. 2442 § 2 (part), 1988)  
12.46.060 - Operative date of chapter. 
This chapter shall become operative as of the effective date of Ordinance No. 2442. 
(Ord. 2442 § 2 (part), 1988)  
Chapter 12.48 - ANIMALS PROHIBITED FROM WHITTIER VILLAGE FESTIVAL 
 
12.48.010 - Prohibition of animals from area of Whittier Village Festival. 
No person, not an official participant, shall direct, lead or bring any animal into or permit or allow any animal to enter or maintain any animal or allow any dog to be maintained in an area designated in a special event permit issued by the city council for the conducting of the Whittier Village Festival during the time specified in that permit during which that festival is to be conducted. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any person insofar as that person is utilizing the services of a Seeing-Eye Dog, a Canine Companion or a Canine Companion puppy-in-training. 
(Ord. 2572 § 1, 1992: Ord. 2470 § 2 (part), 1989)  
12.48.020 - Signing directed. 
The staff of the city shall cause signs to be posted giving public notice of the provisions of Section 12.48.010 of this code. 
(Ord. 2470 § 2 (part), 1989)  
Chapter 12.52 - ART IN PUBLIC PLACES PROGRAM 
 
12.52.010 - Program created. 
This chapter may be known and cited as the city of Whittier "Art in Public Places Program." The intent of the art in public places program is to provide a collection of nationally recognized artwork throughout the city to be of public benefit. The program is designed to present the community with a variety of art work styles and themes, all of the highest possible quality. 
(Ord. 2741 § 1 (part), 1998: Ord. 2597 § 1 (part), 1993)  
12.52.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
A.  "Art work" means original pieces of art, including limited editions, not limited by medium used. It may include paintings, sculpture, murals, mosaic and fountains. 
These categories may be realized through such media as steel, bronze, stained glass, concrete, wood, ceramic tile and stone, as well as other suitable materials. 
B.  "Project" means the type of development being proposed, whether commercial, industrial or residential. 
C.  "Project costs" means the total value of the improvements for a project, as indicated on the building permit application submitted to the city's building and safety division of the community development department, in order to obtain a building permit or permits for the project. 
D.  "Public place" means any area on public or private property, either interior or exterior, which must be accessible and visible to the general public. 
E.  "Inquire and install" means the developer will be responsible to select an artist and obtain proper approval regarding the art work and the placement of the art work as per this chapter. 
F.  "Project applicant" means the property owner, developer or other responsible party proposing the project. 
G.  "Project site" means the location of the improvements being developed. 
(Ord. 2850 §§ 1 and 2, 2004; Ord. 2741 § 1 (part), 1998: Ord. 2597 § 1 (part), 1993)  
12.52.030 - Requirement to provide art work or pay in-lieu contribution. 
When a project is subject to the requirements of this chapter, the project applicant shall comply with provisions of either subsection (A) or (B) or a combination of both. 
A.  The project applicant shall acquire and install an art work in a public place on or in the vicinity of the project site as approved by the city council pursuant to this chapter. The cost or value of such work as approved by the city council shall equal or exceed a minimum of twenty thousand dollars or one-half of one percent of the total project cost. Project applicants shall indicate on their art in public places application that they wish to acquire and install art work per the ordinance codified in this chapter. The parks, recreation and community services department can assist the project applicant in locating information on the artists should he or she desire assistance. 
B.  In-lieu of acquiring and installing an art work, project applicants shall contribute funds to the art in public places fund established pursuant to Section 12.52.080 equal to one half of one percent of the total project cost. The in-lieu fee shall be paid when all other fees are assessed such as the building permit or prior to occupancy, as may be applicable, unless otherwise approved by the city council. Project applicants shall indicate on their art in public places application that they wish to make an in-lieu contribution. 
(Ord. 2850 § 4, 2004; Ord. 2741 § 1 (part), 1998: Ord. 2597 § 1 (part), 1993) 
(Ord. No. 2958, § 4, 10-12-10)  
12.52.040 - Projects subject to art in public places requirement. 
The requirements of this chapter shall apply to the following activities: 
A.  New commercial or manufacturing developments having a total value of two hundred fifty thousand dollars or more, and modifications and additions to existing commercial or manufacturing developments where such improvements have a total value of two hundred fifty thousand dollars or more, as indicated on the building permit application submitted to the city. The term "new commercial or manufacturing developments" are defined to include all those listed within Title 18 of the Whittier Municipal Code. 
B.  Residential development of more than two lots or units, whether by detached single family residential structures, condominiums, apartments, townhouses or other dwelling units, or modifications or additions to such developments, such expenditures in the aggregate are two hundred fifty thousand dollars or more as indicated by the valuation on the building permit application submitted to the city. The term residential development will be defined as all those listed within Title 18 of the Whittier Municipal Code. 
Exceptions. The requirements of this chapter shall not apply to the following activities: 
1.  All public work and governmental agency projects; 
2.  Reconstruction of structures that have been damaged by fire, flood, wind, earthquake or other calamity; 
3.  Projects owned and developed exclusively by nonprofit organizations qualified under Section 501(c)(3) of the United States Internal Revenue Code. Organizations must provide the following to be granted an exemption: 
a.  A certificate of filing, certificate of status or certificate or articles of incorporation or exemption determination letter of the California Secretary of State (Revenue and Taxation code Section 26451.3 provides that the Exemption Application FTB3500, together with any supporting documents shall be open to public inspection if granted); 
b.  A determination letter of Internal Revenue Service (IRS) recognition of their Section of 501(c)(3) exempt status. (An organization that subjects an application to the IRS and has it approved, must make a copy of the application and supporting documents, as well as any letter issued by the IRS, available for public inspection). 
C.  Requesting an Exemption. When a project applicant seeks an exemption from the requirements of this chapter, he or she must do the following: 
1.  Once a project applicant is made aware of the requirements of this chapter and the qualifying project developments that trigger such requirements, he or she must within thirty days send a letter to the director of parks, recreation and community services stating why the project applicant feels that the project should not be subject to the requirements established in Section 12.52.040 and that an exemption is requested. 
2.  The director of parks, recreation and community services will provide the request to the art in public places advisory committee for review. Once the committee has reviewed the request, it shall forward its recommendation to the cultural arts commission. 
3.  The cultural arts commission will review the recommendation of the art in public places advisory committee. If the commission votes approve an exemption request, the matter will be forwarded to city council for final approval. If the commission votes to deny an exemption request, the decision of the commission is final unless the city council appeals the decision. Then the council will review and make a final decision. 
(Ord. 2850 §§ 5 and 6, 2004; Ord. 2847 § 1, 2004; Ord. 2741 § 1 (part), 1998: Ord. 2597 § 1 (part), 1993) 
(Ord. No. 2958, § 2, 10-12-10)  
12.52.050 - Processing. 
The requirements and procedures for the processing of an art in public places application shall be as follows: 
A.  When a project applicant submits a project application to the building and safety division of the community development department, he or she shall be provided a copy of the ordinance codified in this chapter and an art in public places application form. 
B.  Thereafter, the project applicant shall in a timely manner, submit to the building and safety division of the community development department the completed art in public places application form. Guidelines for the submission of all applications required under this chapter shall be established by the city council. 
C.  Upon receipt of the art in public places application, the building and safety division of the community development department shall file the application with the parks, recreation and community services department, who shall present the application to the art in public places advisory committee. Proof of the filing shall be documented by the director of the community development department, or his or her designee, at the time of filing. If the project applicant has chosen to acquire and install art work, the committee will review the application, which shall include a proposal that details the art work. 
D.  The art in public places advisory committee shall, within thirty days from its decision, submit to the cultural arts commission a written recommendation on the proposed art work. If the committee finds that the application as submitted: 
1.  Is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter; 
2.  Is consistent with the general peace, health, safety and general welfare; and 
3.  Meets requirements of artistic merit; it shall recommend to the cultural arts commission approval of the application. 
E.  The cultural arts commission shall review the recommendation of the art in public places advisory committee. If it approves, the commission shall pass on the recommendation to the city council for its consideration. 
F.  Any person interested in and affected by the proposed art work may file written protests or objections with the city clerk at any time prior to the hour and date set for final action by the council. Each such protest or objection must contain a description of the property and art work as to which the signer is appealing. Upon the day and hour fixed for the final review, the city council shall hear and pass upon the application together with any objections or protests that may be raised by any person. 
G.  The city council shall, based upon the guidelines set forth in Section 12.52.070, approve, approve in part, conditionally approve or deny the application. 
H.  When the city council has reviewed and passed upon the application, recommendations and objections made thereto, the final decision shall be confirmed by resolution. Said resolution shall include a finding of whether the value of the art work equals or exceeds the amount of the in-lieu contribution which the applicant seeks to satisfy. The decision of the city council on the application shall be final and conclusive. 
I.  When the project applicant has elected to acquire and install an art work, the building permit shall not be issued until the city council has approved the art in public places application, and occupancy shall not be allowed until the approved work of art has been installed unless an in-lieu contribution is made as a deposit to secure the proper installation of the art work within a reasonable period of time as specified by the city manager. 
J.  When the project applicant has elected to make an in-lieu contribution to the art in public places account, occupancy shall not be allowed until such contribution has been paid. 
(Ord. 2850 § 7, 2004: Ord. 2741 § 1 (part), 1998: Ord. 2597 § 1 (part), 1993) 
(Ord. No. 2958, § 4, 10-12-10)  
12.52.060 - Art in public places advisory committee. 
The city council will appoint an art in public places advisory committee to insure that all city council established criteria has been met. They will review the applications and examine the proposal for public safety, weather resistance, balance with the program, verification of value, public response, proper lighting, public accessibility, installation methods, proportion, composition, the artist's previous experience, the artist's art training and exhibition record. 
Committee support shall be provided by: 
A.  The director of parks, recreation and community services or designee. 
(Ord. 2741 § 1 (part), 1998: Ord. 2597 § 1 (part), 1993) 
(Ord. No. 2958, § 2, 10-12-10)  
12.52.070 - Guidelines for approval of art work. 
Guidelines for the approval and maintenance of art works shall include, but are not limited to the following criteria: 
A.  When a project applicant submits a project application to the building and safety division of the community development department, he or she shall be provided a copy of the ordinance codified in this chapter and an art in public places application form. 
B.  The composition of the proposed art work shall be of a permanent type of material in order to be a durable against vandalism, theft, weather and in order to require a low level of maintenance. 
C.  The art work shall be related in terms of scale, material, form and content to immediate and adjacent buildings and landscaping so that it complements the site and surrounding environment. 
D.  The art work shall be designed and constructed by persons experienced in the production of such art work and recognized by art critics and by his or her peers as on who produces works of art. 
E.  The artist's qualifications will be reviewed by the art in public places advisory committee. There must be examples of past work, which can be documented. Solo and group exhibit records, records of the artist work in private and public collections, art training, art education and printed critiques of past work would be helpful in providing documentation. Slides of similar work by the artist will be reviewed by the art in public places advisory committee. Verification of the purchase price of past works will serve to help validate the fair market price of the proposed commissioned art work. The proposed art work should be submitted in the form of a model whenever possible. Multiple view drawings and photographs are also acceptable. 
F.  The art work shall be permanently affixed to the property unless it is designated a temporary exhibit in the scope of the project when commissioned. 
G.  Installation of the art work shall be planned and implemented to enhance the piece and allow for unobstructed viewing from as many angles as possible. Once the art work has been installed the property owner shall not obstruct viewing of any or all of the piece. Owner may temporarily obstruct the piece in order to maintain the piece. 
H.  The art work shall be maintained by the property owner in a safe, neat and orderly manner acceptable to the city. The property owner shall obtain from the artist maintenance instructions to follow including methods to maintain the piece and the frequency of maintenance. 
I.  In the event that any art work placed on the development as a result of the ordinance codified in this chapter is removed or destroyed, developer shall, within one hundred eighty days of the removal or destruction, replace it with art work which meets the requirements of this chapter and is equal to the removed/destroyed art work's fair market value immediately prior to its removal or destruction. 
J.  The art work shall become the property of the city of Whittier prior to occupancy being approved by the building and safety division of the community development department. 
K.  Prior to the issuance of building permits, the property owner, at his expense, shall (1) execute and record with the Los Angeles County recorder covenants, conditions and restrictions in form and content approved by the city manager and the city attorney providing, among other things, that the property owner and its successors, heirs and assigns shall maintain the art work as required by subsection (G) above, (2) indemnify, defend and hold the city, its officers, employees and agents and related parties harmless from any and all claims or liabilities arising out of the art work, and (3) maintain in the city clerk's office a certificate of public liability insurance, naming the city as an additional insured in an amount not less than one million dollars. 
L.  Expressions of obvious bad taste or profanity, which would be likely be offensive to the general public, are unacceptable. 
M.  Each piece of art work shall be identified by a plaque at the site of an appropriate size and scale to the piece. The plaque shall be made of cast metal and then placed in a location near the art piece listing the title of the piece, the artist, and the date as well as the city and the art in public places program. 
The following items are not to be considered as art work: 
A.  Art objects that are mass-produced from a standard design; 
B.  Reproductions of original art works, with respect to copyrights and any other clearly defined residual rights, when not an integral part of an art work or concept as presented in early design and concept phases; 
C.  Decorative, ornamental or functional elements that are designed by the building architect as opposed to an artist commissioned for the purpose of creating the art work; 
D.  Ornamental planting except where these elements are designed or approved by the artist and are an integral part of the art work by the artist. 
(Ord. 2850 § 8, 2004: Ord. 2741 § 1 (part), 1998: Ord. 2597 § 1 (part), 1993)  
12.52.080 - Art in public places account. 
A.  Accounting. Any monies collected by the city in accordance with the in-lieu contribution provisions of this chapter shall be deposited in a separate account denominated as the "art in public places account." The city manager or his/her designee shall establish accounting records sufficient to identify and control these funds. The account containing these funds shall earn interest and the earned interest shall be used for and be subject to the same restrictions established in subsection (B) of this section. 
B.  Use of Account. The art in public places account shall be used to provide sites for, and works of art in, public places in order to further the intent and purpose of this chapter as set forth in Section 12.52.010. 
C.  Permissible Expenditures. Expenditures of funds shall be strictly limited to the following enumerated uses: 
1.  The cost of art work and its installation; 
2.  Water works, landscaping, lighting and other objects which are an integral part of the art work; 
3.  Plaques for each piece, as required by 12.52.070 (A)(13) of this chapter; 
4.  Educational, promotional and any other such materials relating to art in public places projects; 
5.  Frames, mats, pedestals and other objects necessary for the proper presentation of the art work; 
6.  Walls, pools, planting, architectural or landscape architectural elements necessary for the proper aesthetic and structural placement of the art work; 
7.  Maintenance and repair of art works funded through the art in public places account; 
8.  Events and ceremonies regarding the art work to promote community awareness, outreach and education. 
D.  Administration. 
1.  The art in public places account shall be administered by the city council. 
2.  The art in public places advisory committee shall make recommendations to the city council concerning the purchase or commissioning of art works, including: 
a.  Places which should be considered for art works; and 
b.  The medium of the proposed art work; and 
c.  The artist whose work should be considered for placement in the recommended location. 
3.  Selection of artists and art works shall be based on the guidelines set forth in Section 12.52.070. 
4.  The city will contract with the artist and with consultants as necessary for the purchase or commissioning as well as the execution and installation of the art work. 
5.  On-site activity in connection with the art work installation shall be coordinated by the city manager and his/her designee. 
(Ord. 2850 § 9, 2004; Ord. 2741 § 1 (part), 1998: Ord. 2597 § 1 (part), 1993)  
Chapter 12.54 - SIDEWALK VENDORS[4] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3101 , § 2, adopted May 14, 2019, repealed Ch. 12.54, §§ 12.54.010—12.54.040, and enacted a new chapter as set out herein. The former Ch. 12.54 pertained to street vendors and derived from Ord. 2626, § 1(part), adopted in 1994; and Ord. 2869, § 41, adopted in 2006. 
 
12.54.010 - Definitions. 
A.  "Certified farmers' market" means a location operated in accordance with Chapter 10.5 of Division 17 of the Food and Agricultural Code and any regulations adopted pursuant to that chapter. 
B.  "Chief of police" means the city of Whittier chief of police or designee. 
C.  "Director" means the director of administrative services of the city of Whittier or designee. 
D.  "Roaming sidewalk vendor" means a sidewalk vendor who moves from place to place and stops only to complete a transaction. 
E.  "Sidewalk vendor" means a person who sells food or merchandise from a pushcart, stand, display, pedal-driven cart, wagon, showcase, rack, or other nonmotorized conveyance, or from one's person, upon a public sidewalk or other pedestrian path. 
F.  "Stationary sidewalk vendor" means a sidewalk vendor who vends from a fixed location. 
G.  "Swap meet" means a location operated in accordance with Article 6 of Chapter 9 of Division 8 of the Business and Professions Code, and any regulations adopted pursuant to that article. 
(Ord. No. 3101 , § 2, 5-14-2019)  
12.54.020 - Sidewalk vendor permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any sidewalk vending activity within the city without having first obtained a sidewalk vendor permit from the director. Sidewalk vendor permits shall expire one year after their issuance. 
(Ord. No. 3101 , § 2, 5-14-2019)  
12.54.030 - Application Requirements, application fee, and insurance. 
A.  The director shall develop a sidewalk vendor permit application form and procedures for reviewing and issuing the permits consistent with the requirements of this Chapter 12.54. Such applications shall be accompanied by a fee to defray, in part, the cost of the investigation and review required by this section in an amount set by resolution of the city council. Fees required under this section shall be in addition to any other license, permit or fee required under this section or any other provision of the Whittier Municipal Code. 
B.  Insurance. Sidewalk vendors shall not be permitted to operate within the city without first having obtain general liability insurance in the amount of one million dollars with coverage related to all activities associated with sidewalk vending activities, with the city named as an additional insured. Sidewalk vendors shall submit a certificate of insurance evidencing they have obtained this required insurance together with the completed application for sidewalk vendor permit. 
(Ord. No. 3101 , § 2, 5-14-2019)  
12.54.040 - Application review, issuance, suspension, revocation. 
A.  Neither the filing of an application for a sidewalk vendor permit, nor the payment of the application fee shall authorize sidewalk vending activities. Prior to authorizing the sidewalk vendor permit, each new individual sidewalk vendor and his or her merchandise shall be approved by the city. Following such approval, and prior to commencement of operation of any new sidewalk vendor, the owner will be responsible for providing the following completed documentation to the city and during the term of such owner's participation shall continue to keep current the following: 
1.  Name of the business. 
2.  Name of the applicant. 
3.  If a corporation, articles of incorporation. 
4.  Present residence of the applicant and phone number. 
5.  Business address of the applicant and phone number. 
6.  A description of the merchandise which the pushcart will vend. 
7.  Number of pushcarts owned, operated, leased, controlled or contracted by the applicant to be used in the city. 
8.  A description of the logo, color scheme, insignia and any other distinguishing characteristics of the applicant's sidewalk vendor conveyances and description of the sidewalk vendor's uniform. 
9.  The full and true names and residences of all persons employed, contracted, leased or otherwise given control of the applicant's pushcart(s). 
10.  California driver's license, state issued photographic identification, or similar identification approved by the chief of police of the above described persons. 
11.  Date of birth of the above described persons. 
12.  Any other license or permit as warranted. 
13.  The owner shall be responsible for ensuring that all food service permits are obtained from the Los Angeles County Department of Health Services. Copies of current County of Los Angeles Health Department permits, including individual permits for each cart, must be provided to the chief of police prior to receiving a sidewalk vendor permit for the affected pushcart business. The owner also shall be responsible for ensuring that the commissary(s) have the appropriate and current health/food permits with a copy provided to the director. 
14.  At the time of application, two photographs of the sidewalk vendor and of each of the applicant's employees, at least two inches by two inches in size, taken within the six-month period immediately preceding the date of the application shall be submitted. 
15.  The applicant's fingerprints and the fingerprints of all employees of the applicant. The applicant and all employees shall complete the Live Scan fingerprint process and are responsible for paying any fees associated with this check. 
B.  Investigation of Application. The chief of police, director, or designee shall investigate the application and background of the applicant for a sidewalk vendor license within a reasonable period of time. The chief or designee report the results of the background investigation to the director who shall, within thirty days after the date of the filing of the application, approve or deny the application for the license or renewal thereof. If an application is deemed pending as set forth in subdivision (D) below, the director shall, within thirty days after the adjudication of the pending criminal matter, approve or deny the application for the sidewalk vendor license or renewal thereof. 
C.  Issuance of Permit. After receiving the application, the director shall issue the sidewalk vendor permit only if it is found that all of the following requirements have been met: 
1.  The required fees have been paid. 
2.  The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this Section regulating sidewalk vendors. 
3.  The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation of fact in the application. 
4.  The applicant has fully cooperated in the investigation of the application. 
5.  Neither the applicant nor any operator of a pushcart or other vending conveyance has been convicted or pleaded nolo contendere or guilty within five years prior to his or her application for a sidewalk vendor license to a misdemeanor or felony crime of moral turpitude or drug-related misdemeanor or felony crime, including but not limited to: the sale of a controlled substance as specified in California Health and Safety Code Sections 11054 through 11058, and crimes involving any of the following actions, which are considered crimes of moral turpitude for the purposes of this subsection: assault with intent to commit murder, attempted lewd acts on a minor, arson, burglary, child abuse, criminal threats, domestic violence when committed against a spouse, failure to register as a sex offender, felon in possession of a firearm, felony hit and run, grand theft auto, murder, perjury, possession for sale of controlled substances, rape, receiving stolen property, robbery, trespass with the intent to injure any property or property rights, or interference with the conduct of business, voluntary manslaughter, and welfare fraud. 
6.  The chief or director is specifically authorized to obtain state summary criminal history record information as provided for in California Penal Code Section 11105. Any complaint for the charges listed in division (5) of this subsection pending before a court of law shall cause the application to be considered pending until adjudication of the complaint. 
D.  Sidewalk Vendor Permit Term and Renewal. The term for a sidewalk vendor permit, unless sooner suspended or revoked, shall be for a period of one year. Upon the expiration of such term, the person may renew the sidewalk vendor permit by submitting a new application together with such renewal fee and replacement fees as may be established by resolution of the city council. No sidewalk vendor permit shall be sold, leased, transferred conveyed or granted to any other person. 
E.  Denial, Suspension or Revocation of Sidewalk Vendor Permit. 
1.  If the director does not find that all of the requirements set forth in this subsection have been met, the application for sidewalk vendor permit shell be denied. In the event the application for the sidewalk vendor permit is denied by the director, written notice of such denial shall be given to the applicant specifying the ground or grounds of such denial. Notice of denial of the application for the sidewalk vendor permit shall be deemed to have been served if it, in fact is personally served on the applicant or when deposited in the United States mail with postage prepaid and addressed to the applicant at his or her residence address as set forth in the application for the sidewalk vendor permit. 
2.  Any sidewalk vendor permit issued under this section may be suspended or revoked by the director for any of the following reasons: 
a.  Falsehood of any information supplied by the applicant upon which issuance of the sidewalk vendor permit was based. 
b.  Failure of the applicant to promptly notify the Director within thirty days of any change occurring subsequent to the issuance of the permit in the information supplied by the applicant upon which the issuance of the permit was based. 
c.  Revocation, suspension or non-renewal of the certificate of eligibility issued to the applicant by the Los Angeles County Department of Health Services. 
d.  Conviction of, or plea of guilty or nolo contendere by the applicant of any offense which would have constituted ground for denial of a permit under Section 12.54.040(C)(5) of the herein chapter. 
3.  A holder of a sidewalk vendor permit shall be notified in writing by the director when a permit has been denied, suspended or revoked. Such notice shall contain the grounds upon which the denial, suspension or revocation is based and the right to seek an appeal to the city manager. If no appeal is filed, denial, suspension or revocation of the permit shall become effective ten days after notice is served. If an appeal is filed, the denial, suspension or revocation shall become effective upon final determination of the appeal by the city manager. Notification shall be deemed to have been served when it is personally served upon the permit holder or when deposited in the United States mail with postage prepaid and addressed to the permit holder at the last known address of the permit holder. 
4.  Any person whose permit is revoked shall not be eligible to apply for a new certificate for a period of one year following such revocation. 
(Ord. No. 3101 , § 2, 5-14-2019)  
12.54.050 - Fee waivers. 
Veterans, as defined by Sections 16001 and 16001.5 of the California Business and Professions Code, shall not be required to pay any permit or license fee to hawk, peddle or sell goods, wares or merchandise owned by them. 
(Ord. No. 3101 , § 2, 5-14-2019)  
12.54.060 - Operating requirements. 
A.  Sidewalk vendors are prohibited from operating within a median, on the street, or within twenty-five feet of an intersection of any two or more streets. 
B.  Sidewalk vendors may operate in residential areas from 9:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. In residential areas, roaming sidewalk vendors cannot stay in one location for more than ten minutes. Stationary sidewalk vendors are prohibited in residential areas. 
C.  Sidewalk vendors may operate in commercial areas between 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., except they may operate during 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. in commercial areas where businesses are open during those hours, provided the sidewalk vendor is located on the same street as a business that is open at that time. 
D.  No person shall solicit for commercial purposes at any dwelling, including but not limited to a house, apartment, or condominium, where there is a sign indicating "No Solicitations," "Do Not Disturb," or otherwise indicating that the occupants do not wish to be solicited or in any other way have their privacy disturbed. 
E.  No sidewalk vendor shall touch, come into physical contact with, or affix any object to any member of the public, without first receiving express permission therefor from such member of the public. 
F.  No sidewalk vendor shall persistently solicit any member of the public after such member of the public expresses his or her desire not to be solicited. 
G.  No sidewalk vendor shall intentionally obstruct the free movement of any member of the public on any street, sidewalk or other place open to the public generally. 
H.  Sidewalk vendors shall dispose of all trash into trash receptacles. Used cooking oil, grease, or other cooking fluids must be disposed of in a sink with a grease trap only. Wastewater shall be disposed of in a sewer system and not in a storm drain, catch basin or gutter. All National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) or Health Code requirements are in affect and applicable. 
I.  Sidewalk vendors shall not setup or operate in areas that block access for persons with disabilities. Street vendors must provide a minimum of forty-eight inches of access to allow for access and may not set up any closer than fifty-feet to a bus stop or bus shelter, marked or unmarked crosswalk, or within a sidewalk less than eight-feet in width, to allow for Americans with Disabilities Act path of access. 
J.  No sidewalk vendor shall solicit from a captive audience. "Captive audience" shall be defined as purposefully stationary persons, such as persons in line or seated in public areas. 
K.  No sidewalk vendor shall threaten any injury or damage to any member of the public who declines to be solicited. 
L.  Sidewalk vendors are prohibited from selling any product containing alcohol, cannabis, nicotine, any product used for the ingestion, smoking, vaping, or any other method of consumption of cannabis or nicotine, or any adult-oriented materials. 
M.  In addition to a sidewalk vendor permit, each sidewalk food vendor shall be required to obtain a license to operate from the Los Angeles County Department of Public Health. The sidewalk vendor shall have a copy of the general business license and license from the Los Angeles County Department of Public Health available at all times they are operating. 
N.  Sidewalk vendors may not operate within two hundred feet of any city-approved farmers' market or swap-meet. 
O.  Sidewalk vendors may not operate within one thousand feet of any public or private school building or the grounds thereof during any day school is in session. 
P.  During an urgent or emergency public safety event such as a traffic accident, medical emergencies, gas leaks, natural disasters, fires, etc., the City may temporarily require sidewalk vendors to relocate to another location if doing so is necessary to protect the public's health, safety, or welfare. 
Q.  Sidewalk vendors may operate in a public park except at times when the City has a third-party exclusive agreement for exclusive concessions inside the park. Sidewalk vendors may only operate during posted park hours. The city may adopt further regulations by resolution to limit the number, location, or concentration of sidewalk vendors in city parks due to health, safety and welfare concerns, when necessary to ensure the public's use and enjoyment of the park or to prevent an undue concentration of commercial activity that unreasonably interferes with the character of the park. 
R.  Use of amplified sound-making devices to advertise, draw attention to or announce the presence of any such vendor's location, shall comply with the limitations and provisions set forth in Chapter 8.32 of this code. 
S.  Size of vendor cart shall not exceed 48 inches in width, 72 inches in length, or 72 inches in height from the furthest outside measurements. Additional equipment such as but not limited to tables, shall not be permitted. 
T.  Upon demand of a peace officer or other city enforcement official, a sidewalk vendor shall provide a copy of any licenses required by this chapter for examination. 
(Ord. No. 3101 , § 2, 5-14-2019)  
12.54.070 - Enforcement of the chapter. 
A.  Administrative Citations Exclusive Remedy. Notwithstanding any other provision of the Whittier Municipal Code, the sidewalk vendor regulations contained herein shall be enforced exclusively through the city's administrative citation process, and citation fees shall not exceed the limits set forth in state law (Government Code Section 51039 and as may be amended from time to time). No other civil or criminal remedies may be used to enforce the provisions of this chapter unless allowed by state law. 
B.  City's Determination of Citee's Ability to Pay Administrative Fines. If a person who receives an administrative citation for a violation of the sidewalk vendor regulations contained herein meets the criteria contained in Government Code Section 68632, subdivision (a) or (b), the City shall accept twenty percent of the administrative fine imposed as full satisfaction of the fine. The cited person is responsible for completing required forms and providing documentation to support their eligibility. 
(Ord. No. 3101 , § 2, 5-14-2019)  
Chapter 12.56 - WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY 
 
12.56.010 - Applicability. 
A.  Prior to the installation of any new, modified or expanded wireless telecommunication facility within the public right-of-way, the review and approval of a development review application shall be required to ensure compliance with this chapter. All such development review applications shall be reviewed and approved by the Directors of Community Development and Public Works. 
B.  Prior to the installation of any new or expanded wireless telecommunication facility within the public right-of-way, the applicant shall obtain an encroachment license/permit from the Director of Public Works in addition to the written consent of all entities that hold ground or air space rights that will be encroached upon by the wireless telecommunication facility's antennas, equipment or related infrastructure. 
C.  All wireless telecommunication facilities shall be subject to the submittal and development standards contained herein in addition to Sections 18.47.20 (Definitions), 18.47.80 (Maintenance), 18.47.090 (Master plan of wireless telecommunication facilities), 18.47.110(B) (Lease agreements for wireless telecommunication facilities), 18.47.130 (Removal of wireless telecommunication facilities) and 18.47.140 (Emergencies and disasters) of the Whittier Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2918, § 2, 2-10-09)  
12.56.020 - Submittal requirements. 
All applications for wireless telecommunication facilities within the public right-of-way shall be accompanied with the following: 
A.  All city processing fees. 
B.  A location map illustrating the closest major cross streets to the proposed wireless telecommunication facility location. 
C.  A site plan illustrating the exact location and size of all proposed wireless telecommunication facility antennas, equipment and related infrastructure necessary for its operation within the public right-of-way. 
D.  A fully dimensioned and scaled site plan that illustrates the following information within one hundred fifty feet of the proposed wireless telecommunication facility: 
i)  The distance between all new and existing wireless telecommunication equipment and all other infrastructure within the public right-of-way such as, but not limited to, other existing telecommunication equipment, utility poles, light poles, fire hydrants, bus stops, traffic signal poles and above and below ground utility equipment vault(s). 
ii)  The distance and location of adjoining properties lines abutting the public right-of-way, curbs, driveway approaches, easements, walls, water and sewer lines, and parkway trees from the wireless telecommunication facility. 
iii)  The immediate adjacent land uses and building locations. 
iv)  The full width of the public right-of-way. 
v)  The location and width of all existing sidewalks, parkway landscape planters, and easements. 
E.  Construction details concerning the location and placement of the cellular antennas, equipment vault and related infrastructure. 
F.  All conduit locations between the wireless telecommunication antennas and the infrastructure necessary to operate the antennas. 
G.  A detailed photograph of the exact location of all proposed wireless telecommunication facility antennas, equipment and related infrastructure within the public right-of-way. Additional photographs shall also be provided to document the existing setting of the wireless telecommunication facility within one hundred fifty feet to the north, south, east and west of the proposed facility with a corresponding location map key documenting where each photograph was taken. 
H.  An accurate and detailed photo simulation of the exact location all proposed wireless telecommunication facility antennas, equipment and related infrastructure that is to be placed within the public right-of-way. 
I.  The height of all wireless telecommunication facility antennas, as measured from the top of the antenna(s) to the finished grade directly below. 
J.  A narrative explaining why the applicant chose the project location for a telecommunication facility. 
K.  Spot or contour elevations on the project location to demonstrate any grade changes. 
L.  All proposed grading and drainage modifications. 
M.  All future wireless telecommunication facility antennas and operating equipment that will/may be located at or near the project site, if known. 
N.  A landscape plan illustrating the following information: 
i)  The location of all existing parkway landscape planters within the public right-of-way that will be created, modified or eliminated as part of the proposed wireless telecommunication facility. 
Q.  The size and species of all existing, modified or new parkway landscape material that will be affected due to the new wireless telecommunication facility. 
R.  A propagation map illustrating the existing coverage gap in telecommunication service the new facility will cover. 
S.  A radio-frequency (RF) study prepared by a qualified, independent, RF engineer, deemed acceptable by the Director of Public Works, documenting that the new or modified telecommunications facility will not exceed maximum RF emission limits, as set by the Federal Communication Commission, for maximum human exposure. The RF study shall include all proposed and existing telecommunication antennas at maximum operational capacity. 
T.  Any additional information deemed necessary by the Director of Public Works to evaluate the proposed telecommunication facility and its construction impact to the existing infrastructure and design of the public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2918, § 2, 2-10-09)  
12.56.030 - Development standards. 
A.  General Requirements. 
1.  No wireless telecommunication facility shall interfere with any existing or new emergency communication system at any time. 
2.  Wireless telecommunication facilities shall comply with all local, state and federal regulatory requirements. 
3.  In no case shall any part of a wireless telecommunication facility alter vehicular circulation or parking within the public right-of-way, nor shall it impede vehicular and/or pedestrian access or visibility along any public right-of-way. 
4.  No wireless telecommunication facility shall interfere with the normal operation of any existing land-use(s). 
5.  All wireless telecommunication facilities shall comply with the City's Noise Ordinance at all times. 
6.  All wireless telecommunication facilities shall be singularly and collectively (if multiple cellular providers exist on a single structure or site) be designed to ensure that the maximum Electro Magnetic Radiation exposure limits for human health does not exceed the Federal Communication Commission's maximum human health exposure limits. 
7.  All wireless telecommunication facilities shall be designed and located to eliminate or substantially reduce their visual and aesthetic impacts upon the surrounding public rights-of-way and adjacent properties. To accomplish this goal, all wireless telecommunication facility antennas and supporting equipment shall be developed with the intent of locating and designing such facilities in the following manner and order of preference (from top to bottom): 
a.  Antennas: 
i)  On an existing public utility pole 
ii)  On a new public utility pole 
b.  Telecommunication Facility Equipment: Shall be located within an underground equipment vault only. Above ground equipment vaults are prohibited. In addition, the wireless telecommunication communication provider shall pay for all street and sidewalk excavation and repairs for the installation of all necessary telecommunication equipment and indemnify the City of Whittier against any claims of injury arising from the wireless providers excavation and repairs to the public right-of-way; 
c.  Site Location: 
i)  Within the public right-of-way and does not require the removal of existing parkway trees, reduce the size of any parkway landscape planters and will not require any modifications to the existing location of any infrastructure within the public right-of-way; 
ii)  Within the parkway landscaping and requires only minor alternations to the existing parkway landscaping (including the planter size) and/or infrastructure. 
iii)  All wireless telecommunication facility antennas, equipment and related infrastructure shall be prohibited in all center street medians, whether landscaped or not. 
8.  No wireless telecommunication facility shall have a bright, shiny or reflective finish. Instead, all facilities shall be finished in a color to neutralize it and blend it with, rather than contrast it from, the sky and the on-site improvements immediately surrounding the facility. 
9.  All colors and designs shall be integrated and compatible with the surrounding on-site buildings/structures. 
10.  Any technological stealthing improvements or upgrades that can be made to an existing telecommunication facility shall be made upon the modification or expansion of an existing facility. 
B.  Signage. There shall be no on-site advertising or signage on any portion of a wireless telecommunication facility, except that required by law and/or as may be required by the City of Whittier. 
C.  Lighting. No wireless telecommunication facility structure may be illuminated unless specifically required to do so by any applicable governmental agency that has regulatory authority over telecommunication facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2918, § 2, 2-10-09)  
12.56.040 - Relocation. 
Should any wireless telecommunication antennas, equipment and/or infrastructure be located within the public right-of-way that will be directly impacted by future street improvements or right-of-way dedication, the wireless telecommunication provider shall relocate all necessary antennas, equipment and related infrastructure to an alternative location at their sole expense and comply with all provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2918, § 2, 2-10-09)  
12.56.050 - Design guidelines for small cell sites. 
The director of public works has the authority to implement and alter design guidelines specific to small cell sites in the public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 3100 , § 2, 3-26-19)  
Title 13 - PUBLIC SERVICES 
Chapters:  
DIVISION I. - WATER  
Chapter 13.04 - INSTALLATION AND SERVICES 
Sections: 
 
13.04.010 - Definitions. 
The words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the meaning attached to them unless it is plainly evidenced by the context that a different meaning is intended. 
A.  The term "director of public works" means and includes the person designated by the council to have charge of the supervision and administration of the water division of the city. 
B.  The term "employee" means and includes any person designated by the council or the director of public works to perform work and labor for the water division in and about the business of the water division of the city. 
C.  The term "fee" means and includes specific fees as set by ordinance or resolution of the city council. 
D.  The term "water division" means and includes that certain division, branch or function of the city which cares for, maintains and operates pumps, plants, mains and all necessary facilities for the acquiring, distributing and selling of water within the city. It includes all officers, agents, servants or employees engaged in such work or service whether they are employed by the council or by the director of public works. 
(Amended during 1984 codification; prior code § 7400) 
( Ord. No. 3028, § 4 , 4-14-15; Ord. No. 3043, § 4, 10-27-15)  
13.04.020 - Application for service. 
A.  An application for water to be used on any premises not heretofore provided with water by the city shall be made to the water division and must be accompanied by a service fee as provided in the city council ordinance or resolution. 
B.  Service pipes shall be laid from the water main to a point inside the nearest curbline wherein a curb cock and meter are installed. The installation and maintenance of all pipes on the property side of the meter shall be performed and paid for by the consumer. 
C.  All charges collected by the water division for the installation of services and meters shall constitute service fees and the service pipes and water meters installed shall remain at all times as the property of the city. The service pipes and meters shall be maintained, repaired and renewed by the water division when rendered unserviceable through ordinary wear and tear. Where replacements, repairs or adjustments are made necessary or are rendered necessary by any act, negligence or carelessness of the consumer or any agent, employee or member of his family, any expense caused thereby shall be charged against and collected from the consumer. 
(Prior code § 7400.2(a)) 
( Ord. No. 3028, § 4 , 4-14-15; Ord. No. 3043, § 4 , 10-27-15)  
13.04.030 - Construction authorized. 
The city council is given and shall have full power and authority to order the construction or installation of water storage facilities, water mains, and all apurtenances necessary for the storage, transmission and services of water either inside or outside the corporate limits of the city and in its discretion the council shall have full power and authority to defer or waive any portion of or all of the fees and charges established and required to be paid by this article. Any such deferment or waiver of payment or charge shall be in writing and shall be made upon such terms and conditions as the city council may require. 
(Prior code § 7400.27(part))  
13.04.040 - Single service for more than one dwelling. 
No service connection shall be hereafter made for the purpose of supplying through a common service two mor more independent consumers occupying premises held under the same ownership, unless the houses are on the same lot, or the property is what is known as a court, or apartment house, or block covering more than one lot, and then only provided the owner or owners of the premises agree in writing to pay all charges for water served thereto. 
(Prior code § 7400.12)  
13.04.050 - Pressure regulators. 
A.  Whenever because of high pressure in a water main a water pressure regulator is required by the Uniform Plumbing Code of the city on an individual water service, the water pressure regulator shall be installed at the cost and expense of the owner of the property receiving the water service. Upon installation the water pressure regulator shall be serviced and maintained by the owner of the real property and without any cost or expense to the city. The pressure regulator, its maintenance and operation shall be the responsibility of the property owner. 
B.  The director of public works of the city shall have the power and authority whenever any pressure regulator is required by the Uniform Plumbing Code, to require that the pressure regulator be installed in the water line between the water main and the water meter used for measuring water at the services. When the pressure regulator is to be so installed, the owner of the real property which is being serviced by the water line shall make the necessary arrangements with the water division of the city to have the pressure regulator installed by the water division of the city and the actual installation cost hereof shall be paid for by the owner of the real property. 
C.  No person shall have any right to install a water pressure regulator between the water main and the water meter and it shall only be done by the water division of the city. The cost of the installation shall be estimated upon request by the water division and the estimated cost shall be deposited with the water division until the installation is completed. Any over deposit shall be refunded to the property owner forthwith and if the deposit is not sufficient to pay the cost, the balance of the cost shall be paid by the property owner upon receipt of a statement therefor. 
D.  No person shall procure or order installed any water pressure regulator unless it has been approved by the director of public works of the city, and the director of public works shall keep on file in his office a list of approved water pressure regulators, which list shall be available to all persons desiring to acquire and install water pressure regulators. 
(Amended during 1984 codification; prior code § 7400(d)) 
( Ord. No. 3028, § 4 , 4-14-15)  
13.04.060 - Service for independent consumers. 
In all cases in which water is being serviced to premises occupied by two or more different and independent consumers of water, which premises are held under the same ownership, the owner or owners of the premises shall be and are required to provide independent service to the curbline for each such independent consumer; provided, however, that if the owner of the premises so serviced with water agrees in writing to be responsible for and pay all money due for water used upon the premises, the independent service shall not be required. Should the owner or owners fail or refuse to provide the independent service or assume responsibility for money due for water used upon the premises, the water division shall, after thirty days' notice to the consumer so served, and to the owner of the premises or the person in charge thereof, cut off water from the premises until the independent services required in this section are installed or the agreement assuming responsibility for the money due for water served to the premises is made as provided in this section. 
(Prior code § 7400.11) 
( Ord. No. 3028, § 4, 4-14-15)  
13.04.070 - Common service for separate owners. 
No water shall be served to two or more parcels or property separately owned through a common service unless there is no main contiguous to the premises from which service may be had and in such case only when the consumer first in order of service from the main in writing guarantees the payment of water rates for all parcels of property so served. Whenever at any time hereafter a main is installed contiguous to each of the parcels so served, the owners thereof shall be and are required to provide for an independent service to the curbline for each consumer. The director of public works shall give ten days' notice in writing to all consumers served through the service before enforcing this section, and at the expiration of the ten days the director of public works shall discontinue service to the joint consumers. 
(Amended during 1984 codification; prior code § 7400.13) 
( Ord. No. 3028, § 4 , 4-14-15)  
13.04.080 - Special or temporary services. 
In all cases where an installation of a special or temporary service is required for any purpose not covered by other provisions of this chapter, the service shall be installed and the meter furnished by the water division at the expense of the applicant at cost of the time and material required, including excavation and repaving and administrative cost incurred by the city. If, in the judgment of the director of public works, it is not practicable to install a meter for such special or temporary service, then the water may be furnished from fire hydrants or such other means as he may devise, and charges made shall be fixed by the director commensurate with the amount of water furnished. 
(Amended during 1984 codification; prior code § 7400.21) 
( Ord. No. 3028, § 4 , 4-14-15)  
13.04.090 - Complaints and disputes. 
Should the amount of any bill for service be questioned, the consumer should promptly request an explanation. If the explanation is not satisfactory or is not understood, the consumer must pay the bill under protest in order to avoid discontinuance of service. Protests will be addressed by the director of public works, must be in writing and must state the reasons why the charges are believed to be incorrect. The director of public works will analyze the facts of the case and is authorized to make such adjustments in the charges as may be necessary to effect an equitable settlement. Failure of a consumer to pay under protest after initial explanation is offered will warrant discontinuance of service without further notice if bill is not paid by delinquency date. 
(Amended during 1984 codification; prior code § 7400.10) 
( Ord. No. 3028, § 4, 4-14-15)  
Chapter 13.08 - RATES AND CHARGES 
Sections: 
 
13.08.010 - Rates for service. 
The rates to be charged and collected by the water division for water supplied through meters or otherwise supplied and used within the city shall be fixed and determined by the city council by ordinance or resolution adopted by the city council. The city council shall adopt an ordinance or resolution fixing the rates to be charged and collected for water so used and thereafter the rates shall apply and be charged until they are changed, modified or amended by ordinance or resolution of the city council. 
(Prior code § 7400.1) 
(Ord. No. 2964, § 4, 4-12-11; Ord. No. 3028, § 4 , 4-14-15; Ord. No. 3043, § 5 , 10-27-15)  
13.08.020 - Installation charges. 
The rates to be charged and collected by the water division for installation service shall be fixed and determined by the city council by ordinance or resolution adopted by the city council. The city council shall adopted an ordinance or resolution fixing the rates to be charged and collected for the installation service furnished to any consumer and the rates shall apply and be charged until they are changed, modified or amended by ordinance or resolution of the city council. 
(Prior code § 7400.2(b)) 
(Ord. No. 2964, § 5, 4-12-11; Ord. No. 3028, § 4 , 4-14-15; Ord. No. 3043, § 5 , 10-27-15)  
13.08.030 - Meters required. 
A.  In order to determine amounts to be charged consumers for water, meters shall be installed on all connections to city water mains, except as provided in this article. 
B.  A separate meter shall be placed upon each separate connection, and the charge to be paid shall be computed separately upon each meter. The meters shall be read by the water division at intervals as provided in the city council ordinance or resolution fixing rates or as near thereto as the convenient operation of the water division will permit. When meters are specifically read between regular established meter reading dates for the purpose of connecting or disconnecting any installation, the minimum charges provided in the resolution may be prorated according to the time between meter readings. Each applicant and each consumer of water shall be jointly and severally liable and responsible for and shall pay for all water passing through the meter used by the consumer. 
(Prior code § 7400.2(c)) 
( Ord. No. 3028, § 4, 4-14-15; Ord. No. 3043, § 5 , 10-27-15)  
13.08.040 - Vacant property. 
In case a house becomes vacant the regular minimum rate shall be charged and collected from the owner thereof whether water is used or not, unless the water division is notified in writing of the fact that the property is unoccupied and requested to cut off water therefrom. 
(Prior code § 7400.4) 
( Ord. No. 3028, § 4 , 4-14-15)  
13.08.050 - Turnon fees. 
A.  On failure to comply with the rules and regulations established as condition to the use of water, or to pay rates or any charges imposed, in the time and manner provided in this chapter, the water may be shut off on any and all services where the delinquent consumer is being supplied with water, until payment of the amount due is made, together with a fee set by ordinance or resolution in addition, as a fee for turning the water off and on. 
B.  Whenever a water service is ordered off by the consumer and is to remain off for a period in excess of fifteen days, the consumer shall be charged a turnoff fee in the amount set by ordinance or resolution before the service shall be turned on. 
(Ord. 2546 § 1 (part), 1991) 
( Ord. No. 3028, § 4 , 4-14-15; Ord. No. 3043, § 5 , 10-27-15)  
13.08.060 - Penalty for unauthorized turnon. 
Should the occupant of any premises or any person for him or on his behalf turn on water after it has been shut off at the curb cock by the water division, the meter may be locked or removed, and a penalty as set by ordinance or resolution charged to the consumer. The meter shall not be unlocked or replaced until all delinquent charges, including the penalty, have been paid. 
(Ord. 2546 § 1 (part), 1991) 
( Ord. No. 3028, § 4 , 4-14-15; Ord. No. 3043, § 5 , 10-27-15)  
13.08.070 - Charges during meter failure. 
If a meter fails to register during any period or is known to register inaccurately, the consumer shall be charged with an average daily consumption at the same season as shown by the meter when in use and registering accurately. 
(Prior code § 7400.8)  
13.08.080 - Collection of charges. 
In addition to any other remedy provided in this chapter for the enforcement and collection of any water rate, charge or account, all rates or other charges provided for in this chapter or by any ordinance or resolution of this city prescribing water rates shall be charged against the account holder's property on which furnished and against the owner thereof and shall be deemed delinquent at the same time and in the same manner as the next regular water bill and shall be a lien against the account holder's property where furnished and if, for any cause, any sums owing therefore become delinquent, the water shall be shut off and in no case shall it be turned on to the same property until all such delinquencies have been paid in full, and the property owner shall be responsible to the city in an action prosecuted in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of all such rates or other charges as may be due and unpaid, together with all penalties provided in this chapter and costs. 
(Prior code § 7400.25) 
( Ord. No. 3028, § 4 , 4-14-15; Ord. No. 3043, § 5 , 10-27-15)  
13.08.090 - Delinquency and turnoff. 
Water bills are due and payable when rendered and become delinquent fifteen days after rendered. If bills are not paid when delinquent, water service may be discontinued and a fee required for restoration of service. However, prior to the cutoff and discontinuance of service, notification of the impending action shall be given to the account holder, which notice shall advise the account holder of the procedure for appealing the order discontinuing services. 
(Amended during 1984 codification: prior code § 7400.3) 
( Ord. No. 3028, § 4 , 4-14-15)  
Chapter 13.12 - EQUIPMENT 
Sections: 
 
13.12.010 - Boilers, elevators and power pumps. 
A.  No person shall draw from the city mains or pipes directly into any stationary steam boiler, hydraulic elevator, power pump or similar apparatus. 
B.  Where city water is used to supply a steam boiler, hydraulic elevator or power pump, its owner shall provide a tank of sufficient capacity to afford a supply for at least twelve hours into which the service pipe shall be discharged. 
(Prior code § 7400.15)  
13.12.020 - Cross-connections. 
A.  Purpose. In order to protect the public water supply of the city from the possibility of contamination or pollution by isolating within the customer's internal distribution system, or the consumer's private water system, such contaminants or pollutants which could backflow into the public water system, the following provisions have been established. 
These provisions promote the control or the elimination of existing cross-connections, either actual or potential, between the consumer's in-plant potable water system and nonpotable water supplies/system, plumbing fixtures and industrial water piping systems, and provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross-connection control which will systematically and effectively prevent the contamination or pollution of all potable water systems. 
B.  Protection of Public Water. No water service connection shall be made, installed, maintained or authorized to any premises of a type specified in Table 1, Section 7604 of Title 17 of the California Administrative Code, entitled "Type of Backflow Protection Required," unless the public water supply is protected as required by said state regulations. 
C.  Cross-connection Control Program and Enforcement. The director of public works or his authorized designee, who shall be trained in cross-connection control, shall have the authority and responsibility to implement the cross-connection control program and enforce the provision of this section. The water division is also authorized to conduct surveys or have surveys conducted on water user premises to identify where cross-connection hazards exist or may occur. 
D.  Maintenance and Testing of Backflow Prevention Devices. 
1.  Each consumer with a backflow prevention device shall test and service such device or devices at least once per year. The director of public works or his designee may require more frequent testing if it is determined to be necessary. Such consumer shall maintain such device or devices in a satisfactory operating condition at all times and shall immediately repair or replace such device or devices if found to be defective. 
2.  Tests of backflow prevention devices shall be conducted by a certified backflow prevention device tester approved by the director of public works or his designee and the Los Angeles County Department of Health Services. 
E.  Discontinuance of Water Service. Water service provided by the water division to any premises shall be discontinued after notice that a backflow prevention device has not been installed, tested, maintained as required or if any defect is found in an installed backflow prevention device, or it is found that a backflow prevention device has been altered, removed or bypassed, or if unprotected cross-connections exist on the premises. Water service shall not be restored to such premises until such conditions are corrected. 
F.  Approvals Required for Backflow Prevention Devices. 
1.  Each backflow prevention device shall be approved by the director of public works or his designee prior to installation and shall be installed by and at the expense of the consumer. Backflow devices shall not be approved unless the device has been manufactured in full conformance with the standards established by the American Water Works Association and has received the approval of the Foundation for Cross-Connection Control Research of the University of Southern California. The type of protective device required shall depend upon the degree of hazard which exists. The type of protection shall in no case be less stringent than that listed in Table 1, Section 7604 of Title 17 of the California Administrative Code, entitled "Type of Backflow Protection Required." The director of public works or his designee shall approve the model and size of any required device prior to installation. 
2.  Prior approval must be obtained from the director of public works or his designee before a backflow prevention device is removed, relocated or replaced. 
G.  Records of Backflow Prevention Devices. 
1.  Records of all tests, service, repairs and locations of backflow prevention devices shall be kept by the consumer on forms approved by the director of public works or his designee. 
2.  The water division shall maintain reports of testing and maintenance of backflow prevention devices for a minimum of three years. 
H.  Emergency Connection. Subject to the approval of the State Board of Health, the city may maintain emergency connection with other public utilities serving water. 
(Ord. 2496 § 1, 1990: prior code § 7400.16) 
( Ord. No. 3028, § 6 , 4-14-15)  
13.12.030 - Fire hydrant use. 
A.  Fire hydrants shall be opened only by the water division, fire department or by such persons as may have first obtained a written permit from the water division. No such permit shall be issued to any person who has violated any of the provisions of this chapter or whose indebtedness to the city for water used or damage to hydrants is delinquent. Charges for water used under the permits shall be set by the director of public works based upon intended use. 
B.  Due to the danger of creating water hammer with the consequent blowing up of water mains by the improper operation of fire hydrants, all persons, except members of the fire department, shall observe the following rules when taking water from city fire hydrants: Before operating any hydrant valve for the purpose of obtaining water for cleaning or sprinkling streets, flooding ditches, flushing sewers and culverts or for any other use except fighting fire by members of the fire department, a wheel-type gate valve having a National Standard Fire Thread (female thread on one end and male thread on the other) shall be installed on the hydrant outlet and this valve shall be the only valve operated for turning the water off and on, except for the initial opening and the final shutoff of the hydrant. Every person opening fire hydrants shall replace the caps on the outlets when they are not in use. Failure to do so will be sufficient cause to prohibit further use of the hydrants and the refusal to grant subsequent permits for the use of the fire hydrants. 
C.  Any person using water from a fire hydrant without written permission from the city water division shall pay for the water flowing from the fire hydrant at the rate fixed and determined by the director of public works and in addition shall pay an inspection charge as set by ordinance or resolution. 
(Ord. 2546 § 2, 1991; amended during 1984 codification; prior code § 7400.14) 
( Ord. No. 3028, § 6, 4-14-15; Ord. No. 3043, § 6, 10-27-15)  
13.12.040 - Meter bypasses prohibited. 
All city water used on any premises where a meter is installed must pass through the meter except as provided in the case of private fire service. No bypass or connection around the meter between the service and the main shall be made or maintained. 
(Prior code § 7400.7)  
13.12.050 - Meter testing. 
A.  Any consumer may demand that the meter through which water is being furnished be examined and tested by the water division for the purpose of ascertaining whether or not it is registering correctly the amount of water which is being delivered through it. The demand shall be made in writing to the water division, and shall be accompanied by a fee set by ordinance or resolution. 
B.  Upon receipt of the demand it shall be the duty of the water division to cause the meter to be examined and tested for the purpose of ascertaining whether or not it is registering correctly the water being delivered through it. If, on the examination and test, the meter is found to register over two percent more water than actually passes through it, another meter will be substituted therefor, and the fee paid shall be repaid to the person making the application, and the water bill for the current period adjusted in such a manner as the director of public works may deem fair and just. If the meter is found to register not over two percent fast, the fee shall not be refunded to the customer and the water bills paid as rendered. 
(Ord. 2546 § 3, 1991) 
( Ord. No. 3028, § 6 , 4-14-15; Ord. No. 3043, § 6 , 10-27-15)  
13.12.060 - Shutoff valves and check valves. 
A.  All shutoff valves are installed by the city for the use of the water department. The shutoff valves shall not be used or in any way molested or manipulated by consumers of water, except in case of emergency. For ordinary usage all consumers shall provide their own valves. 
B.  The director of public works may order an approved shutoff, as mentioned in subsection A of this section, installed on any premises not already provided with one and in case the shutoff is not installed within ten days after written notice to do so has been given the owner or occupant of the premises, the service may be shut off pending the installation. 
C.  If the placing of an approved check valve or other device on the property side of the meter of any consumer is in the opinion of the director of public works necessary for the safety and protection of the water system or appliances thereof, the approved check valve shall be immediately installed by and at the expense of the consumer. 
D.  If the consumer does not make the required installation within five days after being notified by the water division to do so, then service may be discontinued. 
(Amended during 1984 codification; prior code § 7400.17) 
( Ord. No. 3028, § 6 , 4-14-15)  
Chapter 13.16 - WATER MAINS 
Sections: 
 
13.16.010 - Applicability. 
The provisions contained in this chapter shall apply only to water systems hereafter installed or replaced. 
(Prior code § 7400.61)  
13.16.020 - Approval of plans required. 
Plans and specifications for the installation of water mains, services and fire hydrants in new subdivisions or areas shall be submitted and filed in duplicate with the director of public works, and his approval in writing shall be obtained before any work of installation or construction is commenced thereon. The plans and specifications shall be approved or disapproved within ten days after submission. 
(Amended during 1984 codification; prior code § 7400.60) 
( Ord. No. 3028, § 7, 4-14-15)  
13.16.030 - Design standards. 
All facilities of any water system installed in the city shall be designed and constructed to withstand, with ample safety factors, the physical stresses to which they will be subjected and shall be free from structural and sanitary hazards. All equipment used therein shall be of adequate size and capacity and shall be correlated with available supply from the source facilities and storage to meet the requirements of Section 13.16.040. 
(Prior code § 7400.50)  
13.16.040 - Total water flow required. 
The required total water flow in water mains for any given service area or unit of a water system shall be the total sum of the minimum fire flow requirements, as set forth in Section 13.16.060, plus the maximum daily water flow requirements as set forth in Section 13.16.050. For the purposes of this section, the maximum daily water flow requirement shall be deemed to be two times the average daily water flow requirement as defined in Section 13.16.050. 
(Prior code § 7400.51)  
13.16.050 - Daily flow required. 
The average daily water flow requirement, in gallons per minute, as required in Section 13.16.040, in any water system or unit thereof shall be obtained by multiplying the estimated daily water consumption in gallons per capita, times the total estimated population to be served in the system or unit and dividing the sum by one thousand four hundred forty (being the minutes in a twenty-four-hour day). In no case shall the average daily design flow consumption per capita for any system or unit thereof be less than one hundred gallons per day at a normal operating pressure of not less than thirty-five pounds per square inch; providing, that a lower normal operating pressure may be approved by the director of public works in hillside areas, but under no condition shall a pressure of less than twenty-five pounds per square inch be permitted. 
(Amended during 1984 codification; prior code § 7400.52) 
( Ord. No. 3028, § 7, 4-14-15)  
13.16.060 - Fire flow. 
The minimum fire-flow water requirement for any system or unit thereof shall be determined by the fire chief of the county or his designated representative in accordance with the following formula. The computation shall be: 
Minimum 
Fire Flow 
Requirements 	Minimum 
Duration 
Fire Flow 
1500 gal. per minute ..... 	2 hours 
2000 gal. per minute ..... 	2 hours 
2500 gal. per minute ..... 	2 hours 
3000 gal. per minute ..... 	3 hours 
3500 gal. per minute ..... 	3 hours 
4000 gal. per minute ..... 	4 hours 
4500 gal. per minute ..... 	4 hours 
5000 gal. per minute ..... 	5 hours 
 
(Amended during 1984 codification: prior code § 7400.53)  
13.16.070 - Circulation. 
All water systems shall be so designed to permit circulating water flows except where impractical because of cul-de-sacs and like conditions or the incomplete development of the grid system. 
(Prior code § 7400.54)  
13.16.080 - Pipe design. 
All water pipe and fittings used in water distribution mains or lines hereafter laid or replaced shall be designed to withstand the maximum internal and external pressures and forces to which they may be subjected under normal operating conditions and with an ample safety factor all in accordance with and as set forth in the written standards of required design for pressures and forces established by the American Waterworks Association, copies of which standards are on file in the office of the director of public works. 
(Amended during 1984 codification; prior code § 7400.55)  
13.16.090 - Main size. 
For all water mains or systems hereafter installed or replaced, the minimum size shall be six inches in diameter, on which or where fire hydrants are located. 
(Prior code § 7400.56)  
13.16.100 - Service pipe size. 
In all future subdivisions of property or lot splits, the diameter of the water service pipe and connection to the water main shall not be less than the service pipe required by the plumbing code for the building served thereby. The service pipe shall be equipped with a valve at the inlet to the meter. In order to provide adequate water service to large parcels or lots, the director of public works may require larger water service pipe and connections in accordance with a table therefor now on file in his office. 
(Amended during 1984 codification; prior code § 7400.57) 
( Ord. No. 3028, § 7 , 4-14-15)  
13.16.110 - Valve location. 
All water main line valves or distribution mains or lines shall be installed on not less than a three-valve pattern at street intersections having a single intersecting main. 
(Prior code § 7400.58)  
13.16.120 - Fire hydrant size, type and location. 
A.  The size and type of fire hydrants shall be designated by the fire chief or director of public works in accordance with the table of sizes on file in the director of public works' office, and the location thereof shall be designated by the fire chief or director of public works. 
B.  The service line from the street water main to the fire hydrant shall have a minimum diameter of six inches and shall be gated. 
(Amended during 1984 codification; prior code § 7400.59) 
( Ord. No. 3028, § 7 , 4-14-15)  
Chapter 13.20 - NEW SUBDIVISIONS AND ANNEXATIONS 
Sections: 
 
13.20.010 - Definitions. 
The term "cost of installation of mains," as used in this chapter, includes the cost of the mains installed and of all materials, substances, labor, supervision and engineering and the reasonable rental value of machinery and equipment used or employed in the installation thereof. Notwithstanding any of the other provisions of this chapter, the term "cost of installation of mains" and the term "cost of installation" include any and all overhead expense and costs of administration on labor or materials including the cost of workmen's compensation insurance, the cost of materials, labor, engineering, equipment rental, and all other costs as set forth in this chapter, and the owner shall pay all costs as provided in this chapter. 
(Amended during 1984 codification; prior code § 7400.20(i))  
13.20.020 - Owner responsibility. 
A.  Except as provided in this chapter, at the time of laying out and subdividing or resubdividing any tract or parcel of land within the city, or upon the annexation of any parcel of land, either developed or undeveloped, the owner or owners of the tracts, lands or annexations shall at their own expense provide for such water mains, submains and water services as may be necessary for the distribution of water to each lot, piece or parcel of land. When installed, the mains, submains and services shall become and be the property of the city, and be dedicated to the public for the purpose of distributing water to the lands. 
B.  Whenever real property is annexed to the city, which real property has already been installed therein existing water facilities that meet the standards and requirements of the water division, the council may authorize purchase of the facilities if the owners thereof are willing to sell, and the council may or may not require the owners of the real property being annexed and being served by the facilities to pay the cost thereof. Should the council be unable or unwilling to purchase the water facilities, it may allow the annexed property to continue to be served through the existing facilities by motion recorded in its official minutes. 
(Prior code § 7400.20(a)) 
( Ord. No. 3028, § 8 , 4-14-15)  
13.20.030 - Construction by water division. 
A.  Construction of all new distributing systems shall be done by the water division only, and shall be paid for by the owner or owners of tracts, lands or annexations, except as provided in Section 13.20.020. 
B.  Owner or owners of proposed subdivisions, or of property being annexed, shall apply to the director of public works for water service. The director shall thereupon make or cause to be made plans and estimates to determine the probable cost of required installation. Mains, submains and services shall be of such size and kind as are in the opinion of the director, adequate to supply the tracts or annexations with water and fire protection, having due regard to requirements of adjacent lands and the growth of the city. 
C.  On completion of the estimates, the director of public works shall notify the owner or owners of the amount of the estimated cost, and that amount in cash or certified check payable to the city must be deposited with the water division prior to approval of the tract map by the city engineer, or prior to approval of the annexation by the council. 
( Ord. No. 3028, § 8, 4-14-15) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3028, § 8 , adopted April 14, 2015, amended § 13.20.030 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 13.20.030, pertained to construction by water department, and derived from prior code § 7400.20(b); and amendments during the 1984 codification.  
13.20.040 - Financial arrangements required for subdivision or annexation. 
No subdivision, resubdivision, plot, tract or tracts within the city and no property or land shall be annexed, accepted and approved by the council unless and until the necessary and required financial arrangements with regard to city water service therein, under the terms of this chapter, have been arranged and approved by the director of public works. 
( Ord. No. 3028, § 8, 4-14-15) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3028, § 8 , adopted April 14, 2015, amended § 13.20.040 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 13.20.040, pertained to financial arrangements required for subdivision or annexation approval, and derived from prior code § 7400.20(c); and amendments during the 1984 codification.  
13.20.050 - System construction and cost adjustment. 
After approval of a tract map, subdivision map, or annexation by the council and final recording of same, the director of public works shall proceed with the installation of the required mains, submains and services, together with such valves, fittings and valve boxes as may be necessary to proper control of the system, keeping all costs data for labor, materials and equipment rental. Any excess remaining in the hands of the water division over and above the actual costs shall be refunded to the owner or owners of the tract, subdivision or annexation. If, however, the actual cost exceeds the amount deposited, then the owner or owners shall pay the excess over and above the amount deposited, payment of the excess being a requirement to the turning on of the water. 
(Amended during 1984 codification; prior code § 7400.20(d)) 
( Ord. No. 3028, § 8 , 4-14-15)  
13.20.060 - Mains in boundary streets. 
The owner or owners of a proposed subdivision shall be required to pay one-half of the cost of the installation of mains in streets along the exterior boundaries of the subdivision, this cost to be based on the cost of installations at the time of approval of the subdivision and the cost to be determined by the director of public works. 
(Amended during 1984 codification; prior code § 7400.20(f)) 
( Ord. No. 3028, § 8 , 4-14-15)  
13.20.070 - Oversize mains. 
In the event that the city elects to install mains of greater size than in the opinion of the director are adequate to supply any new subdivision with water and fire protection, the owner or owners of a proposed subdivision shall not be required to pay more than the cost of mains, which, in the opinion of the director, are adequate to supply the subdivision with water and fire protection, but no other adjustment of the cost of installation shall be made. 
(Amended during 1984 codification; prior code § 7400.20(g))  
13.20.080 - Fire hydrants required. 
No subdivision, resubdivision, plot or tract of land within the city shall be accepted and approved, whether by annexation or otherwise, by the council of the city unless and until the owner or owners of the real property have installed or made the necessary arrangements to install an approved type of fire hydrant. The fire hydrants, burys, shutoff valves and necessary pipe connections and fittings shall be furnished and installed by the city, and the cost thereof, including the installation and overhead costs, shall be paid to the city by the owner or owners of the property. Before commencing any work, the water division shall estimate the cost thereof, and the owner or owners shall deposit that amount with the water division prior to the approval of any tract or subdivision by the council or prior to any annexation of the property to the city. 
(Prior code § 7400.20(e)) 
( Ord. No. 3028, § 8, 4-14-15)  
Chapter 13.24 - RESTRICTIONS 
Sections: 
 
13.24.010 - Restrictions during emergency. 
Upon notice published in a daily paper in the city, the director of public works shall have the right to restrict the use of water for sprinkling, wetting, irrigation or construction purposes to such hours and for such time as may be deemed advisable. In the event of any emergency, the director of public works shall have the right, power and authority to turn off the water from any main or mains or pipes of the water system of the city with or without notice. The director of public works is enforced with power or authority to determine when an emergency exists and such discrimination shall be final or until revised at a meeting of the council. In addition to the power given in this section, the council reserves the right in the event of any emergency to turn off the water from any main or mains or pipes of the city either with or without notice and so long a time as the council may deem advisable. 
(Amended during 1984 codification; prior code § 7400.22) 
( Ord. No. 3028, § 9, 4-14-15)  
13.24.020 - Supplying water to other consumers. 
No consumer may supply water to any person other than the occupant or occupants of the premises of the consumer; provided, that the consumer may supply water to persons for use in the performance of any contract for the improvement of any street or other public place after having given notice to the water division, who shall issue no such permit to or for any person whose indebtedness to the city for water or damages to hydrants is delinquent, or who has on one or more occasions taken water from the distribution system of the city or from the pipes of consumers connected with the distributing system of the city without having given notice and received permission provided for in this chapter. No consumer shall permit leaks or waste of water. 
(Amended during 1984 codification; prior code § 7400.18) 
( Ord. No. 3028, § 9, 4-14-15)  
13.24.030 - Unauthorized use or injury prohibited. 
No person shall open a fire hydrant or hydrants, tap a water main or mains, or in any manner willfully damage or injure the city water system, or any part thereof, or take water therefrom or use the city water system in violation of the rules established by the city for the use of the water system, without the written permission of the director of public works. 
(Amended during 1984 codification; prior code § 7200.26 ) 
( Ord. No. 3028, § 9 , 4-14-15)  
13.24.040 - Tampering with equipment prohibited. 
No person shall tap, open, connect with or otherwise tamper with any main, pipe, valve or any other equipment which forms part of the system of the waterworks of the city. 
(Prior code § 7200.19)  
13.24.050 - Notice of disturbing system during construction required. 
All persons who open, grade, regrade, fill, excavate or work a street shall give ten days' written notice to the director of public works for the removal or displacement of any water mains, pipes, fittings, meters or other waterworks materials that may interfere with the street work, and on failure to so furnish the notice any damage resulting from the failure shall be charged against the person responsible. 
(Amended during 1984 codification; prior code § 7200.23) 
( Ord. No. 3028, § 9 , 4-14-15)  
DIVISION II. - SEWERS  
Chapter 13.28 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 
 
13.28.010 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, unless it is plainly evident from the context that a different meaning is intended, the following terms used in this article are defined as follows: 
A.  "Approved" means approval by the city engineer as the result of investigation and tests conducted by him or his deputies or by reason of accepted principles or tests by national authorities, technical or scientific organizations. 
B.  "Boiler blowoff" means the condensed steam or hot water from a boiler when blown off to remove scale and slime or blowdown from cleaning and repair. 
C.  "Chief engineer" means the chief engineer of the county sanitation districts or his authorized deputy or representative. 
D.  "Chimney" means a vertical section of a house sewer extending from a vertical tee or wye in the main sewer or from a long radius one-fourth bend set vertically in the house sewer at the property line and in either case suitably reinforced with concrete. 
E.  "Effluent" means partial or completely treated sewage flowing out of any sewage treatment device. 
F.  "Existing house sewers," as used in this article, refer to those house sewers existing at the time Ordinance 1129 became effective. 
G.  "House sewer" means and includes a private sewer or a private sewer lateral. 
H.  "Industry pretreatment plant" means any works or device for pretreatment of industrial waste, liquid wastes prior to discharge into the public sewer. 
I.  "Inspector" means the authorized inspector, deputy, agent or representative of the city engineer, the superintendent, or chief engineer. 
J.  "Private lateral sewage discharge" or "PLSD" means a discharge of sewage that is caused by blockage or other defective condition within a private sewer lateral. 
K.  "Private sewer" or "private sewer lateral" means a privately owned sewer which conveys sewage from a building to the public sewer, including all pipes, fittings, and appurtenances, from the outer face of the building served to the connection into the public sewer main, including the connection itself. 
L.  "Public sewer" means the main sewer or trunk sewer, constructed in a street, highway, alley, place or right-of-way dedicated to public use. "Public sewer" does not include house sewer. 
M.  "Sewage treatment plant" means any works or device for treating sewage except any septic tank, settling tank, or cesspool designed to one lot. 
N.  "Short title" means this article, which shall be known as the "Sanitary Sewer Code" and may be cited as such. 
O.  "Specifications" means specifications for the construction of street improvements, including storm drains, sanitary sewers and appurtenances in the city, adopted and approved by the council. 
P.  "Trunk sewer" means a sewer under the jurisdiction of a public entity other than the city. 
(Prior code § 7500) 
(Ord. No. 3059 , § 2, 12-13-16)  
13.28.020 - Administration. 
A.  The city engineer shall administer the provisions of this article unless otherwise specified in this article and for such purpose shall have the powers of a peace officer. 
B.  Whenever a power is granted to, or a duty is imposed upon the city engineer, or any other public officer, the power may be exercised or the duty may be performed by a deputy of the officer or a person authorized by the officer. 
(Prior code §§ 7500.47, 7500.48)  
13.28.030 - Exceptions to requirements. 
A.  The city engineer may grant an exception to any requirement of this chapter if he finds that literal compliance with the provision is impossible or impractical because of peculiar conditions in no way the fault of the person requesting the exception and that the purposes of this article will be accomplished and public safety secured by an alternative construction or procedure. 
B.  Sewage treatment plants and sewage pump plants under the jurisdiction of a county sanitation district are exempted from all the provisions of this article. 
(Prior code §§ 7500.49, 7500.50)  
Chapter 13.32 - CONSTRUCTION AND CONNECTION 
Sections: 
 
13.32.010 - Main sewers. 
A.  All main sewers constructed under contract with the city shall meet the requirements of specifications adopted and approved by the council, unless otherwise specifically excepted. 
B.  All main sewers constructed by any person including a municipally-owned public utility shall meet the requirements of specifications adopted and approved by the council, unless otherwise specifically excepted. 
(Prior code § 7500.1)  
13.32.020 - House sewers—Compliance required. 
A.  All house sewers from the main sewer to the property line or easement line constructed under contract with the city shall meet the requirements of specifications adopted and approved by the council, unless otherwise specifically excepted. 
B.  All house sewers from the main sewer to the property line or easement line constructed by any person including a municipally-owned public utility shall meet the requirements of specifications adopted and approved by the council, unless otherwise specifically excepted. 
C.  All house sewers from the property line to within twenty-four inches of the exterior wall of the building or structure shall meet the requirements of the plumbing regulations of this city. 
(Prior code § 7500.2)  
13.32.030 - House sewers—Existing. 
The following requirements shall apply to exising house sewers: 
A.  When it is found necessary to replace any portion of an existing house sewer between the street curb and lot line, all that portion of the house sewer between these limits shall be replaced to meet the requirements for new house sewers. 
B.  When it is found necessary to replace any portion of an existing house sewer between the curb and public sewer, all that portion of the house sewer between these limits shall be replaced to meet the requirements for new house sewers. 
(Prior code § 7500.3)  
13.32.040 - House sewers—In undedicated street. 
No person shall connect or cause to be connected any sewer which has been, or may hereafter be, constructed in any street, highway, alley, right-of-way orother public place prior to the dedication and acceptance of the street, alley, right-of-way or other public place by the board on behalf of the public, with any public sewer of the city, unless the sewer first mentioned has been laid under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the city engineer and in accordance with all provisions of this article. 
(Prior code § 7500.8)  
13.32.050 - House sewers—Maintenance. 
All house sewers and appurtenances thereto, now existing or hereafter constructed, shall be maintained by the owner of the property served in a safe and sanitary condition, and all devices or safeguards which are required by this article for the operation thereof shall be maintained in good working order. 
(Prior code § 7500.39)  
13.32.060 - House sewers—Closing procedure. 
Whenever the use of a house sewer is discontinued by reason of connection to another house sewer or by reason of moving, wrecking or burning of a building or for any other reason, the house sewer shall be sealed at the property line or easement line or at the public sewer. Whenever the city engineer finds that a house sewer has not been sealed as required in this section, he shall serve notice and post the property to that effect. Unless the sewer has been sealed as required within ten days after the posting of the notice, the city engineer is authorized to disconnect the sewer and discontinue the use thereof until it has been properly sealed and meets the requirements of this article. 
(Prior code § 7500.42)  
13.32.070 - Disconnection—Authorized for violation. 
The city engineer may disconnect from the public sewer any industrial or house sewer connection which is constructed or connected without permit or which is used contrary to the provisions of this article governing industrial liquid waste. The city engineer shall make every reasonable effort to notify the owner or occupant of the premises affected by any proposed disconnection and may grant a reasonable time for elimination of the violation. 
(Prior code § 7500.43)  
13.32.080 - Disconnection—Reimbursement required for reconnection. 
A.  Whenever a house sewer has been disconnected from the public sewer by the city engineer as provided in Section 13.32.070 for failure to comply with the provisions of this article, reconnection shall be made only upon issuance of a permit in writing therefor by the city engineer. Before the permit is issued, the applicant shall reimburse the city for the cost of the disconnection made, and the city engineer may require the installation of a manhole for the purpose of measuring the flow or for making periodic tests of the wastes from the connection. 
B.  Whenever a house sewer connection permittee or any other person by reason of violation of this article causes obstruction, damage or destruction of a public sewer, he shall reimburse the city for the cost of flushing, cleaning, repairing and reconnection of the sewer made necessary by the violation within thirty days after the city engineer renders an invoice for the costs. 
(Prior code §§ 7500.44, 7500.45)  
13.32.090 - Trunk sewer connection. 
All house sewers which are to be connected to a trunk sewer shall include a running trap, the type and location of which shall meet the approval of the city engineer and chief engineer. 
(Prior code § 7500.4)  
13.32.100 - Y or T saddles. 
A.  The Y or T saddle shall be installed by cutting a hole in the mainline sewer pipe and fitting the saddle snugly in place with heavy (twelve-gauge) galvanized asphalt painted iron wire bound around the mainline pipe and the flange of the saddle. The Y saddle shall be placed in the side of the main line pipe with the Y branch upward at approximately forty-five degrees from the horizontal and so as to direct the flow from the house connection sewer downstream into the main sewer. the T saddle shall be placed in the top of the main line sewer pipe. The T saddle shall be used only for the construction of a chimney pipe. 
B.  After the saddle is in place, an imbedment of cement concrete shall be placed under and around the main line sewer pipe and saddle as required for a standard chimney pipe in accordance with the "standard plan" on file in the officer of the city engineer. The inside of the joint between pipe and saddle shall be pointed with one-to-two cement mortar. 
C.  The city engineer shall charge a fee in an amount as set by the city council for permission to connect a house sewer to a public sewer at a point where no special Y or T has been previously installed. 
(Prior code §§ 7500.7, 7500.46)  
13.32.110 - Connection through another lot. 
A.  No connection from any building or other structure shall hereafter be made to any public sewer if the connection or any portion of it is in, under or upon any lot other than the lot on which the building or structure is located, except a house court or an auto trailer court. 
B.  If a lot or parcel of land requiring a sewer connection is so situated that access to the public sewer is not possible except across some other lot or parcel of land, a sewer connection may be placed in a recorded public easement which includes the right to lay and maintain the connection and is appurtenant to the lot or parcel of land to be served by the sewer connection. 
C.  Each building having separate frontage on a public street on which there is a public sewer must be separately connected to the public sewer. 
(Prior code § 7500.9)  
13.32.120 - New subdivisions. 
A.  Owners Must Provide Sanitary Sewers. At the time of laying out and subdividing or resubdividing any tract or parcel of real property within the city, the owner or owners of the tract, parcel or real property shall at their own cost and expense provide for the installation of sanitary sewer mains, house connections and appurtenances in accordance with the plans and specifications therefor adopted by the city and all conditions of this code regulating them. The sanitary sewer mains and appurtenances when installed and completed shall automatically become the property of and shall be owned by the city and they shall be deemed dedicated to the public for the purpose of serving the real property with sanitary sewer facilities. 
B.  Installation. The installation of all sewer mains, house connections and appurtenances shall be made and done either by the city or by a licensed sewer contractor approved by the city engineer according to the specifications of the city and to the satisfaction of the city engineer. The cost of the sewer mains shall be paid for by the owner or owners of the real property to be served by the sanitary sewer mains. 
C.  Charges for Connecting to Existing Sanitary Sewer Main. The owner or owners of any tract or parcel of real property within the city that is subdivided into five or more lots, any property that is unsubdivided but hereafter annexed to the city and subdivided into five or more lots, and any tract or parcel of real property lying outside of the city, the sanitary sewers of which are connected to or the effluent of which flows through a sanitary sewer main owned by the city, shall pay to the city a sewer connection fee as provided in the city council ordinance or resolution. Such payments shall be made at the time the subdivision map of the real property is submitted to the city for approval, or for real property lying outside the city, at the time a request for connection to the sanitary sewer main of the city is filed with the city. The cost shall be for the privilege of connecting to the existing sanitary sewer mains and shall be used by the city for the purpose of providing and maintaining adequate sanitary sewer mains. 
(Amended during 1984 codification; prior code § 7500.41) 
(Ord. No. 3102 , § 3, 5-28-19)  
Chapter 13.34 - LATERAL INSPECTION AND REPAIR 
 
13.34.010 - Purpose. 
The purposes of this chapter are (a) to provide for operation and maintenance of the city's sewer system in a reliable and serviceable condition, (b) to eliminate or minimize sewage overflows by eliminating or minimizing stoppages and reducing sources of infiltration and inflow into the city's sewer system, (c) to comply with applicable legal requirements pertaining to the city's sewer system and (d) to protect the public health and safety by establishing and providing a mechanism for enforcing performance standards for private sewer laterals that connect or are connected to a public sewer main. 
(Ord. No. 3059 , § 3, 12-13-16)  
13.34.020 - Prohibited conditions. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any property owner to maintain a private sewer lateral in a defective condition. As used in this chapter, "defective condition" includes a condition that allows infiltration and inflow of extraneous water or exfiltration of sewage and/or that materially increases the possibility of a blockage or overflow, and that as determined by the city engineer is caused by, but not limited to, one or more of the following conditions: (a) displaced joints; (b) substantial root intrusion; (c) substantial deterioration; (d) damaged or missing clean-out(s); (e) damaged or missing backwater prevention device(s); (f) un-permitted construction or materials; and/or (g) lack of a manufactured connection to the city's sewer system. 
B.  Any property containing a private sewer lateral that is in violation of this chapter is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. Such nuisance conditions include, but are not limited to, any sewer lateral in a defective condition, any sewer lateral which contain leaks or breaks; any sewer lateral to which a backwater prevention device is not properly attached or properly functioning; any uncapped or improperly capped sewer clean-outs; property with sump pumps, downspouts or yard drains which discharge into the city's public sewer; and all other sources of accidental, negligent or intended introduction of storm water run-off into the city's public sewer. 
C.  A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated as such by the city. This chapter may be enforced by civil action and/or administrative citation pursuant to chapter 1.09 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 3059 , § 3, 12-13-16)  
13.34.030 - Mandatory inspection and repair of existing sewer lateral. 
A.  Conditions Requiring Inspection of Existing Private Sewer Lateral. All existing private sewer laterals, including but not limited to those serving residential, multiple residential, commercial and industrial properties, connected to the city's public sewer shall be inspected at the property owner's sole expense when any of the following events occur: 
1.  The occurrence of two or more PLSDs within a two-year period; 
2.  A change of the use of the structure served to a use that will result in a fifty percent higher flow than the current use; 
3.  Repair or replacement of any portion of the private sewer lateral; 
4.  Replacement of or addition of a bathroom; 
5.  Determination by the city engineer and/or building official that the cleaning, testing, repair or replacement is required for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare; 
6.  Issuance of a building permit with a valuation of one hundred thousand dollars or more; and/or a fifty percent or more increase in the number of bedrooms over the prior total number of bedrooms; 
7.  Significant repair or replacement of the main sewer line to which the lateral is attached as determined by the city engineer and/or building official; or 
8.  Prior to the close of escrow upon a sale or other transfer of the house, building, property or other structure served or, if there is no escrow, prior to recording a deed or other document transferring title to the house, building, property or other structure served, if no inspection or permitted repair occurred within twenty years preceding the transfer. A transfer of ownership between family members does not require testing if reassessment of property value is not required by the Los Angeles County Tax Assessor. 
B.  Inspection and Testing Procedures for Existing Sewer Laterals. 
1.  All existing sewer laterals shall be inspected by video inspection method in accordance with city regulations for the implementation of this chapter. Recordings of inspection shall be performed and maintained pursuant to city regulations. 
2.  Prior to testing, the sewer lateral shall be thoroughly cleaned. 
3.  All video inspection recordings shall be promptly submitted to the public works department for review and determination of action. 
4.  The video inspection shall be conducted by a person and/or firm qualified to do such work and meeting the approval of the city engineer. 
5.  A video inspection recording shall be valid for a period of six months from the date of the inspection. If a property owner fails to obtain a written approval from the city engineer/building official within six months after obtaining a video inspection, the city may, in its discretion, require the property owner to obtain another video inspection before issuing a certificate of compliance. 
C.  Mitigation of Failed Test or Inspection. 
1.  When the city engineer and/or building official determines, in his or her discretion, that a sewer lateral is in a defective condition, the property owner shall obtain any necessary permits required under this code and shall cause all repairs necessary to bring the building sewer lateral into compliance with the provisions of Article 13 within ninety days. All costs of repair or replacement of the building sewer lateral shall be borne by the property owner. 
2.  Upon completion of repairs to or replacement of the sewer lateral, a video inspection pursuant to this chapter shall be conducted to verify that the repairs or replacement have been properly completed. 
3.  Any required repairs or replacement of a sewer lateral that result from the testing required as a result of the sale or transfer of property in a non-probate transaction shall be completed prior to the close of escrow of the sale or, if there is no escrow, prior to recording the deed or other document transferring title. For properties sold or transferred in a probate or other testamentary proceeding, pursuant to the terms of a revocable living trust or similar instrument, or pursuant to the termination of a joint tenancy or similar proceeding, any repair or replacement of a sewer lateral shall be completed within one hundred eighty days after the probate sale or other transfer. 
(Ord. No. 3059 , § 3, 12-13-16)  
13.34.040 - Sewer lateral compliance and issuance of approval by city. 
The city engineer or designee shall review the final submitted video inspection for compliance with this chapter. When all conditions are met to the satisfaction of the city engineer or building official, the sewer lateral shall be approved as complying with the provisions of this chapter. The city shall thereupon issue written approval to the property owner, noting that the sewer lateral serving the property is properly equipped, structurally sound and meets the requirements of the city. The written approval shall not imply a warranty or guarantee of any kind. Once written approval is issued, the sewer lateral for which the written approval is issued shall not require testing for a period of twenty years from the date of issuance of the written approval unless one of the events stated in Section 13.34.030(A)(1) through (7) occurs, or the city engineer otherwise has reason to believe the private sewer lateral is in a defective condition. 
(Ord. No. 3059 , § 3, 12-13-16)  
13.34.050 - Right of entry. 
As a condition of receipt of city sewer services and use of the public sewer, the city engineer may enter, inspect, collect wastewater samples, and/or test any buildings, structures, or premises to secure compliance or prevent a violation of this chapter. Unless there is an emergency threatening the public health, safety or welfare, the city engineer shall provide at least ten business days' notice to the property owner of intent to enter upon property. The city engineer may also request that a property owner provide all written records of building sewer lateral inspection, maintenance, repair and replacement at the time of inspection or within ten or more business days after receipt of the request. Any inspection of property hereunder shall be limited to those portions of the property necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 3059 , § 3, 12-13-16)  
13.34.060 - Regulations to implement this chapter. 
The city may establish rules, regulations, guidelines and/or policies for implementing and enforcing this chapter 
(Ord. No. 3059 , § 3, 12-13-16)  
13.34.070 - Fees. 
The council may by resolution establish reasonable fees for the administration of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 3059 , § 3, 12-13-16)  
Chapter 13.36 - OPERATION 
Sections: 
 
13.36.010 - Discharge of objectionable materials prohibited. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided by this section, no person shall place, deposit or discharge, directly or indirectly, into any public sewer of this city or into any house sewer connection therewith in the city, or on or upon any street, alley or public place or on or upon any private property or any other place in the city in such manner that it will be permitted to run into any such public sewer or house sewer, any of the following substances: 
1.  Any oil, petroleum, naphtha, liquid asphaltum or or petroleum product, or any fatty matter, rags, sand, earth or stone dust; 
2.  Dead animals, fish, fruit or vegetable matter in any form except garbage deposited into the sanitary sewer system by means of garbage grinders as provided in this chapter; 
3.  Any refuse or industrial liquid waste other than domestic sewage that will not readily disintegrate in the sewage treatment plant or that will cause or tend to cause obstructions in the sewer system or the sewage treatment plant or interfere or tend to interfere with the efficient and successful operation of the system of the plant, or cause a potential hazard or objectionable odor; 
4.  Any chemicals or waste destructive to masonry; 
5.  Grease except in quantities commonly contained in domestic sewage; 
6.  Any effluent of a temperature exceeding one hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit; 
7.  Any radioactive waste except where special permit has been granted by the city engineer and in type and amounts as specified from time to time by the city engineer. Permission to discharge radioactive waste shall be terminated immediately at the discretion of the city engineer if in his opinion the discharge constitutes or may constitute a public health hazard; 
8.  Any industrial waste including but not limited to mineral salts, molds, or wastes resulting from their manufacture and other products which will tend to sterilize activated sludge, trickling filter slimes, or slime growth on artificial or natural slow sand filters. 
B.  Before any person may discharge alkalis, acids or other corrosive or harmful wastes into the public sewer, he shall reduce the biochemical oxygen demand and control the pH to the extent which the city engineer finds adequate taking all circumstances into consideration. 
C.  Except as provided in subsection D of this section, no person shall make or maintain any connection with any part of the public sewer for the purpose of discharging sewage or waste which contains any of the objectionable substances mentioned in this section. 
D.  Whenever any person desires to make or maintain any connection with any part of the public sewer for the purpose of discharging sewage or waste which contains any of the objectionable substances, the person shall apply to the city engineer for a permit for those purposes. The permit shall be issued only when the city engineer is satisfied that an adequate intercepting appliance has been provided to prevent the objectionable substance or substances from entering the public sewer. The permit shall be issued only upon payment to the city engineer of a fee as set by the city council and shall expire one year after the date of its issuance. 
1.  The permit shall be revocable whenever it appears to the city engineer that the holder thereof has violated any provision of this chapter or when the intercepting appliance does not prevent the objectionable substance or substances from entering the public sewer. The permit shall be revoked by registered mail to the permittee at the address set forth in the permit. The permit shall be deemed revoked as of the fifth day after receipt of the notice. 
2.  No holder of any permit issued pursuant to this subsection shall fail to maintain the appliance in a satisfactory working condition. 
3.  Permits issued under this subsection shall be nontransferable. 
4.  Before granting a permit to any applicant to discharge any industrial liquid waste or industrial sewage into the public sewer, the city engineer shall determine either that the waste is one which will not damage or destroy the public sewer or cause an unwarranted increase in the cost of maintenance of the public sewer or retard or inhibit the treatment of the sewage, or is one that can be made acceptable by pretreatment. 
E.  The provisions of this section requiring the installation of adequate intercepting appliances and the obtaining of permits shall not apply to any person maintaining a connection with the public sewer upon the eleventh day of April, 1952, until the expiration of sixty days from that date. 
(Prior code § 7500.19)  
13.36.020 - Unpolluted waters. 
A.  Unpolluted waters from refrigeration systems, air conditioning systems or industrial cooling systems may be discharged into a storm drain sewer or a dry well where space and soil conditions permit such installation. Where the discharge into a storm drain or dry well is not feasible, the unpolluted waters from such systems may be discharged into a public sewer where written permission therefor has been granted by the city engineer. Such permission shall be upon such terms and conditions as the city engineer may prescribe, including the amount of water to be discharged into any such sewer, the time of the discharge and any other reasonable regulations imposed by the city engineer in granting the permission. 
B.  Waters from swimming pools may be discharged into a storm drain sewer or into a dry well where space and soil conditions permit the installation of the dry well. If such facilities are not available, then water from swimming pools may be discharged into the public sewer; provided, however, that written permission therefor has been first obtained from the city engineer. If a swimming pool is to be partially or wholly drained, then the water shall be discharged into a public sewer only between the hours of nine p.m. and six a.m. of any day. The city engineer in granting permission to drain any pool into the public sewer may impose reasonable conditions, including the amount of water to be drained into the public sewer and the hours therefor. 
(Prior code § 7500.21)  
13.36.030 - Garbage. 
A.  Garbage resulting from the preparation of any food or drink prepared and served or proposed to be served on the premises may be ground and discharged into the public sewer upon approval of the city engineer and the director as to the fineness of content determined by an analysis made with United States sieves and based on wet drained weights in accordance with the following: 
1.  Not less than forty percent shall pass a No. 8 sieve; 
2.  Not less than sixty-five percent shall pass a No. 3 sieve; 
3.  Not less than one hundred percent shall pass a one-fourth-inch screen. 
B.  The method of discharge permitted under this section shall be by flushing with water directly into a trapped outlet into the house plumbing leading to the public sewer. The city engineer may limit the permissible quantity of garbage to be disposed of through garbage grinders. 
(Amended during 1984 codification; prior code § 7500.23)  
13.36.040 - Opening manholes. 
No person shall open or enter any manhole in any public sewer to dispose of garbage or other deleterious substances or storm or surface waters or for any other like purpose. 
(Prior code § 7500.36)  
13.36.050 - Dumping cesspool effluent. 
Cesspool effluent which does not contain concentrations of industrial liquid wastes, oil, greases, or other deleterious substances may be dumped into certain specific manholes when permission in writing is secured from the city engineer. No person shall dump cesspool effluent in any manhole other than those designated by the city engineer, or do so without permission in writing. Such permission may be granted only upon application in writing by a person engaged in the business of disposing of the effluent. The application shall state the street address of each location from which the effluent is to be obtained. The permit shall give the date and location of the manhole to be used. The city engineer may refuse to grant such permission to any person who fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 7500.37)  
13.36.060 - Cleaning manholes. 
When cesspool effluent is dumped into specified manholes under permission from the city engineer, it shall be discharged through a pipe or hose in such manner that none of the effluent will be left adhering to the sides or shelf of the manhole, and if any such effluent is inadvertently allowed to adhere to the sides or shelf of the manhole, the manhole shall be thoroughly cleaned with clear water. 
(Prior code § 7500.38)  
13.36.070 - Flushing sewer connection. 
Every industrial waste pretreatment plant shall be equipped with an adequate fresh water supply easily available for diluting and flushing, and all sewer connections shall be thoroughly flushed after discharge of each batch of industrial liquid waste. 
(Prior code § 7500.30)  
13.36.080 - Industrial waste pretreatment facility maintenance. 
Every industrial waste pretreatment facility shall be adequately maintained to accomplish its intended purpose. Abandonment or failure to properly maintain such equipment shall be cause for immediate revocation of the industrial connection sewer permit and disconnection from the public sewer. 
(Prior code § 7500.31)  
13.36.090 - Interceptor cleaning. 
Every interceptor shall be cleaned by the operator thereof as often as necessary to prevent objectionable materials from entering the public sewer. 
(Prior code § 7500.32)  
13.36.100 - Interceptor and other installation inspection. 
The city engineer, the director or the chief engineer may make inspections at any reasonable time of all interceptors or other installations on any premises, and shall require that any such interceptor or other installation be used and maintained as required by this chapter, and be kept in a clean and sanitary condition, and may prosecute any person managing, operating or having control of any such premises, or portion thereof, for failing, refusing or neglecting to comply with the provisions of this chapter, using the penal provisions of this code for any such prosecution. 
(Amended during 1984 codification; prior code § 7500.33)  
13.36.110 - Excavations. 
All excavations shall have sufficient width to allow proper workmanship and permit adequate inspection and shall be supported in the manner set forth in the rules, orders and regulations prescribed by the Industrial Accident Commission of the state. Sheet piling and other timbers shall be withdrawn in such a manner as to prevent caving of the walls of the excavation or disturbance of the sewer pipe. 
(Prior code § 7500.6)  
13.36.120 - Maintenance inspections. 
The city engineer, the director, or the chief engineer may inspect as often as he deems necessary, every sewage pumping plant, sewage treatment plant, industrial liquid waste pretreatment plant house sewer, interceptor, dilution basin, neutralization basin, back water trap or valve, or other similar appurtenances to ascertain whether such facilities are maintained and operated in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. All persons shall permit the city engineer, the superintendent, or the chief engineer to have access to all such facilities at all reasonable times. 
(Prior code § 7500.34)  
13.36.130 - Damaging system prohibited. 
No person shall remove or damage any portion of any public sewer, or any house sewer in a public easement, or use or take any water from any sewer or flushing apparatus for any use whatever. 
(Prior code § 7500.35)  
DIVISION III. - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS  
Chapter 13.40 - UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICTS 
Sections: 
 
13.40.010 - Definitions. 
Whenever in this chapter the following words and phrases are used, they shall have the respective meanings assigned to them in the following definitions: 
A.  "Commission" means the Public Utilities Commission of the state. 
B.  "Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures" means poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms, braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits, appliances, attachments and appurtenances located aboveground within a district and used or useful in supplying electric communication or similar or associated service. 
C.  "Underground utility distict" or "district" means that area in the city within which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are prohibited as the area is described in the resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 13.40.040. 
D.  "Utility" includes all persons or entities supplying electrical communication or similar or associated service by means of electrical materials or devices. 
(Prior code § 7600)  
13.40.020 - District establishment hearing. 
The council may from time to time call public hearings to ascertain whether the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures within designated areas of the city and the underground installation of wires and facilities for supplying electric communication or similar or associated service. The city clerk shall notify all affected property owners as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and utilities concerned, by mail, of the time and place of the hearings at least fifteen days prior to the date thereof. Each such hearing shall be open to the public and may be continued from time to time. At each such hearing all persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The decision of the council shall be final and conclusive. 
(Amended during 1984 codification; prior code § 7601)  
13.40.030 - Report prior to hearing. 
Prior to holding the public hearing, the city engineer shall consult with all affected utilities and shall prepare a report for submission at the hearing containing among other information the extent of the utilities, participation and applicable cost estimates. The report shall also contain an estimate of the time required to complete the underground installation and removal of overhead facilities. 
(Prior code § 7603)  
13.40.040 - Designation by council. 
If, after any such public hearing, the council finds that the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires the removal and the underground installation within a designated area, the council shall, by resolution, declare the designated area an underground utility district and order the removal and underground installation. The resolution shall include a description of the area comprising the district and shall fix the time within which the removal and underground installation shall be accomplished and within which affected property owners must be ready to receive underground service. A reasonable time shall be allowed for the removal and underground installation, having due regard for the availability of labor, materials and equipment necessary for the removal and the installation of the underground facilities as may be occasioned thereby. 
(Prior code § 7604)  
13.40.050 - Notice to property owners and utilities. 
A.  Within ten days after the effective date of a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.40.040, the city clerk shall notify all affected utilities and all persons owning real property within the district created by the resolution of the adoption thereof. The city clerk shall further notify the affected property owners of the necessity that, if they or any person occupying the property desire to continue to receive electric, communication or similar or associated service, they or the occupant shall provide all necessary facility changes on their premises so as to receive the service from the lines of the supplying utility or utilities at a new location. 
B.  Notification by the city clerk shall be made by mailing a copy of the resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.40.040, together with a copy of the ordinance codified in this chapter, to the affected property owners as they are shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the affected utilities. 
(Prior code § 7608)  
13.40.060 - Compliance required. 
Whenever the council creates, by reolution, an underground utility district, and therein orders the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures therein as provided in this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person or utility to erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures in the district after the date when the overhead facilities are required to be removed by the resolution, except as the overhead facilities may be required to furnish service to an owner or occupant of property prior to the performance by the owner or occupant of the underground work necessary for the owner or occupant to continue to receive utility service as provided in Section 13.40.090, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 7605)  
13.40.070 - Exceptions. 
A.  Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, overhead facilities may be installed and maintained for a period not to exceed ten days without prior approval of the council, in order to provide emergency service. The council may grant special permission on such terms as the council may deem appropriate, in cases of unusual circumstances without discrimination as to any person or utility, to erect, construct, install, maintain, use or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures. 
B.  With respect to any district formed under this chapter, the city council may authorize any or all of the following: 
1.  Any municipal facilities or equipment installed under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the city engineer; and 
2.  Poles, or electroliers, used exclusively for street lighting; and 
3.  Overhead wires (exclusive of supporting structures) crossing any portion of a district within which overhead wires have been prohibited, or connecting to buildings on the perimeter of a district, when the wires originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are not prohibited; and 
4.  Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used for the transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of thirty-four thousand five hundred volts; and 
5.  Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location on the building to another location on the same building or to an adjacent building without crossing any public street; and 
6.  Antennae, associated equipment and supporting structures, used by a utility for furnishing communication services; and 
7.  Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface-mounted transformer, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts; and 
8.  Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used or to be used in conjunction with construction projects; and 
9.  The use of available public funds to defray the cost of constructing service connections to users in a district. 
(Prior code §§ 7606, 7607)  
13.40.080 - Utility company responsibilities. 
If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service within a district created by any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.40.040, the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of the conduits, conductors and associated equipment required to be furnished by it under its applicable rules, regulations and tariffs on file with the commission. 
(Prior code § 7609)  
13.40.090 - Property owner responsibilities. 
A.  Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting a building or structure within a district shall construct and provide that portion of the service connection on his property between the facilities referred to in Section 13.40.080 and the termination facility on or within the building or structure being served; and 
B.  In the event any person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting the property does not comply with the provisions of subsection A of this section within the time provided for in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 13.40.040, the city engineer shall post written notice on the property being served and thirty days thereafter may authorize the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated facilities supplying utility service to the property. 
(Prior code § 7610)  
13.40.100 - City responsibility. 
The city shall remove at its own expense all city-owned equipment from all poles required to be removed under this chapter in ample time to enable the owner or user of the poles to remove them within the time specified within the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 13.40.040. 
(Prior code § 7611)  
13.40.110 - Time limit extension. 
In the event that any act required by this chapter or by a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.40.040 cannot be performed within the time provided on account of shortage of materials, war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor disturbances, civil disobedience, or any other circumstances beyond the control of the actor, then the time within which the act will be accomplished shall be extended for a period equivalent to the time of the limitation. 
(Prior code § 7612)  
Chapter 13.42 - WATER CONSERVATION IN LANDSCAPING 
Sections: 
 
13.42.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish standards and procedures for the design, installation and management of water-conserving landscapes in order to utilize available plant, water and land resources to avoid excessive landscape water demands while ensuring high quality landscape design. 
(Ord. 2591 § 1 (part), 1993)  
13.42.020 - Applicability. 
A.  These requirements shall be applicable to new and rehabilitated landscaping for industrial, commercial, office and institutional developments; to parks and other public recreational areas; to multifamily (two or more units) residential and PUD common areas; to model home complexes; and to city road medians and corridors. 
B.  These requirements shall not be applicable to: 
1.  Homeowner-provided landscaping at single-family and multiple family projects; 
2.  Cemeteries; 
3.  Registered historical sites; 
4.  Ecological restoration projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system; 
5.  Mined-land reclamation projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system; 
6.  Any project with a landscaped area less than one thousand five hundred square feet, unless the director determines that substantial compliance with the purpose of this chapter as stated in Section 13.42.010 requires that a landscape plan be submitted. 
C.  Exemptions. The director may authorize exemptions to any of the design and improvement standards in this chapter. Such exemptions may be granted if the director finds that the proposed design or improvement is in substantial compliance with the purpose and intent of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2591 § 1 (part), 1993)  
13.42.030 - Definitions. 
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this chapter shall be as defined in this section. 
A.  "Application rate" means the rate of irrigation (inches per hour or gallons per minute) at which water is applied by an irrigation system. 
B.  "Automatic control valve" means a valve in an irrigation system which is activated by an automatic electric or hydraulic controller. 
C.  "Automatic irrigation system" means an irrigation system that can be controlled without manual manipulation and which operates on a preset program. 
D.  "Contour" means a line drawn on a plan which connects all points of equal elevation above or below a known or assumed reference point. 
E.  "Controller" means an automatic timing device with enclosure, which signals automatic valves to open and close on a preset program. 
F.  "Cycle" means, in irrigation, the complete operation of actual watering time programmed into a controller. 
G.  "Designer" means a person qualified to practice landscape architecture and/or irrigation design. 
H.  "Director" means the director of parks, recreation and community services of the city. 
I.  "Grading" means earthwork performed to alter the natural contours of an area to be planted. 
J.  "Hydrozone" means a portion of the planting area having plants grouped according to water need. 
K.  "Infiltration rate" means the rate (inches per hour) in which water moves through soil under natural conditions. 
L.  "Irrigation system" means a complete connection of system components, including the water distribution network and the necessary irrigation equipment, downstream from the backflow prevention device. 
M.  "Planting area" means the parcel area less building pad(s), driveway(s), patio(s), deck(s), walkway(s) and parking area(s). Planting area includes water bodies (i.e. fountains, ponds, lakes) and natural areas. 
N.  "Planting plan" means a plan that shall identify locations, spacing, numbers and container sizes of all plant materials including common and botanical names. 
O.  "Rehabilitated landscape" means any planting area in which fifty percent of existing landscape materials are replaced or modified within any twelve-month period. Examples include a change of plants or ground cover, installation of a new irrigation system, and grading modifications. 
P.  "Station" means a position on an automatic irrigation controller which indicates the control point of automatic irrigation valves. 
Q.  "Turf" means a surface layer of earth containing grass with its roots. 
(Ord. 2591 § 1 (part), 1993) 
(Ord. No. 2958, § 3, 10-12-10)  
13.42.040 - Landscape plan—Required. 
Landscape plans shall be prepared in accordance with the standards set forth herein and with any guidelines developed to help implement the provisions of this chapter. Such plans shall be submitted and approved prior to the issuance of building permits to comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2591 § 1 (part), 1993)  
13.42.050 - Landscape plan—Application. 
Prior to the issuance of a building permit, a landscape plan application shall be submitted and reviewed in accordance with this chapter. Applications for landscape plan approval shall be filed by the owner of the affected property or his agent, or by a public entity to which the provisions of the chapter apply, on forms furnished by the director. 
(Ord. 2591 § 1 (part), 1993)  
13.42.060 - Landscape plan—Approval. 
No landscape plan application shall be approved unless the director finds that the plan compliments the design of the project; is consistent with the provisions of this chapter and applicable landscape guidelines; compatible with adjacent existing or future public landscaped areas and with the elevations and appearances with existing structures, located upon lots within the immediate vicinity of the lot which is the subject of such application. 
(Ord. 2591 § 1 (part), 1993)  
13.42.070 - Landscape plan—Content. 
Each landscape plan shall consist of the following elements including, but not limited to, the following: 
A.  Water Conservation Concept Statement. Each landscape plan for projects with landscape area in excess of two thousand five hundred square feet shall include a cover sheet referred to as the water conservation concept statement, which serves as a checklist to verify that the elements of the landscape plan have been completed and includes a brief narrative summary of the project. Said statement shall include calculations of the project's: 
1.  Maximum applied water allowance; 
2.  Estimated applied water use; 
B.  Planting Plan. The planting plan shall identify location, spacing, numbers and container sizes of all plant materials including common and botanical names, drawn on project base sheets in a clear and legible fashion in accordance with the guidelines established to implement the provisions of this chapter. 
C.  Irrigation Plan. The irrigation plan shall identify all components of the irrigation system drawn on project base sheets in a clear and legible fashion in accordance with the guidelines established to implement the provisions of this chapter. 
D.  Annual Irrigation Schedule. The annual irrigation schedule shall be prepared for both the plant establishment period and established landscape. The irrigation schedule shall include run time and frequency of irrigation for each station. 
(Ord. 2591 § 1 (part), 1993)  
13.42.080 - Water features. 
Decorative water features such as pools, ponds and waterfalls used in landscaped areas shall incorporate recycling of water and, where available, use reclaimed water and shall be designed and operated to minimize water loss. 
(Ord. 2591 § 1 (part), 1993)  
13.42.090 - Water meters. 
Each landscape irrigation system for projects with landscape areas in excess of two thousand five hundred square feet shall be metered for water use, separated from domestic and other nonlandscape uses. 
(Ord. 2591 § 1 (part), 1993)  
13.42.100 - Landscape maintenance. 
The property owner shall permanently and continuously maintain all landscaping and irrigation in a neat, clean and healthy condition, including removal of litter and weeds, proper pruning, mowing of lawns, fertilizing and watering; and replacement of diseased and/or dead plants and malfunctioning or missing irrigation system components. 
(Ord. 2591 § 1 (part), 1993)  
13.42.110 - Model home landscaping. 
For each subdivision with model homes, the developer shall submit a landscape plan and install landscaping for each model home, incorporating the requirements of this chapter and including: 
A.  Signs identifying elements of the water-conserving landscape and irrigation system design placed around the model; 
B.  Literature describing water-conserving landscapes to be available to individuals touring the model; 
C.  The location, text and size of signs shall be clearly shown on the landscape plan and shall be in substantial accordance with the guidelines established to implement the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2591 § 1 (part), 1993)  
13.42.120 - Relative water requirements of commonly used plants. 
The director shall develop a list of plants that are commonly used in landscape designs with water requirement classifications of low, medium and high to assist landscape designers to choose species of appropriate water demands to comply with this chapter and to group species of similar water demands to facilitate efficient irrigation. This list shall be included in the landscape guidelines developed to implement the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2591 § 1 (part), 1993)  
Chapter 13.43 - WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPING[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3050, § 2 , adopted March 22, 2016, amended Ch. 13.43 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 13.43, §§ 13.43.010—13.43.070, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 2942, § 1, adopted Dec. 8, 2009. 
 
13.43.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to adopt the state model water efficient landscape ordinance set forth in Title 23, Division 2 Chapter 2.7 of the California Code of Regulations, pursuant to Governor's Executive Order No. B-29-15 in order to: 
1.  Promote the values and benefits of landscaping practices that integrate and go beyond the conservation and efficient use of water; 
2.  Establish a structure for planning, designing, installing, maintaining and managing water efficient landscapes in new construction and rehabilitated projects by encouraging the use of a watershed approach that requires cross-sector collaboration of industry, government and property owners to achieve the many benefits possible; 
3.  Establish provisions for water management practices and water waste prevention for existing landscapes; 
4.  Use water efficiently without waste by setting a maximum applied water allowance as an upper limit for water use and reduce water use to the lowest practical amount; 
5.  Promote the benefits of consistent landscape ordinances with neighboring local and regional agencies; and, 
6.  Encourage local agencies and water purveyors to use economic incentives that promote the efficient use of water, such as implementing a tiered-rate structure. 
7.  Encourage local agencies to designate the necessary authority that implements and enforces the provisions of the model water efficient landscape ordinance or its local landscape ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 3050, § 2, 3-22-16)  
13.43.020 - Applicability. 
A.  After December 1, 2015, and consistent with Executive Order No. B-29-15, this chapter shall apply to all of the following landscape projects: 
1.  New construction projects with an aggregate landscape area equal to or greater than five hundred square feet requiring a building or landscape permit, plan check or design review; 
2.  Rehabilitated landscape projects with an aggregate landscape area equal to or greater than two thousand five hundred square feet requiring a building or landscape permit, plan check, or design review; 
3.  Existing landscapes limited to Sections 13.43.230, 13.43.240 and 13.43.250; and 
4.  Cemeteries. Recognizing the special landscape management needs of cemeteries, new and rehabilitated cemeteries are limited to Sections 13.43.080, 13.43.150 and 13.43.160; and existing cemeteries are limited to Sections 13.43.230, 13.43.240 and 13.43.250. 
B.  Any project with an aggregate landscape area of two thousand five hundred square feet or less may comply with the performance requirements of this chapter or conform to the prescriptive measures contained in Appendix D of Chapter 2.7, Division 2, Title 23 of the California Code of Regulations. 
C.  For projects using treated or untreated graywater or rainwater captured on site, any lot or parcel within the project that has less than two thousand five hundred square feet of landscape and meets the lot or parcel's landscape water requirement (estimated total water use) entirely with treated or untreated graywater or through stored rainwater captured on site is subject only to Appendix D section (5) of Chapter 2.7, Division 2, Title 23 of the California Code of Regulations. 
D.  This chapter does not apply to: 
1.  Registered local, state or federal historical sites; 
2.  Ecological restoration projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system; 
3.  Mined-land reclamation projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system; or 
4.  Existing plant collections, as part of botanical gardens and arboretums open to the public. 
( Ord. No. 3050, § 2, 3-22-16)  
13.43.030 - Definitions. 
The terms used in this chapter have the meaning set forth below: 
"Appendix" means the specified appendix to Chapter 2.7, Division 2, Title 23 of the California Code of Regulations. 
"Applied water" means the portion of water supplied by the irrigation system to the landscape. 
"Automatic irrigation controller" means a timing device used to remotely control valves that operate an irrigation system. Automatic irrigation controllers are able to self-adjust and schedule irrigation events using either evapotranspiration (weather-based) or soil moisture data. 
"Backflow prevention device" means a safety device used to prevent pollution or contamination of the water supply due to the reverse flow of water from the irrigation system. 
"Certificate of completion" means the document required under Section 13.43.130. 
"Certified irrigation designer" means a person certified to design irrigation systems by an accredited academic institution, a professional trade organization or other program such as the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's WaterSense irrigation designer certification program and irrigation association's certified irrigation designer program. 
"Certified landscape irrigation auditor" means a person certified to perform landscape irrigation audits by an accredited academic institution, a professional trade organization or other program such as the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's WaterSense irrigation auditor certification program and irrigation association's certified landscape irrigation auditor program. 
"Check valve" or "anti-drain valve" means a valve located under a sprinkler head, or other location in the irrigation system, to hold water in the system to prevent drainage from sprinkler heads when the sprinkler is off. 
"Common interest developments" means community apartment projects, condominium projects, planned developments, and stock cooperatives per Civil Code Section 1351. 
"Compost" means the safe and stable product of controlled biologic decomposition of organic materials that is beneficial to plant growth. 
"Conversion factor (0.62)" means the number that converts acre-inches per acre per year to gallons per square foot per year. 
"Distribution uniformity" means the measure of the uniformity of irrigation water over a defined area. 
"Drip irrigation" means any non-spray low volume irrigation system utilizing emission devices with a flow rate measured in gallons per hour. Low volume irrigation systems are specifically designed to apply small volumes of water slowly at or near the root zone of plants. 
"Ecological restoration project" means a project where the site is intentionally altered to establish a defined, indigenous, historic ecosystem. 
"Effective precipitation" or "usable rainfall" (Eppt) means the portion of total precipitation which becomes available for plant growth. 
"Emitter" means a drip irrigation emission device that delivers water slowly from the system to the soil. 
"Established landscape" means the point at which plants in the landscape have developed significant root growth into the soil. Typically, most plants are established after one or two years of growth. 
"Establishment period of the plants" means the first year after installing the plant in the landscape or the first two years if irrigation will be terminated after establishment. Typically, most plants are established after one or two years of growth. Native habitat mitigation areas and trees may need three to five years for establishment. 
"Estimated total water use" (ETWU) means the total water used for the landscape as described in Section 13.43.080. 
"ET adjustment factor" (ETAF) means a factor of 0.55 for residential areas and 0.45 for non-residential areas, that, when applied to reference evapotranspiration, adjusts for plant factors and irrigation efficiency, two major influences upon the amount of water that needs to be applied to the landscape. The ETAF for new and existing (non-rehabilitated) special landscape areas shall not exceed 1.0. The ETAF for existing non-rehabilitated landscapes is 0.8. 
"Evapotranspiration rate" means the quantity of water evaporated from adjacent soil and other surfaces and transpired by plants during a specified time. 
"Flow rate" means the rate at which water flows through pipes, valves and emission devices, measured in gallons per minute, gallons per hour, or cubic feet per second. 
"Flow sensor" means an inline device installed at the supply point of the irrigation system that produces a repeatable signal proportional to flow rate. Flow sensors must be connected to an automatic irrigation controller, or flow monitor capable of receiving flow signals and operating master valves. This combination flow sensor/controller may also function as a landscape water meter or submeter. 
"Friable" means a soil condition that is easily crumbled or loosely compacted down to a minimum depth per planting material requirements, whereby the root structure of newly planted material will be allowed to spread unimpeded. 
"Fuel modification plan guideline" means guidelines from a local fire authority to assist residents and businesses that are developing land or building structures in a fire hazard severity zone. 
"Graywater" means untreated wastewater that has not been contaminated by any toilet discharge, has not been affected by infectious, contaminated, or unhealthy bodily wastes, and does not present a threat from contamination by unhealthful processing, manufacturing, or operating wastes. "Graywater" includes, but is not limited to, wastewater from bathtubs, showers, bathroom washbasins, clothes washing machines, and laundry tubs, but does not include wastewater from kitchen sinks or dishwashers. Health and Safety Code Section 17922.12. 
"Hardscapes" means any durable material (pervious and non-pervious). 
"Hydrozone" means a portion of the landscaped area having plants with similar water needs and rooting depth. A hydrozone may be irrigated or non-irrigated. 
"Infiltration rate" means the rate of water entry into the soil expressed as a depth of water per unit of time (e.g., inches per hour). 
"Invasive plant species" means species of plants not historically found in California that spread outside cultivated areas and can damage environmental or economic resources. Invasive species may be regulated by county agricultural agencies as noxious species. Lists of invasive plants are maintained at the California Invasive Plant Inventory and USDA invasive and noxious weeds database. 
"Irrigation audit" means an in-depth evaluation of the performance of an irrigation system conducted by a certified landscape irrigation auditor. An irrigation audit includes, but is not limited to: inspection, system tune-up, system test with distribution uniformity or emission uniformity, reporting overspray or runoff that causes overland flow, and preparation of an irrigation schedule. The audit must be conducted in a manner consistent with the irrigation association's landscape irrigation auditor certification program or other U.S. Environmental Protection Agency "Watersense" labeled auditing program. 
"Irrigation efficiency" (IE) means the measurement of the amount of water beneficially used divided by the amount of water applied. Irrigation efficiency is derived from measurements and estimates of irrigation system characteristics and management practices. The irrigation efficiency for purposes of this chapter are 0.75 for overhead spray devices and 0.81 for drip systems. 
"Irrigation survey" means an evaluation of an irrigation system that is less detailed than an irrigation audit. An irrigation survey includes, but is not limited to: inspection, system test, and written recommendations to improve performance of the irrigation system. 
"Irrigation water use analysis" means an analysis of water use data based on meter readings and billing data. 
"Landscape architect" means a person who holds a license to practice landscape architecture in the state of California Business and Professions Code, Section 5615. 
"Landscape area" means all the planting areas, turf areas, and water features in a landscape design plan subject to the maximum applied water allowance calculation. The landscape area does not include footprints of buildings or structures, sidewalks, driveways, parking lots, decks, patios, gravel or stone walks, other pervious or non-pervious hardscapes, and other non-irrigated areas designated for non-development (e.g., open spaces and existing native vegetation). 
"Landscape contractor" means a person licensed by the state of California to construct, maintain, repair, install, or subcontract the development of landscape systems. 
"Landscape documentation package" means the documents required under Section 13.43.070. 
"Landscape project" means total area of landscape in a project as defined in "landscape area" for the purposes of this chapter, meeting requirements under Section 13.43.020. 
"Landscape water meter" means an inline device installed at the irrigation supply point that measures the flow of water into the irrigation system and is connected to a totalizer to record water use. 
"Lateral line" means the water delivery pipeline that supplies water to the emitters or sprinklers from the valve. 
"Local agency" means a city or county, including a charter city or charter county, that is responsible for adopting and implementing the ordinance. The local agency is also responsible for the enforcement of this chapter, including but not limited to, approval of a permit and plan check or design review of a project. 
"Local water purveyor" means any entity, including a public agency, city, county, or private water company that provides retail water service. 
"Low volume irrigation" means the application of irrigation water at low pressure through a system of tubing or lateral lines and low-volume emitters such as drip, drip lines, and bubblers. Low volume irrigation systems are specifically designed to apply small volumes of water slowly at or near the root zone of plants. 
"Main line" means the pressurized pipeline that delivers water from the water source to the valve or outlet. 
"Master shut-off valve" is an automatic valve installed at the irrigation supply point which controls water flow into the irrigation system. When this valve is closed water will not be supplied to the irrigation system. A master valve will greatly reduce any water loss due to a leaky station valve. 
"Maximum applied water allowance" (MAWA) means the upper limit of annual applied water for the established landscaped area as specified in [California Code of Regulations] Section 492.4. It is based upon the area's reference evapotranspiration, the ET adjustment factor, and the size of the landscape area. The estimated total water use shall not exceed the maximum applied water allowance. Special landscape areas, including recreation areas, areas permanently and solely dedicated to edible plants such as orchards and vegetable gardens, and areas irrigated with recycled water are subject to the MAWA with an ETAF not to exceed 1.0. MAWA = (ETo) (0.62) [(ETAF x LA) + ((1-ETAF) x SLA)] 
"Median" is an area between opposing lanes of traffic that may be unplanted or planted with trees, shrubs, perennials, and ornamental grasses. 
"Microclimate" means the climate of a small, specific area that may contrast with the climate of the overall landscape area due to factors such as wind, sun exposure, plant density, or proximity to reflective surfaces. 
"Mined-land reclamation projects" means any surface mining operation with a reclamation plan approved in accordance with the Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975. 
"Mulch" means any organic material such as leaves, bark, straw, compost, or inorganic mineral materials such as rocks, gravel, or decomposed granite left loose and applied to the soil surface for the beneficial purposes of reducing evaporation, suppressing weeds, moderating soil temperature, and preventing soil erosion. 
"New construction" means, for the purposes of this chapter, a new building with a landscape or other new landscape, such as a park, playground, or greenbelt without an associated building. 
"Non-residential landscape" means landscapes in commercial, institutional, industrial and public settings that may have areas designated for recreation or public assembly. It also includes portions of common areas of common interest developments with designated recreational areas. 
"Operating pressure" means the pressure at which the parts of an irrigation system are designed by the manufacturer to operate. 
"Overhead sprinkler irrigation systems" or "overhead spray irrigation systems" means systems that deliver water through the air (e.g., spray heads and rotors). 
"Overspray" means the irrigation water which is delivered beyond the target area. 
"Parkway" means the area between a sidewalk and the curb or traffic lane. It may be planted or unplanted, and with or without pedestrian egress. 
"Permit" means an authorizing document issued by local agencies for new construction or rehabilitated landscapes. 
"Pervious" means any surface or material that allows the passage of water through the material and into the underlying soil. 
"Plant factor" or "plant water use factor" is a factor, when multiplied by ETo, estimates the amount of water needed by plants. For purposes of this chapter, the plant factor range for very low water use plants is 0 to 0.1, the plant factor range for low water use plants is 0.1 to 0.3, the plant factor range for moderate water use plants is 0.4 to 0.6, and the plant factor range for high water use plants is 0.7 to 1.0. Plant factors cited in this chapter are derived from the publication "Water Use Classification of Landscape Species". Plant factors may also be obtained from horticultural researchers from academic institutions or professional associations as approved by the California Department of Water Resources (DWR). 
"Project applicant" means the individual or entity submitting a landscape documentation package required under California Code of Regulations] Section 492.3, to request a permit, plan check, or design review from the local agency. A project applicant may be the property owner or his or her designee. 
"Rain sensor" or "rain sensing shutoff device" means a component which automatically suspends an irrigation event when it rains. 
"Record drawing" or "as-builts" means a set of reproducible drawings which show significant changes in the work made during construction and which are usually based on drawings marked up in the field and other data furnished by the contractor. 
"Recreational area" means areas, excluding private single family residential areas, designated for active play, recreation or public assembly in parks, sports fields, picnic grounds, amphitheaters or golf course tees, fairways, roughs, surrounds and greens. 
"Recycled water," "reclaimed water," or "treated sewage effluent water" means treated or recycled waste water of a quality suitable for nonpotable uses such as landscape irrigation and water features. This water is not intended for human consumption. 
"Reference evapotranspiration" or "ETo" means a standard measurement of environmental parameters which affect the water use of plants. ETo is expressed in inches per day, month, or year as represented in Appendix (Chapter 2.7, Division 2, Title 23 of the California Code of Regulations), and is an estimate of the evapotranspiration of a large field of four- to seven-inch tall, cool-season grass that is well watered. Reference evapotranspiration is used as the basis of determining the maximum applied water allowances so that regional differences in climate can be accommodated. 
"Regional water efficient landscape ordinance" means a local ordinance adopted by two or more local agencies, water suppliers and other stakeholders for implementing a consistent set of landscape provisions throughout a geographical region. Regional ordinances are strongly encouraged to provide a consistent framework for the landscape industry and applicants to adhere to. 
"Rehabilitated landscape" means any relandscaping project that requires a permit, plan check, or design review, meets the requirements of Section 13.43.020, and the modified landscape area is equal to or greater than two thousand five hundred square feet. 
"Residential landscape" means landscapes surrounding single or multifamily homes. 
"Runoff" means water which is not absorbed by the soil or landscape to which it is applied and flows from the landscape area. For example, runoff may result from water that is applied at too great a rate (application rate exceeds infiltration rate) or when there is a slope. 
"Soil moisture sensing device" or "soil moisture sensor" means a device that measures the amount of water in the soil. The device may also suspend or initiate an irrigation event. 
"Soil texture" means the classification of soil based on its percentage of sand, silt, and clay. 
"Special landscape area" (SLA) means an area of the landscape dedicated solely to edible plants, recreational areas, areas irrigated with recycled water, or water features using recycled water. 
"Sprinkler head" or "spray head" means a device which delivers water through a nozzle. 
"Static water pressure" means the pipeline or municipal water supply pressure when water is not flowing. 
"Station" means an area served by one valve or by a set of valves that operate simultaneously. 
"Swing joint" means an irrigation component that provides a flexible, leak-free connection between the emission device and lateral pipeline to allow movement in any direction and to prevent equipment damage. 
"Submeter" means a metering device to measure water applied to the landscape that is installed after the primary utility water meter. 
"Turf" means a ground cover surface of mowed grass. Annual bluegrass, Kentucky bluegrass, perennial ryegrass, red fescue, and tall fescue are cool-season grasses. Bermuda grass, Kikuyu grass, Seashore Paspalum, St. Augustine grass, Zoysia grass, and Buffalo grass are warm-season grasses. 
"Valve" means a device used to control the flow of water in the irrigation system. 
"Water conserving plant species" means a plant species identified as having a very low or low plant factor. 
"Water feature" means a design element where open water performs an aesthetic or recreational function. Water features include ponds, lakes, waterfalls, fountains, artificial streams, spas, and swimming pools (where water is artificially supplied). The surface area of water features is included in the high water use hydrozone of the landscape area. Constructed wetlands used for on-site wastewater treatment or stormwater best management practices that are not irrigated and used solely for water treatment or stormwater retention are not water features and, therefore, are not subject to the water budget calculation. 
"Watering window" means the time of day irrigation is allowed. 
"WUCOLS" means the Water Use Classification of Landscape Species published by the University of California Cooperative Extension and the Department of Water Resources 2014. 
( Ord. No. 3050, § 2, 3-22-16)  
13.43.040 - Provisions for new construction or rehabilitated landscapes. 
A.  The city may designate by mutual agreement another agency to implement some or all of the requirements contained in this chapter. The city may collaborate with water purveyors to define each entity's specific responsibilities relating to this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 3050, § 2, 3-22-16)  
13.43.050 - Compliance with landscape documentation package. 
A.  Prior to construction, the city shall: 
1.  Provide the project applicant with the ordinance and procedures for permits, plan checks or design reviews; 
2.  Review the landscape documentation package submitted by the project applicant; 
3.  Approve or deny the landscape documentation package; 
4.  Issue a permit or approve the plan check or design review for the project applicant; and 
5.  Upon approval of the landscape documentation package, submit a copy of the water efficient landscape worksheet to the local water purveyor. 
B.  Prior to construction, the project applicant shall: 
1.  Submit a landscape documentation package to the city. 
C.  Upon approval of the landscape documentation package by the city, the project applicant shall: 
1.  Receive a permit or approval of the plan check or design review and record the date of the permit in the certificate of completion; 
2.  Submit a copy of the approved landscape documentation package along with the record drawings, and any other information to the property owner or his/her designee; and 
3.  Submit a copy of the water efficient landscape worksheet to the local water purveyor. 
( Ord. No. 3050, § 2, 3-22-16)  
13.43.060 - Penalties. 
Any violation of the provisions of this chapter by a project applicant shall be a misdemeanor, and may be enforced pursuant to the provisions of Chapters 1.08 and 1.09 of Title I. In addition, or as an alternative, the city may institute a civil action to enjoin or abate any violation of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 3050, § 2, 3-22-16)  
13.43.070 - Elements of the landscape documentation package. 
A.  The landscape documentation package shall include the following six elements: 
1.  Project information; 
a.  Date. 
b.  Project applicant. 
c.  Project address (if available, parcel and/or lot number(s)). 
d.  Total landscape area (square feet). 
e.  Project type (e.g., new, rehabilitated, public, private, cemetery, homeowner-installed). 
f.  Water supply type (e.g., potable, recycled, well) and identify the local retail water purveyor if the applicant is not served by a private well. 
g.  Checklist of all documents in landscape documentation package. 
h.  Project contacts to include contact information for the project applicant and property owner. 
i.  Applicant signature and date with statement, "I agree to comply with the requirements of the water efficient landscape ordinance and submit a complete landscape documentation package." 
2.  Water efficient landscape worksheet; 
a.  Hydrozone information table; 
b.  Water budget calculations; 
1)  Maximum applied water allowance (MAWA); 
2)  Estimated total water use (ETWU); 
3.  Soil management report; 
4.  Landscape design plan; 
5.  Irrigation design plan; and 
6.  Grading design plan. 
( Ord. No. 3050, § 2, 3-22-16)  
13.43.080 - Water efficient landscape worksheet. 
A.  A project applicant shall complete the water efficient landscape worksheet in Appendix B which contains information on the plant factor, irrigation method, irrigation efficiency, and area associated with each hydrozone. Calculations are then made to show that the evapotranspiration adjustment factor (ETAF) for the landscape project does not exceed a factor of 0.55 for residential areas and 0.45 for non-residential areas, exclusive of special landscape areas. The ETAF for a landscape project is based on the plant factors and irrigation methods selected. The maximum applied water allowance is calculated based on the maximum ETAF allowed (0.55 for residential areas and 0.45 for non-residential areas) and expressed as annual gallons required. The estimated total water use (ETWU) is calculated based on the plants used and irrigation method selected for the landscape design. ETWU must be below the MAWA. 
1.  In calculating the maximum applied water allowance and estimated total water use, a project applicant shall use the ETo values from the reference evapotranspiration table in Appendix A (Chapter 2.7, Division 2, Title 23 of the California Code of Regulations). For geographic areas not covered in Appendix A (Chapter 2.7, Division 2, Title 23 of the California Code of Regulations), use data from other cities located nearby in the same reference evapotranspiration zone, as found in the CIMIS Reference Evapotranspiration Zones Map, Department of Water Resources, 1999. 
B.  Water budget calculations shall adhere to the following requirements: 
1.  The plant factor used shall be from WUCOLS or from horticultural researchers with academic institutions or professional associations as approved by the California Department of Water Resources (DWR). The plant factor ranges from 0 to 0.1 for very low water using plants, 0.1 to 0.3 for low water use plants, from 0.4 to 0.6 for moderate water use plants, and from 0.7 to 1.0 for high water use plants. 
2.  All water features shall be included in the high water use hydrozone and temporarily irrigated areas shall be included in the low water use hydrozone. 
3.  All special landscape areas shall be identified and their water use calculated as shown in Appendix B (Chapter 2.7, Division 2, Title 23 of the California Code of Regulations). 
4.  ETAF for new and existing (non-rehabilitated) special landscape areas shall not exceed 1.0. 
( Ord. No. 3050, § 2, 3-22-16)  
13.43.090 - Soil management report. 
A.  In order to reduce runoff and encourage healthy plant growth, a soil management report shall be completed by the project applicant, or his/her designee, as follows: 
1.  Submit soil samples to a laboratory for analysis and recommendations. 
a.  Soil sampling shall be conducted in accordance with laboratory protocol, including protocols regarding adequate sampling depth for the intended plants. 
b.  The soil analysis shall include: 
1)  Soil texture; 
2)  Infiltration rate determined by laboratory test or soil texture infiltration rate table; 
3)  pH; 
4)  Total soluble salts; 
5)  Sodium; 
6)  Percent organic matter; and 
7)  Recommendations. 
c.  In projects with multiple landscape installations (i.e. production home developments) a soil sampling rate of one in seven lots or approximately fifteen percent will satisfy this requirement. Large landscape projects shall sample at a rate equivalent to one in seven lots. 
2.  The project applicant, or his/her designee, shall comply with one of the following: 
a.  If significant mass grading is not planned, the soil analysis report shall be submitted to the local agency as part of the landscape documentation package; or 
b.  If significant mass grading is planned, the soil analysis report shall be submitted to the local agency as part of the certificate of completion. 
3.  The soil analysis report shall be made available, in a timely manner, to the professionals preparing the landscape design plans and irrigation design plans to make any necessary adjustments to the design plans. 
4.  The project applicant, or his/her designee, shall submit documentation verifying implementation of soil analysis report recommendations to the local agency with certificate of completion. 
( Ord. No. 3050, § 2, 3-22-16)  
13.43.100 - Landscape design plan. 
A.  For the efficient use of water, a landscape shall be carefully designed and planned for the intended function of the project. A landscape design plan meeting the following design criteria shall be submitted as part of the landscape documentation package. 
1.  Plant Material. 
a.  Any plant may be selected for the landscape, providing the estimated total water use in the landscape area does not exceed the maximum applied water allowance. Methods to achieve water efficiency shall include one or more of the following: 
1)  Protection and preservation of native species and natural vegetation; 
2)  Selection of water-conserving plant, tree and turf species, especially local native plants; 
3)  Selection of plants based on local climate suitability, disease and pest resistance; 
4)  Selection of trees based on applicable local tree ordinances or tree shading guidelines, and size at maturity as appropriate for the planting area; and 
5)  Selection of plants from local and regional landscape program plant lists. 
6)  Selection of plants from local fuel modification plan guidelines. 
b.  Each hydrozone shall have plant materials with similar water use, with the exception of hydrozones with plants of mixed water use, as specified in Section 13.43.110(a)(2)(d). 
c.  Plants shall be selected and planted appropriately based upon their adaptability to the climatic, geologic, and topographical conditions of the project site. Methods to achieve water efficiency shall include one or more of the following: 
1)  Use the Sunset Western Climate Zone System which takes into account temperature, humidity, elevation, terrain, latitude, and varying degrees of continental and marine influence on local climate; 
2)  Recognize the horticultural attributes of plants (i.e., mature plant size, invasive surface roots) to minimize damage to property or infrastructure [e.g., buildings, sidewalks, power lines]; allow for adequate soil volume for healthy root growth; and 
3)  Consider the solar orientation for plant placement to maximize summer shade and winter solar gain. 
d.  Turf is not allowed on slopes greater than twenty-five percent where the toe of the slope is adjacent to an impermeable hardscape and where twenty-five percent means one foot of vertical elevation change for every four feet of horizontal length (rise divided by run times one hundred equals slope percent). 
e.  High water use plants, characterized by a plant factor of 0.7 to 1.0, are prohibited in street medians. 
f.  A landscape design plan for projects in fire-prone areas shall address fire safety and prevention. A defensible space or zone around a building or structure is required per Public Resources Code Section 4291(a) and (b). Avoid fire-prone plant materials and highly flammable mulches. Refer to the local Fuel Modification Plan guidelines. 
g.  The use of invasive plant species, such as those listed by the California Invasive Plant Council, is strongly discouraged. 
h.  The architectural guidelines of a common interest development, which include community apartment projects, condominiums, planned developments, and stock cooperatives, shall not prohibit or include conditions that have the effect of prohibiting the use of low-water use plants as a group. 
2.  Water Features. 
a.  Recirculating water systems shall be used for water features. 
b.  Where available, recycled water shall be used as a source for decorative water features. 
c.  Surface area of a water feature shall be included in the high water use hydrozone area of the water budget calculation. 
d.  Pool and spa covers are highly recommended. 
3.  Soil Preparation, Mulch and Amendments. 
a.  Prior to the planting of any materials, compacted soils shall be transformed to a friable condition. On engineered slopes, only amended planting holes need meet this requirement. 
b.  Soil amendments shall be incorporated according to recommendations of the soil report and what is appropriate for the plants selected (see Section 13.43.090). 
c.  For landscape installations, compost at a rate of a minimum of four cubic yards per one thousand square feet of permeable area shall be incorporated to a depth of six inches into the soil. Soils with greater than six percent organic matter in the top six inches of soil are exempt from adding compost and tilling. 
d.  A minimum three-inch layer of mulch shall be applied on all exposed soil surfaces of planting areas except in turf areas, creeping or rooting groundcovers, or direct seeding applications where mulch is contraindicated. To provide habitat for beneficial insects and other wildlife, up to five percent of the landscape area may be left without mulch. Designated insect habitat must be included in the landscape design plan as such. 
e.  Stabilizing mulching products shall be used on slopes that meet current engineering standards. 
f.  The mulching portion of the seed/mulch slurry in hydro-seeded applications shall meet the mulching requirement. 
g.  Organic mulch materials made from recycled or post-consumer shall take precedence over inorganic materials or virgin forest products unless the recycled post-consumer organic products are not locally available. Organic mulches are not required where prohibited by local fuel modification plan guidelines or other applicable local ordinances. 
B.  The landscape design plan, at a minimum, shall: 
1.  Delineate and label each hydrozone by number, letter, or other method; 
2.  Identify each hydrozone as low, moderate, high water, or mixed water use. Temporarily irrigated areas of the landscape shall be included in the low water use hydrozone for the water budget calculation; 
3.  Identify recreational areas; 
4.  Identify areas permanently and solely dedicated to edible plants; 
5.  Identify areas irrigated with recycled water; 
6.  Identify type of mulch and application depth; 
7.  Identify soil amendments, type, and quantity; 
8.  Identify type and surface area of water features; 
9.  Identify hardscapes (pervious and non-pervious); 
10.  Identify location, installation details, and twenty-four-hour retention or infiltration capacity of any applicable stormwater best management practices that encourage on-site retention and infiltration of stormwater. Project applicants shall refer to the local agency or regional water quality control board for information on any applicable stormwater technical requirements. Stormwater best management practices are encouraged in the landscape design plan and examples are provided in Section 13.43.200. 
11.  Identify any applicable rain harvesting or catchment technologies as discussed in Section 13.43.200 and their twenty-four-hour retention or infiltration capacity; 
12.  Identify any applicable graywater discharge piping, system components and area(s) of distribution; 
13.  Contain the following statement: "I have complied with the criteria of the ordinance and applied them for the efficient use of water in the landscape design plan"; and 
14.  Bear the signature of a licensed landscape architect, licensed landscape contractor, or any other person authorized to design a landscape. (See Sections 5500.1, 5615, 5641, 5641.1, 5641.2, 5641.3, 5641.4, 5641.5, 5641.6, 6701, 7027.5 of the Business and Professions Code, Section 832.27 of Title 16 of the California Code of Regulations, and Section 6721 of the Food and Agriculture Code.). 
( Ord. No. 3050, § 2, 3-22-16)  
13.43.110 - Irrigation design plan. 
A.  This section applies to landscaped areas requiring permanent irrigation, not areas that require temporary irrigation solely for the plant establishment period. For the efficient use of water, an irrigation system shall meet all the requirements listed in this section and the manufacturers' recommendations. The irrigation system and its related components shall be planned and designed to allow for proper installation, management, and maintenance. An irrigation design plan meeting the following design criteria shall be submitted as part of the landscape documentation package. 
1.  System. 
a.  Landscape water meters, defined as either a dedicated water service meter or private submeter, shall be installed for all non-residential irrigated landscapes of one thousand square feet but not more than five thousand square feet (the level at which Water Code 535 applies) and residential irrigated landscapes of five thousand square feet or greater. A landscape water meter may be either: 
1)  A customer service meter dedicated to landscape use provided by the local water purveyor; or 
2)  A privately owned meter or submeter. 
b.  Automatic irrigation controllers utilizing either evapotranspiration or soil moisture sensor data utilizing non-volatile memory shall be required for irrigation scheduling in all irrigation systems. 
c.  If the water pressure is below or exceeds the recommended pressure of the specified irrigation devices, the installation of a pressure regulating device is required to ensure that the dynamic pressure at each emission device is within the manufacturer's recommended pressure range for optimal performance. 
1)  If the static pressure is above or below the required dynamic pressure of the irrigation system, pressure-regulating devices such as inline pressure regulators, booster pumps, or other devices shall be installed to meet the required dynamic pressure of the irrigation system. 
2)  Static water pressure, dynamic or operating pressure, and flow reading of the water supply shall be measured at the point of connection. These pressure and flow measurements shall be conducted at the design stage. If the measurements are not available at the design stage, the measurements shall be conducted at installation. 
d.  Sensors (rain, freeze, wind, etc.), either integral or auxiliary, that suspend or alter irrigation operation during unfavorable weather conditions shall be required on all irrigation systems, as appropriate for local climatic conditions. Irrigation should be avoided during windy or freezing weather or during rain. 
e.  Manual shut-off valves (such as a gate valve, ball valve, or butterfly valve) shall be required, as close as possible to the point of connection of the water supply, to minimize water loss in case of an emergency (such as a main line break) or routine repair. 
f.  Backflow prevention devices shall be required to protect the water supply from contamination by the irrigation system. A project applicant shall refer to the applicable local agency code (i.e., public health) for additional backflow prevention requirements. 
g.  Flow sensors that detect high flow conditions created by system damage or malfunction are required for all on non-residential landscapes and residential landscapes of five thousand square feet or larger. 
h.  Master shut-off valves are required on all projects except landscapes that make use of technologies that allow for the individual control of sprinklers that are individually pressurized in a system equipped with low pressure shut down features. 
i.  The irrigation system shall be designed to prevent runoff, low head drainage, overspray, or other similar conditions where irrigation water flows onto non-targeted areas, such as adjacent property, non-irrigated areas, hardscapes, roadways, or structures. 
j.  Relevant information from the soil management plan, such as soil type and infiltration rate, shall be utilized when designing irrigation systems. 
k.  The design of the irrigation system shall conform to the hydrozones of the landscape design plan. 
l.  The irrigation system must be designed and installed to meet, at a minimum, the irrigation efficiency criteria as described in California Code of Regulations] Section 492.4 regarding the maximum applied water allowance. 
m.  All irrigation emission devices must meet the requirements set in the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) standard, American Society of Agricultural and Biological Engineers'/International Code Council's (ASABE/ICC) 802-2014 "Landscape Irrigation Sprinkler and Emitter Standard. All sprinkler heads installed in the landscape must document a distribution uniformity low quarter of 0.65 or higher using the protocol defined in ASABE/ICC 802-2014. 
n.  It is highly recommended that the project applicant or local agency inquire with the local water purveyor about peak water operating demands (on the water supply system) or water restrictions that may impact the effectiveness of the irrigation system. 
o.  In mulched planting areas, the use of low volume irrigation is required to maximize water infiltration into the root zone. 
p.  Sprinkler heads and other emission devices shall have matched precipitation rates, unless otherwise directed by the manufacturer's recommendations. 
q.  Head to head coverage is recommended. However, sprinkler spacing shall be designed to achieve the highest possible distribution uniformity using the manufacturer's recommendations. 
r.  Swing joints or other riser-protection components are required on all risers subject to damage that are adjacent to hardscapes or in high traffic areas of turf grass. 
s.  Check valves or anti-drain valves are required on all sprinkler heads where low point drainage could occur. 
t.  Areas less than ten feet in width in any direction shall be irrigated with subsurface irrigation or other means that produces no runoff or overspray. 
u.  Overhead irrigation shall not be permitted within twenty-four inches of any non-permeable surface. Allowable irrigation within the setback from non-permeable surfaces may include drip, drip line, or other low flow non-spray technology. The setback area may be planted or unplanted. The surfacing of the setback may be mulch, gravel, or other porous material. These restrictions may be modified if: 
1)  The landscape area is adjacent to permeable surfacing and no runoff occurs; or 
2)  The adjacent non-permeable surfaces are designed and constructed to drain entirely to landscaping; or 
3)  The irrigation designer specifies an alternative design or technology, as part of the landscape documentation package and clearly demonstrates strict adherence to irrigation system design criteria in Section 13.43.110(a)(1)(i). Prevention of overspray and runoff must be confirmed during the irrigation audit. 
v.  Slopes greater than twenty-five percent shall not be irrigated with an irrigation system with an application rate exceeding seventy-five-hundredths inches per hour. This restriction may be modified if the landscape designer specifies an alternative design or technology, as part of the landscape documentation package, and clearly demonstrates no runoff or erosion will occur. Prevention of runoff and erosion must be confirmed during the irrigation audit. 
2.  Hydrozone. 
a.  Each valve shall irrigate a hydrozone with similar site, slope, sun exposure, soil conditions, and plant materials with similar water use. 
b.  Sprinkler heads and other emission devices shall be selected based on what is appropriate for the plant type within that hydrozone. 
c.  Where feasible, trees shall be placed on separate valves from shrubs, groundcovers, and turf to facilitate the appropriate irrigation of trees. The mature size and extent of the root zone shall be considered when designing irrigation for the tree. 
d.  Individual hydrozones that mix plants of moderate and low water use, or moderate and high water use, may be allowed if: 
1)  Plant factor calculation is based on the proportions of the respective plant water uses and their plant factor; or 
2)  The plant factor of the higher water using plant is used for calculations. 
e.  Individual hydrozones that mix high and low water use plants shall not be permitted. 
f.  On the landscape design plan and irrigation design plan, hydrozone areas shall be designated by number, letter, or other designation. On the irrigation design plan, designate the areas irrigated by each valve, and assign a number to each valve. Use this valve number in the Hydrozone Information Table (see Appendix B, Section A, Chapter 2.7, Division 2, Title 23 of the California Code of Regulations). This table can also assist with the irrigation audit and programming the controller. 
B.  The irrigation design plan, at a minimum, shall contain: 
1.  Location and size of separate water meters for landscape; 
2.  Location, type and size of all components of the irrigation system, including controllers, main and lateral lines, valves, sprinkler heads, moisture sensing devices, rain switches, quick couplers, pressure regulators, and backflow prevention devices; 
3.  Static water pressure at the point of connection to the public water supply; 
4.  Flow rate (gallons per minute), application rate (inches per hour), and design operating pressure (pressure per square inch) for each station; 
5.  Recycled water irrigation systems as specified in Section 13.43.180; 
6.  The following statement: "I have complied with the criteria of the ordinance and applied them accordingly for the efficient use of water in the irrigation design plan"; and 
7.  The signature of a licensed landscape architect, certified irrigation designer, licensed landscape contractor, or any other person authorized to design an irrigation system. (See Sections 5500.1, 5615, 5641, 5641.1, 5641.2, 5641.3, 5641.4, 5641.5, 5641.6, 6701, 7027.5 of the Business and Professions Code, Section 832.27 of Title 16 of the California Code of Regulations, and Section 6721 of the Food and Agricultural Code.) 
( Ord. No. 3050, § 2, 3-22-16)  
13.43.120 - Grading design plan. 
A.  For the efficient use of water, grading of a project site shall be designed to minimize soil erosion, runoff, and water waste. A grading plan shall be submitted as part of the landscape documentation package. A comprehensive grading plan prepared by a civil engineer for other local agency permits satisfies this requirement. 
1.  The project applicant shall submit a landscape grading plan that indicates finished configurations and elevations of the landscape area including: 
a.  Height of graded slopes; 
b.  Drainage patterns; 
c.  Pad elevations; 
d.  Finish grade; and 
e.  Stormwater retention improvements, if applicable. 
2.  To prevent excessive erosion and runoff, it is highly recommended that project applicants: 
a.  Grade so that all irrigation and normal rainfall remains within property lines and does not drain on to non-permeable hardscapes; 
b.  Avoid disruption of natural drainage patterns and undisturbed soil; and 
c.  Avoid soil compaction in landscape areas. 
3.  The grading design plan shall contain the following statement: "I have complied with the criteria of the ordinance and applied them accordingly for the efficient use of water in the grading design plan" and shall bear the signature of a licensed professional as authorized by law. 
( Ord. No. 3050, § 2, 3-22-16)  
13.43.130 - Certificate of completion. 
A.  The certificate of completion (see Appendix C for a sample certificate within Chapter 2.7, Division 2, Title 23 of the California Code of Regulations) shall include the following six elements: 
1.  Project information sheet that contains: 
a.  Date; 
b.  Project name; 
c.  Project applicant name, telephone, and mailing address; 
d.  Project address and location; and 
e.  Property owner name, telephone, and mailing address; 
2.  Certification by either the signer of the landscape design plan, the signer of the irrigation design plan, or the licensed landscape contractor that the landscape project has been installed per the approved landscape documentation package; 
a.  Where there have been significant changes made in the field during construction, these "as-built" or record drawings shall be included with the certification; 
b.  A diagram of the irrigation plan showing hydrozones shall be kept with the irrigation controller for subsequent management purposes. 
3.  Irrigation scheduling parameters used to set the controller (see Section 13.43.140); 
4.  Landscape and irrigation maintenance schedule (see Section 13.43.150); 
5.  Irrigation audit report (see Section 13.43.160); and 
6.  Soil analysis report, if not submitted with landscape documentation package, and documentation verifying implementation of soil report recommendations (see Section 13.43.090). 
B.  The project applicant shall: 
1.  Submit the signed certificate of completion to the local agency for review; 
2.  Ensure that copies of the approved certificate of completion are submitted to the local water purveyor and property owner or his or her designee. 
C.  The local agency shall: 
1.  Receive the signed certificate of completion from the project applicant; 
2.  Approve or deny the certificate of completion. If the certificate of completion is denied, the local agency shall provide information to the project applicant regarding reapplication, appeal, or other assistance. 
( Ord. No. 3050, § 2, 3-22-16)  
13.43.140 - Irrigation scheduling. 
A.  For the efficient use of water, all irrigation schedules shall be developed, managed, and evaluated to utilize the minimum amount of water required to maintain plant health. Irrigation schedules shall meet the following criteria: 
1.  Irrigation scheduling shall be regulated by automatic irrigation controllers. 
2.  Overhead irrigation shall be scheduled between 8:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. unless weather conditions prevent it. If allowable hours of irrigation differ from the local water purveyor, the stricter of the two shall apply. Operation of the irrigation system outside the normal watering window is allowed for auditing and system maintenance. 
3.  For implementation of the irrigation schedule, particular attention must be paid to irrigation run times, emission device, flow rate, and current reference evapotranspiration, so that applied water meets the estimated total water use. Total annual applied water shall be less than or equal to maximum applied water allowance (MAWA). Actual irrigation schedules shall be regulated by automatic irrigation controllers using current reference evapotranspiration data (e.g., CIMIS) or soil moisture sensor data. 
4.  Parameters used to set the automatic controller shall be developed and submitted for each of the following: 
a.  The plant establishment period; 
b.  The established landscape; and 
c.  Temporarily irrigated areas. 
5.  Each irrigation schedule shall consider for each station all of the following that apply: 
a.  Irrigation interval (days between irrigation); 
b.  Irrigation run times (hours or minutes per irrigation event to avoid runoff); 
c.  Number of cycle starts required for each irrigation event to avoid runoff; 
d.  Amount of applied water scheduled to be applied on a monthly basis; 
e.  Application rate setting; 
f.  Root depth setting; 
g.  Plant type setting; 
h.  Soil type; 
i.  Slope factor setting; 
j.  Shade factor setting; and 
k.  Irrigation uniformity or efficiency setting. 
( Ord. No. 3050, § 2, 3-22-16)  
13.43.150 - Landscape and irrigation maintenance schedule. 
A.  Landscapes shall be maintained to ensure water use efficiency. A regular maintenance schedule shall be submitted with the certificate of completion. 
B.  A regular maintenance schedule shall include, but not be limited to, routine inspection; auditing, adjustment and repair of the irrigation system and its components; aerating and dethatching turf areas; topdressing with compost, replenishing mulch; fertilizing; pruning; weeding in all landscape areas, and removing obstructions to emission devices. Operation of the irrigation system outside the normal watering window is allowed for auditing and system maintenance. 
C.  Repair of all irrigation equipment shall be done with the originally installed components or their equivalents or with components with greater efficiency. 
D.  A project applicant is encouraged to implement established landscape industry sustainable best practices for all landscape maintenance activities. 
( Ord. No. 3050, § 2, 3-22-16)  
13.43.160 - Irrigation audit, irrigation survey, and irrigation water use analysis. 
A.  All landscape irrigation audits shall be conducted by a local agency landscape irrigation auditor or a third party certified landscape irrigation auditor. Landscape audits shall not be conducted by the person who designed the landscape or installed the landscape. 
B.  In large projects or projects with multiple landscape installations (i.e. production home developments) an auditing rate of one in seven lots or approximately fifteen percent will satisfy this requirement. 
C.  For new construction and rehabilitated landscape projects installed after December 1, 2015, as described in Section 13.43.020: 
1.  The project applicant shall submit an irrigation audit report with the certificate of completion to the local agency that may include, but is not limited to: inspection, system tune-up, system test with distribution uniformity, reporting overspray or runoff that causes overland flow, and preparation of an irrigation schedule, including configuring irrigation controllers with application rate, soil types, plant factors, slope, exposure and any other factors necessary for accurate programming; 
2.  The local agency shall administer programs that may include, but not be limited to, irrigation water use analysis, irrigation audits, and irrigation surveys for compliance with the maximum applied water allowance. 
( Ord. No. 3050, § 2, 3-22-16)  
13.43.170 - Irrigation efficiency. 
A.  For the purpose of determining estimated total water use, average irrigation efficiency is assumed to be 0.75 for overhead spray devices and 0.81 for drip system devices. 
( Ord. No. 3050, § 2, 3-22-16)  
13.43.180 - Recycled water. 
A.  The installation of recycled water irrigation systems shall allow for the current and future use of recycled water. 
B.  All recycled water irrigation systems shall be designed and operated in accordance with all applicable local and state laws. 
C.  Landscapes using recycled water are considered special landscape areas. The ET adjustment factor for new and existing (non-rehabilitated) special landscape areas shall not exceed 1.0. 
( Ord. No. 3050, § 2, 3-22-16)  
13.43.190 - Graywater systems. 
A.  Graywater systems promote the efficient use of water and are encouraged to assist in on-site landscape irrigation. All graywater systems shall conform to the California Plumbing Code (Title 24, Part 5, Chapter 16) and any applicable local ordinance standards. Refer to Section 13.43.020(d) for the applicability of this chapter to landscape areas less than two thousand five hundred square feet with the estimated total water use met entirely by graywater. 
( Ord. No. 3050, § 2, 3-22-16)  
13.43.200 - Stormwater management and rainwater retention. 
A.  Stormwater management practices minimize runoff and increase infiltration which recharges groundwater and improves water quality. Implementing stormwater best management practices into the landscape and grading design plans to minimize runoff and to increase on-site rainwater retention and infiltration are encouraged. 
B.  Project applicants shall refer to the local agency or Regional Water Quality Control Board for information on any applicable stormwater technical requirements. 
C.  All planted landscape areas are required to have friable soil to maximize water retention and infiltration. Refer to Section 13.43.100(a)(3). 
D.  It is strongly recommended that landscape areas be designed for capture and infiltration capacity that is sufficient to prevent runoff from impervious surfaces (i.e. roof and paved areas) from either: (1) the one-inch, twenty-four-hour rain event, or (2) the eighty-fifth percentile, twenty-four-hour rain event, and/or additional capacity as required by any applicable local, regional, state or federal regulation. 
E.  It is recommended that stormwater projects incorporate any of the following elements to improve on-site stormwater and dry weather runoff capture and use: 
1.  Grade impervious surfaces, such as driveways, during construction to drain to vegetated areas. 
2.  Minimize the area of impervious surfaces such as paved areas, roof and concrete driveways. 
3.  Incorporate pervious or porous surfaces (e.g., gravel, permeable pavers or blocks, pervious or porous concrete) that minimize runoff. 
4.  Direct runoff from paved surfaces and roof areas into planting beds or landscaped areas to maximize site water capture and reuse. 
5.  Incorporate rain gardens, cisterns, and other rain harvesting or catchment systems. 
6.  Incorporate infiltration beds, swales, basins and drywells to capture stormwater and dry weather runoff and increase percolation into the soil. 
7.  Consider constructed wetlands and ponds that retain water, equalize excess flow, and filter pollutants. 
( Ord. No. 3050, § 2, 3-22-16)  
13.43.210 - Public education. 
A.  Publications. Education is a critical component to promote the efficient use of water in landscapes. The use of appropriate principles of design, installation, management and maintenance that save water is encouraged in the community. 
1.  A local agency or water supplier/purveyor shall provide information to owners of permitted renovations and new, single-family residential homes regarding the design, installation, management, and maintenance of water efficient landscapes based on a water budget. 
B.  Model Homes. All model homes that are landscaped shall use signs and written information to demonstrate the principles of water efficient landscapes described in this chapter. 
1.  Signs shall be used to identify the model as an example of a water efficient landscape featuring elements such as hydrozones, irrigation equipment, and others that contribute to the overall water efficient theme. Signage shall include information about the site water use as designed per the local ordinance; specify who designed and installed the water efficient landscape; and demonstrate low water use approaches to landscaping such as using native plants, graywater systems, and rainwater catchment systems. 
2.  Information shall be provided about designing, installing, managing, and maintaining water efficient landscapes. 
( Ord. No. 3050, § 2, 3-22-16)  
13.43.220 - Environmental review. 
A.  The city shall comply with the provisions of the California [Environmental] Quality Act (CEQA). 
( Ord. No. 3050, § 2, 3-22-16)  
13.43.230 - Provisions for existing landscapes. 
A.  The city may by mutual agreement, designate another agency, such as a water purveyor, to implement some or all of the requirements contained in this chapter. The city may collaborate with water purveyors to define each entity's specific responsibilities relating to this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 3050, § 2, 3-22-16)  
13.43.240 - Irrigation audit, irrigation survey, and irrigation water use analysis. 
A.  This Section 13.43.240, shall apply to all existing landscapes that were installed before December 1, 2015 and are over one acre in size. 
1.  For all landscapes in Section 13.43.240.A. that have a water meter, the local agency shall administer programs that may include, but not be limited to, irrigation water use analyses, irrigation surveys, and irrigation audits to evaluate water use and provide recommendations as necessary to reduce landscape water use to a level that does not exceed the maximum applied water allowance for existing landscapes. The maximum applied water allowance for existing landscapes shall be calculated as: MAWA = (0.8) (ETo) (LA) (0.62). 
2.  For all landscapes in Section 13.43.240.A., that do not have a meter, the local agency shall administer programs that may include, but not be limited to, irrigation surveys and irrigation audits to evaluate water use and provide recommendations as necessary in order to prevent water waste. 
B.  All landscape irrigation audits shall be conducted by a certified landscape irrigation auditor. 
( Ord. No. 3050, § 2, 3-22-16)  
13.43.250 - Water waste prevention. 
A.  Local agencies shall prevent water waste resulting from inefficient landscape irrigation by prohibiting runoff from leaving the target landscape due to low head drainage, overspray, or other similar conditions where water flows onto adjacent property, non-irrigated areas, walks, roadways, parking lots, or structures. Penalties for violation of these prohibitions shall be established locally. 
B.  Restrictions regarding overspray and runoff may be modified if: 
1.  The landscape area is adjacent to permeable surfacing and no runoff occurs; or 
2.  The adjacent non-permeable surfaces are designed and constructed to drain entirely to landscaping. 
( Ord. No. 3050, § 2, 3-22-16)  
13.43.260 - Effective precipitation. 
A.  The city may consider effective precipitation (twenty-five percent of annual precipitation) in tracking water use and may use the following equation to calculate maximum applied water allowance: 
MAWA = (ETo - Eppt) (0.62) [(0.55 x LA) + (0.45 x SLA)] for residential areas. 
MAWA = (ETo-EPPT) (0.62) [(0.45 x LA) + (0.55 x SLA)] for non-residential areas. 
( Ord. No. 3050, § 2, 3-22-16)  
13.43.270 - Reporting. 
A.  The city shall comply with the reporting requirements of the implementation and enforcement of 23 California Code of Regulations Section 495. 
( Ord. No. 3050, § 2, 3-22-16)  
Chapter 13.48 - LEASE OF PUBLIC UTILITIES 
Sections: 
 
13.48.010 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter the following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the following meanings ascribed to them: 
A.  "City" shall mean city of Whittier; and 
B.  "City council" shall mean city council of the city; and 
C.  "Public utility" shall mean each public utility for furnishing water, wastewater disposal, solid waste collection or solid waste disposal services to customers. 
(Ord. 2799 § 1 (part), 2002)  
13.48.020 - Lease of public utilities. 
The city may lease, for just compensation, all or any part of the portion of its public utility for furnishing of water, wastewater disposal, solid waste collection and solid waste disposal services to any other municipal corporation, public agency or public utility corporation upon the terms and conditions agreed upon by the city if the acquiring entity by resolution adopted by a majority of the members of its legislative body or board of directors has concurred in the lease and the terms and conditions thereof and if the acquiring entity will be bound to render water, wastewater disposal or refuse collection and disposal services to the persons formerly served through the system being leased on terms and conditions which are just and reasonable and which do not unreasonably discriminate against the customers of the acquired entity. 
(Ord. 2799 § 1 (part), 2002)  
13.48.030 - Proposal for the acquisition of the public utility—Public hearing. 
The city council may specify the manner of soliciting and filing, and the method of evaluating, any proposal for the acquisition of the public utility, or any such proposal may be recommended by city staff. Upon receipt and staff evaluation of a proposal, the city council shall schedule a public hearing, and notice thereof shall be published in accordance with Section 6066 of the California Government Code. At the hearing, the city council shall examine proposals received and staff recommendations, and without lease term or other restrictions, may lease, for just compensation, the public utility to the entity that the city council finds best qualified to continue to provide equal or better service to the customers of the system. 
(Ord. 2799 § 1 (part), 2002)  
Title 15 - BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION 
Chapters:  
Chapter 15.04 - ADOPTION OF TECHNICAL BUILDING CODES AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3062 , § 3, adopted Jan. 24, 2017, amended Ch. 15.04 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 15.04, §§ 15.04.010—15.04.140, pertained to building codes. See Code Comparative Table for a detailed history of derivation. 
 
15.04.010 - Adoption of specific Codes—Copies on file. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the following California Building Codes are adopted and include: 
1.  The 2016 California Building Code including Appendix F, I and J; 
2.  The 2016 California Residential Code including Appendix H; 
3.  The 2016 California Electrical Code; 
4.  The 2016 California Mechanical Code; 
5.  The 2016 California Plumbing Code including Appendix A and I; 
6.  The 2016 California Energy Code; 
7.  The 2016 California Historical Building Code; 
8.  The 2016 California Existing Building Code; 
9.  The 2016 California Green Building Standards; 
10.  The 2016 California Referenced Standards Code; 
11.  The 2015 International Pool and Spa Code; 
12.  The 1997 Abatement of Dangerous Buildings Code. 
13.  The 1997 Uniform Housing Code. 
including all indices and amendments, are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter as if fully set out herein, as Chapter 15.04.005.010 [on file in the offices of the city, as adopted by Ord. No. 3062 ] of Title 15 of this Code. 
(b)  Copies of Codes Available. In accordance with, Health & Safety Code § 18942(d), one copy of said Codes will remain on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 3062 , § 3, 1-24-17)  
15.04.020 - Definition of terms. 
Whenever any of the following names or terms are used in the 2016 California Codes; including all indices and amendments, or in the Whittier Municipal Code, such names or terms will be deemed and constructed to have the name ascribed to it in this section, as follows: 
"Building and safety division" means the Building and Safety Division, Community Development Services Department of the City of Whittier; 
"Health office" means the Los Angeles County Health Department. 
(Ord. No. 3062 , § 3, 1-24-17)  
15.04.030 - Resolution of conflicts in application. 
In the event of any conflict or ambiguity between any provision contained in the California Codes and any amendment or addition thereto contained in this title, the amendment or addition thereto will control. 
(Ord. No. 3062 , § 3, 1-24-17)  
Chapter 15.06 - EARTHQUAKE HAZARD REDUCTION IN EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Sections: 
 
15.06.010 - Purpose. 
A.  The purpose of this chapter is to promote public safety and welfare by reducing the risk of death or injury that may result from the effects of earthquakes on unreinforced masonry bearing wall buildings, or buildings containing unreinforced masonry infill walls, constructed prior to August 10, 1933. Such buildings have been widely recognized for sustaining life-hazardous damage, including partial or complete collapse during moderate to strong earthquakes. 
B.  The provisions of this chapter are intended as minimum standards for structural seismic resistance established primarily to reduce the risk of life loss or injury. Compliance with these standards will not necessarily prevent loss of life or injury or prevent earthquake damage to rehabilitated buildings. This chapter does not require alteration of existing electrical, plumbing, mechanical or fire safety systems unless they constitute a hazard to life or property. 
C.  This chapter provides systematic procedures and standards for identification and classification of unreinforced masonry bearing wall and infill buildings based on their present use. Priorities, time periods and standards are also established under which these buildings are required to be structurally analyzed and anchored. Where the analysis finds deficiencies, this chapter requires the building to be strengthened or demolished. 
D.  Qualified historical buildings shall comply with the State Historical Building Code (SHBC) established under Part 8, Title 24 of the California Administrative Code. 
(Ord. 2493 § 1 (part), 1990)  
15.06.020 - Scope. 
A.  Applicability. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to buildings constructed or under construction prior to August 10, 1933, or for which a building permit was issued prior to August 10, 1933, which on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter have unreinforced masonry bearing walls, or unreinforced masonry infilled walls, as defined herein. 
B.  Exception. This chapter shall not apply to detached one or two family dwellings or detached apartment houses containing less than five units and used solely for residential purposes. 
(Ord. 2493 § 1 (part), 1990)  
15.06.030 - Definitions. 
A.  For purposes of this chapter, the applicable definitions in Sections 2302 and 2312 of the Uniform Building Code, 1988 edition, shall apply. 
B.  Additional Definitions. 
1.  Essential building means any building housing a hospital or other medical treatment facility having surgery or emergency treatment areas; fire or police stations; municipal government disaster operation and communication centers. 
2.  High risk building. 
a.  High risk building means any building, not classified as an essential building, having an occupant load of one hundred or more, as determined by Section 3302 (a) of the Uniform Building Code, 1988 edition. 
b.  Exception. A high risk building shall not include the following: 
i.  Any building having exterior walls braced with masonry crosswalls or wood frame crosswalls spaced less than forty feet apart in each story. Crosswalls shall be full story height with a minimum length of one-and-one-half times the story height. 
ii.  Any building used for its intended purpose, as determined by the director of building and safety, for less than twenty hours per week. 
3.  Medium risk building means any building, not classified as a high risk building or an essential building, having an occupant load of twenty or more as determined by Section 3302 (a) of the Uniform Building Code, 1988 edition. 
4.  Low risk building means any building, not classified as an essential building, having an occupant load of less than twenty as determined by Section 3302 (a) of the Uniform Building Code, 1988 edition. 
5.  Unreinforced masonry bearing wall means a masonry wall having all of the following characteristics: 
a.  Provides the vertical support for a floor or roof; 
b.  The total superimposed load exceeds one hundred pounds per lineal foot; 
c.  The area of reinforcing steel is less than fifty percent of that required by Section 2407 (h) of the Uniform Building Code, 1988 edition. 
6.  Unreinforced masonry infill wall means a masonry wall, or portion of a wall, not classified as an unreinforced masonry bearing wall, where the area of reinforcing steel is less than fifty percent of that required by Section 2407(h) of the Uniform Building Code, 1988 edition. 
(Ord. 2493 § 1 (part), 1990)  
15.06.040 - Rating classifications. 
A.  The rating classifications shown in Table 15.06.040, are hereby established and each building within the scope of this chapter shall be placed in one such rating classification by the director of building and safety. The total occupant load of the entire building, as determined by Section 3302(a) of the Uniform Building Code, 1988 edition, shall be used to determine the rating classification. 
B.  Exception. For the purpose of this chapter, portions of buildings constructed to act independently when resisting seismic forces may be placed in separate rating classifications. 
Table 15.06.040 
Rating Classifications 
Type of Building 	Classification 
Essential building 	I 
High risk building 	II 
Medium risk building 	III 
Low risk building 	IV 
 
(Ord. 2493 § 1 (part), 1990)  
15.06.050 - General requirements. 
A.  The owner of each building within the scope of this chapter shall cause a structural analysis of the building to be made by a civil or structural engineer or architect licensed by the state of California. If the building does not meet the minimum earthquake standards specified in this chapter, the owner shall either cause it to be structurally altered to conform to such standards, or cause the building to be demolished. 
B.  The owner of a building within the scope of this chapter shall comply with the requirements set forth above by submitting to the director of building and safety for review within the stated time limits: 
1.  Within two hundred seventy days after service of the order, a structural analysis, which is subject to approval by the director of building and safety, demonstrating that the building meets the minimum requirements of this chapter; or 
2.  Within two hundred seventy days after service of the order, a structural analysis and plans for the proposed structural alterations to the building necessary to comply with the minimum requirements of this chapter; or 
3.  Within one hundred twenty days after service of the order, plans for the installation of wall anchors in accordance with the requirements specified in Section 15.06.070(C); or 
4.  Within two hundred seventy days after service of the order, plans for the demolition of the building. 
C.  After plans are submitted and approved by the director of building and safety, the owner shall obtain a building permit, commence and complete the required construction or demolition within the time limits set forth in Table 15.06.050 A. These time limits shall commence to run from the date the order is served in accordance with subsections A and B of this section. 
D.  Owners electing to comply with subsection B 3 of this section are also required to comply with subsections B 2 or B 4 of this section; provided, however, that the two hundred seventy day time period provided for in said subsections and the time limits for obtaining a building permit, commencing construction and completing construction for complete structural alterations or building demolition set forth in Table 15.06.050 A shall be extended in accordance with Table 15.06.050 B. Each such extended time limit, except the time limit for commencing construction, shall commence to run from the date the order is served in accordance with Section 15.06.060 (B). The time limit for commencing construction shall commence from the date the building permit is issued. 
Table 15.06.050A 
Time Limits For Compliance 
Required Action 
By Owner 	Obtain Building 
Permit 
Within 	Commence 
Construction 
Within 	Complete 
Construction 
Within 
Complete structural alterations or building demolition 	1 year l80 days 1 	2 years 	
			
Wall anchor installation 	180 days 	270 days 	1 year 
1 Measured from the date of building permit issuance. All other time limits are measured from the date of the order. 
 
Table 15.06.050B 
Service Priorities and Extended Time Provisions 
Rating 
Classification 	Occupant 
Load 	Extension of Time 
If Wall Anchors 
Are Installed 	Minimum Time 
Periods for 
Service of Order 
I 
(highest priority) 	Any 	270 days 	0 
II 	100 or more 	2 years 	90 days 
III 	100 or more 	3 years 	270 days 
	51 to and including 99 	4 years 	1 year 
	20 to and including 50 	4 years 	1 year 
IV 
(lowest priority) 	Less than 20 	5 years 	1 year 
 
(Ord. 2493 § 1 (part), 1990)  
15.06.060 - Administration. 
A.  Service of Order. The director of building and safety shall issue an order, as provided in subsection B of this section, to the owner of each building within the scope of this chapter in accordance with the minimum time periods for service of such orders set forth in Table 15.06.050 B. The minimum time period for the service of such orders shall be measured from the effective date of this chapter. Upon receipt of a written request from the owner, the director of building and safety shall order a building to comply prior to the normal service date for such building set forth in this section. 
B.  Contents of Order. The order shall be in writing and shall be served either personally or by certified or registered mail upon the owner as shown on the last equalized assessment, and upon the person, if any, in apparent charge or control of the building. The order shall specify that the building has been determined by the director of building and safety to be within the scope of this chapter and, therefore, is required to meet the minimum seismic standards of this chapter. The order shall specify the rating classification of the building and shall be accompanied by a copy of Section 15.06.050 which sets forth the owner's alternatives and time limits for compliance. 
C.  Appeal Form Order. 
1.  The owner or person in charge or control of the building may appeal to the board of examiners and appeals the director of building and safety's initial determination that the building is within the scope of this chapter. Such an appeal shall be filed with the board within sixty days from the service date of the order described in subsection B of this section. Any such appeal shall be decided by the board no later than sixty days after the date that the appeal is filed. Such appeal shall be made in writing upon appropriate forms provided by the director of building and safety and the grounds therefor shall be stated clearly and concisely. Each appeal shall be accompanied by a filing fee as established by resolution of the city council. 
2.  Appeals or requests for minor modifications from any other determinations, orders or actions by the director of building and safety pursuant to this chapter, shall be made in accordance with the appeal procedures established in Section 15.08.260. 
D.  Recordation. 
1.  At the time that the aforementioned order is served, the director of building and safety shall cause to be filed with the office of the County Recorder a document stating that the subject building is within the scope of this chapter. The document shall also state that the owner thereof has been ordered to structurally analyze the building and to structurally alter or demolish it where it is not found to comply with this chapter. 
2.  If the building is found not to be within the scope of this chapter, or as a result of structural alterations or an analysis is found to be structurally capable of resisting minimum seismic forces required by this chapter; or is demolished; the director of building and safety shall cause to be filed with the office of the county recorder a document terminating the status of the subject building as being classified within the scope of this chapter. 
E.  Enforcement. If the owner or other person in charge or control of the subject building fails to comply with any order issued by the director of building and safety pursuant to this chapter within any of the time limits set forth in Section 15.06.050, the director of building and safety shall order that the entire building be vacated and remain vacated until such order has been complied with. If compliance with such order has not been accomplished within ninety days after the date the building has been ordered vacated, or by such additional time as may have been granted by the board of examiners and appeals, the director of building and safety may order demolition of the building in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 8.08 of this code. 
(Ord. 2493 § 1 (part), 1990)  
15.06.070 - Analysis and design. 
A.  Generally. Every structure within the scope of this chapter shall be analyzed and constructed to resist minimum total lateral seismic forces assumed to act nonconcurrently in the direction of each of the main axes of the structure in accordance with the following equation: 
V = IKCSW 
The value of IKCS need not exceed the values set forth in Table 15.06.070 A based on the applicable rating classification of the building. 
B.  Lateral Forces on Elements of Structures. 
1.  Parts or portions of structures shall be analyzed and designed for lateral loads in accordance with subsection A of this section and Section 2312 (e) of the Uniform Building Code, 1985 edition but not less than the value from the following equation: 
F p = IC p SW p 
For the provisions of this subsection, the product of IS need not exceed the values as set forth in Table 15.06.070 B. 
2.  Exception. Unreinforced masonry walls in buildings not having a rating classification of I may be analyzed in accordance with Section 15.06.080. 
3.  The value of C p need not exceed the values set forth in Table 15.06.070 C. 
C.  Anchorage and Interconnection. Anchorage and interconnection of all parts, portions and elements of the structure shall be analyzed and designed for lateral forces in accordance with Table 15.06.070 C and the equation F p = IC p SW p as modified by Table 15.06.070 B. Minimum anchorage of masonry walls to each floor or roof shall resist a minimum force of two hundred pounds per linear foot acting normal to the wall at the level of the floor or roof. 
D.  Level of Required Repair. Alterations and repairs required to meet the provisions of this chapter shall comply with all other applicable requirements of the Uniform Building Code unless otherwise specifically provided for in this chapter. 
E.  Required Analysis. 
1.  Generally. Except as modified herein, the analysis and design relating to the structural alteration of existing structures within the scope of this chapter shall be in accordance with the analysis specified in the Uniform Building Code. 
2.  Continuous Stress Path. A complete, continuous stress path from every part or portion of the structure to the ground shall be provided for the required horizontal forces. 
3.  Positive Connections. All parts, portions or elements of the structure shall be interconnected by positive means. 
F.  Analysis Procedure. 
1.  Generally. Stresses in materials and existing construction utilized to transfer seismic forces from parts or portions of the structure to the ground shall conform to those permitted by the Uniform Building Code and those materials and types of construction specified in Section 15.06.080. 
2.  Connections. Materials and connectors used for interconnection of parts and portions of the structure shall conform to the Uniform Building Code. Nails may be used as part of an approved connector. 
3.  Unreinforced Masonry Walls. 
a.  Except as modified herein, unreinforced masonry walls shall be analyzed as specified in Sections 2406, 2407 and 2408 to withstand all vertical loads as specified in Chapter 23 of the Uniform Building Code in addition to the seismic forces required by this chapter. The fifty percent increase in the seismic force factor for shear walls as specified in Section 2407 (h)4.F of the Uniform Building Code may be omitted in the computation of seismic loads to existing shear walls. 
b.  No allowable tension stress will be permitted in unreinforced masonry walls. Walls not capable of resisting the required design forces specified in this chapter shall be strengthened or shall be removed and replaced. 
c.  Exception. 
i.  Unreinforced masonry walls in buildings not classified as a Rating Classification I pursuant to Table 15.06.040 may be analyzed in accordance with Section 15.06.080. 
ii.  An unreinforced masonry wall which carries no design or applied loads other than its own weight may be considered as veneer if it is adequately anchored to new supporting elements. 
G.  Combination of Vertical and Seismic Forces. 
1.  New Materials. All new materials introduced into the structure to meet the requirements of this chapter which are subject to combined vertical and horizontal forces shall comply with Section 2303 (f) of the Uniform Building Code. 
2.  Existing Materials. When stresses in existing lateral force resisting elements are due to a combination of dead loads plus live loads plus seismic loads, the allowable working stress specified in the Uniform Building Code may be increased one hundred percent. However, no increase will be permitted in the stresses allowed in Section 15.06.080, and the stresses in members due only to seismic and dead loads shall not exceed the values permitted by Section 2303 (d) of the Uniform Building Code. 
3.  Allowable Reduction of Bending Stress by Vertical Load. In calculating tensile fiber stress due to seismic forces required by this chapter, the maximum tensile fiber stress may be reduced by the full direct stress due to vertical dead loads. 
Table 15.06.070A 
Horizontal Force Factors Based on Rating Classification 
Rating 
Classification 	IKCS 
I 	0.186 
II 	0.133 
III & IV 	0.100 
 
Table 15.06.070B 
Horizontal Force Factors "IS" for Parts or Portions of Structures 
Rating 
Classification 	IS 
I 	1.50 
II 	1.00 
III & IV 	0.75 
 
Table 15.06.070C 
Horizontal Force Factor "C p " for Parts or 
Portions of Buildings or Other Structures 1 
Part or Portion of 
Buildings 	Direction of Force 	Value of C p 
Exterior bearing and nonbearing walls, interior bearing walls and partitions, interior nonbearing walls and partitions over ten feet in height, masonry fences over six feet in height. 	Normal to flat surface 	0.20 
Cantilever parapet and other cantilever walls, except retaining walls 	Normal to flat surface 	1.00 
Exterior and interior ornamentations and appendages 	Any direction 	1.00 
When connected to, or a part of, a building; towers, tanks, towers and tanks plus contents, racks over 8 feet 3 inches in height plus contents, chimneys, smokestacks and penthouses 	Any direction 	0.20 2&4 
When connected to, or a part of, a building; rigid and rigidly mounted equipment and machinery not required for continued operation of essential occupancies. 5 	Any horizontal direction 	0.20 3 
Tanks plus effective contents resting on the ground. 	Any direction 	0.12 
Floors and roofs acting as diaphragms. 	In the plane of the diaphragm 	0.12 6 
Prefabricated structural elements, other than walls, with force applied at center of gravity of assembly. 	Any horizontal director 	0.30 
Connections for exterior panels or elements. 	Any direction 	2.00 
 
Notes: 
1 See Section 15.06.070 B for use of C p . 
2 When located in the upper portion of any building with a h n /D ratio of 5 to 1 or greater, the value shall be increased by fifty percent. 
3 For flexible and flexibly mounted equipment and machinery, the appropriate values for C p shall be determined with consideration given to both the dynamic properties of the equipment and machinery and to the building or structure in which it is placed. 
4 The W,, for storage racks shall be the weight of the racks plus contents. The value of C p for racks over two storage support levels in height shall be 0.16 for the levels below the top two levels. 
5 The design of the equipment and machinery and their anchorage is an integral part of the design and specification of such equipment and machinery. The structure to which the equipment or machinery is mounted shall be capable of resisting the anchorage forces (see also Section 2312 (k) of the Uniform Building Code, 1985 edition). 
6 Floors and roofs acting as diaphragms shall be designed for a minimum force resulting from a C p of .l2 applied to W p unless a greater force results from the distribution of lateral forces in accordance with Section 2312 (e) of the Uniform Building Code, 1985 edition. 
(Ord. 2493 § 1 (part), 1990)  
15.06.080 - Materials of construction. 
A.  Generally. All materials permitted by the Uniform Building Code including their appropriate allowable stresses and those existing configurations of materials specified herein may be utilized to meet the requirements of this chapter. 
B.  Existing Materials. 
1.  Unreinforced Masonry Walls. 
a.  Unreinforced masonry walls analyzed in accordance with this chapter may provide vertical support for roof and floor construction and resistance to lateral loads. The facing and backing of such walls shall be bonded so that not less than four percent of the exposed face area is composed of solid headers extending not less than four inches into the backing. The distance between adjacent full-length headers shall not exceed twenty-four inches vertically or horizontally. Where the backing consists of two or more wythes the header shall extend not less than four inches into the most distant wythe, or the backing wythes shall be bonded together with separate headers whose area and spacing conform to the foregoing. 
b.  Tension stresses due to seismic forces normal to the wall may be neglected if the walls do not exceed the height to thickness ratio in Table 15.06.080 A and the in-plane shear stresses due to seismic loads do not exceed those set forth in Table 15.06.080 B. 
c.  If the wall height-thickness ratio exceeds the specified limits, the wall may be supported by vertical bracing members designed in accordance with Section 15.06.070. The deflection of such bracing member at design load shall not exceed one-tenth of the wall thickness. 
d.  Exception. The wall may be supported by flexible vertical bracing members designed in accordance with Section 15.06.070 (B) if the deflection at design loads is not less than one-quarter nor more than one-third of the wall thickness. 
e.  All vertical bracing members shall be attached to floor and roof construction for their design loads independently of required wall anchors. Horizontal spacing of vertical bracing members shall not exceed one-half of the wall height nor ten feet. 
f.  The wall height may be measured vertically to bracing elements other than a floor or roof. Spacing of the bracing elements and wall anchors shall not exceed six feet. Bracing elements shall be detailed to minimize the horizontal displacement of the wall by components of vertical displacements of the floor or roof. 
2.  Existing Roof, Floors, Walls, Footings and Wood Framing. Existing materials, including wood shear walls, utilized in the described configuration may be used as part of the lateral load resisting system, provided that the stresses in these materials do not exceed the values shown in Table 15.06.080 C. 
C.  Strengthening of Existing Materials. New materials, including wood shear walls, may be utilized to strengthen portions of the existing seismic resisting system in the described configurations provided that the stresses do not exceed the values shown in Table 15.06.080 D. 
D.  Alternate Materials. Alternate materials, designs and methods of construction may be approved by the director of building and safety in accordance with the provisions of the Uniform Building Code. 
E.  Minimum Acceptable Quality of Existing Unreinforced Masonry Walls. 
1.  General Provisions. All unreinforced masonry walls utilized to carry vertical loads and seismic forces parallel and perpendicular to the wall plane shall be tested as specified in this subsection. All masonry quality shall equal or exceed the minimum standards established herein or shall be removed and replaced with new materials. The quality of mortar in all masonry walls shall be determined by performing in-place shear tests or by testing eight inch diameter cores. Alternative methods of testing may be approved by the director of building and safety. Nothing shall prevent pointing with mortar of the masonry wall joints before the tests are first made. Prior to any pointing, the mortar joints must be raked and cleaned to remove loose and deteriorated mortar. Mortar for pointing shall be type S or N except that masonry cements shall be used. All preparation and pointing shall be done under the continuous inspection of a registered deputy building inspector. At the conclusion of the inspection, the inspector shall submit a written report to the licensed engineer or architect responsible for the seismic analysis of the building setting forth the result of the work inspected. Such report shall be submitted to the director of building and safety for approval as part of the structural analysis. All testing shall be performed in accordance with the requirements specified in this subsection by a testing agency approved by the director of building and safety. An accurate record shall be kept of all such tests and of their locations in the building, and these results shall be submitted to the director of building and safety for approval as part of the structural analysis. 
2.  Number and Location of Tests. The minimum number of tests shall be two per wall or line of wall elements resisting a common force, or one per one thousand five hundred square feet of wall surface, with a minimum of eight tests in any case. The exact test or core location shall be determined at the building site by the licensed engineer or architect responsible for the seismic analysis of the subject building. 
3.  In-place Shear Tests. The bed joints of the outer wythe of the masonry shall be tested in shear by laterally displacing a single brick relative to the adjacent bricks in that wythe. The opposite head joint of the brick to be tested shall be removed and cleaned prior to testing. The minimum quality mortar in eighty percent of the shear tests shall not be less than the total of thirty psi plus the axial stress in the wall at the point of the test. The shear stress shall be based on the gross area of both bed joints and shall be that at which movement of the brick is first observed. 
4.  Core Tests. A minimum number of mortar test specimens equal to the number of required cores shall be prepared from the cores and tested as specified herein. The mortar joint of the outer wythe of the masonry core shall be tested in shear by placing the circular core section in a compression testing machine with the mortar bed joint rotated fifteen degrees from the axis of the applied load. The mortar joint tested in shear shall have an average ultimate stress of twenty psi based on the gross area. The average shall be obtained from the total number of cores made. If test specimens cannot be made from cores taken, then the shear value shall be reported as zero. 
F.  Testing of Shear Bolts. One-fourth of all new shear bolts and dowels embedded in unreinforced masonry walls shall be tested by a registered deputy inspector using a calibrated torque wrench to the following minimum torques: 
	
½? diameter bolts or dowels = 	40 foot-lbs. 
5/8 ? diameter bolts or dowels = 	50 foot-lbs. 
¾? diameter bolts or dowels = 	60 foot-lbs. 
 
No bolts exceeding three-quarters of an inch shall be used. All nuts shall be installed over malleable iron or plate washers when bearing on wood and heavy cut washers when bearing on steel. 
G.  Determination of Allowable Stresses for Design Methods Based on Test Results. 
1.  Design Shear Values. Design seismic in-plane shear stresses shall be substantiated by tests performed as specified in Section 15.06.080 E 3 and 4. Design stresses shall be related to test results obtained in accordance with Table 15.06.080 B. Intermediate values between three and ten psi may be interpolated. 
2.  Design Compression and Tension Values. Compression stresses for unreinforced masonry having a minimum design shear value of three psi shall not exceed one hundred psi. Design tension values for unreinforced masonry shall not be permitted. 
H.  Five percent of the existing rod anchors utilized as all or part of the required wall anchors shall be tested in pullout by an approved testing laboratory. The minimum number tested shall be four per horizontal assembly, with two tests at walls with joists framing into the wall and two tests at walls with joists parallel to the wall. The test apparatus shall be supported on the masonry wall at a minimum distance of the wall thickness from the anchor tested. The rod anchor shall be given a preload of three hundred pounds prior to establishing a datum for recording elongation. The tension test load reported shall be recorded at one-eighth inch relative movement of the anchor and the adjacent masonry surface. Results of all tests shall be reported. The report shall include the test results as related to the wall thickness and joist orientation. The allowable resistance value of the existing anchors shall be forty percent of the average of those tested anchors having the same wall thickness and joist orientation. 
I.  Qualification tests for new devices used for wall anchorage shall be tested with the entire tension load carried on the enlarged head at the exterior face of the wall. Bond on the part of the device between the enlarged head and the interior wall face shall be eliminated for the qualification tests. The resistance value assigned the device shall be twenty percent of the average of the ultimate loads. 
Table 15.06.080A 
Allowable Value of Height-Thickness Ratio 
of Unreinforced Masonry Walls with 
Minimum Quality Mortar 1, 2 
	Building With 
Crosswalls* 	All Other 
Buildings 
Walls of one-story buildings 	16 	13 
First story wall of multistory buildings 	16 	15 
Walls in top story of multistory buildings 	14 	9 
All other walls 	16 	13 
1 Minimum quality mortar shall be determined by laboratory testing in accordance with Section 15.06.080 E. 
2 This table is not applicable to buildings of rating classification 1. Walls of buildings within rating classification I shall be analyzed in accordance with Section 15.06.070 F. 
* As defined by Section 15.06.030 
 
  
Table 15.06.080B 
Allowable Shear Stress for Tested
Unreinforced Masonry Walls
Eighty Percent of 
Test Results in 
psi Not Less Than: 	Average Test 
Results of Cores 
in psi 	Seismic In-plane 
Shear Based on 
Gross Area 1 
30 plus axial stress 	20 	3 psi 
40 plus axial stress 	27 	4 psi 
50 plus axial stress 	33 	5 psi 
100 plus axial stress or more 	67 or more 	10 psi max 
 
1 Allowable shear stress may be increased by addition of 10% of the axial stress due to the weight of the wall directly above. 
Table 15.06.080C 
Values for Existing Materials 
Existing Materials or 
Configuration of Materials 1 	Allowable Values 
Horizontal diaphragms: 	
a. Roofs with straight sheathing and roofing applied directly to the sheathing. 	100 lbs per ft. for seismic shear. 
b. Roofs with diagonal sheathing and roofing applied directly to the sheathing. 	400 lbs. per ft. for seismic shear. 
c. Floors with straight tongue and groove sheathing. 	150 lbs. per ft. for seismic shear. 
d. floors with straight sheathing and finished wood flooring. 	300 lbs. per ft. for seismic shear 
e. Floors with diagonal sheathing and finished wood flooring. 	450 lbs. per ft. for seismic shear 
f. Floors or roofs with straight sheathing and plaster applied to the joist or rafters. 2 	Add 50 lbs. per ft. to the allowable values for items a & c. 
Shear walls: 	
Wood stud walls with lath and plaster. 	100 lbs. per ft. each side for seismic shear. 
Plain concrete footings 	f' c = 1500 psi unless otherwise shown by tests. 
Douglas fir lumber 	Allowable stress same as d and f above. 3 
Reinforcing steel 	f t = 18,000 psi maximum. 3 
Structural steel 	f t = 20,000 psi maximum. 3 
 
Notes: 
1 Material must be sound and in good condition. 
2 Wood lath and plaster must be reattached to existing joists or rafters in a manner approved by the director of building safety. 
3 Stresses given may be increased for combinations of loads as specified in Section 15.06.070 G2. 
Table 15.06.080D 
Allowable Values of New Materials Used 
In Conjunction with Existing Construction 1 
New Materials or 
Configuration of Materials 	Allowable Values 
1. Horizontal diaphragms: 	
Plywood sheathing applied directly over existing straight sheathing with ends of plywood sheets bearing on joists or rafters and edges of plywood located on centers of individual sheathing boards. 	Same as specified in Table 25-J of the UBC, 1985 edition, for blocked diaphragms.* 
2. Shear walls: 	
a. Plywood sheathing applied directly over existing wood studs. No value shall be given to plywood applied over existing plaster or wood sheathing. 	Same as values specified in Table 25-K for shear walls. 
b. Drywall or plaster applied directly over wood studs. 	75 percent of the values specified in Table 47-I. 
c. Drywall or plaster applied to plywood sheathing over existing wood studs. 	33 1/3 percent of the values specified in Table 47-I. 
3. Shear bolts: 	
Shear bolts and shear dowels embedded a minimum of 8 inches into unreinforced masonry walls. Bolt centered in a 2½ inch diameter cored hold with dry-pack or non-shrink grout around circumference of bolt or dowel. 1 	100 percent of the values for solid masonry specified in Table 24.E. No values larger than those given for ¾?Ø bolts shall be used. 
4. Tension bolts: 	
Tension bolts and tension dowels extending entirely through unreinforced masonry walls secured with bearing plates on far side of wall with at least 30 sq. inches of area. 2 	1200 lbs. per bolt or dowel. 
5. Wall anchors (15.06.090 B 1): 	
a. Bolts extending to the exterior face of the wall with a 2½ inch round plate under the head. Installed as specified for shear bolts. Spaced not closer than 12? o.c. 1, 2 	600 lbs. per bolt. 
b. Bolts or dowels extending to the exterior face of the wall with a 2½ inch round plate under the head and drill at an angle 22½ degrees to the horizontal. Installed as specified for shear 
bolts. 1, 2 	1200 lbs. per bolt or dowel. 
6. Infilled walls: 	
Reinforced masonry infilled opening in existing unreinforced masonry walls with keys or dowels to match existing reinforcing. 	Same as values specified for unreinforced masonry walls. 
7. Reinforced masonry: 	
Masonry piers and walls reinforced per Section 2407. 	Same values as specified in Chapter 24. 
8. Reinforced concrete: 	
Concrete footings, walls and piers reinforced as specified in Chapter 26 and designed for tributary loads. 	Same values as specified in Chapter 26. 
9. Existing foundation loads: 	
Foundation loads for structures exhibiting no evidence of settlement. 	Calculated existing foundation loads due to maximum dead load plus live load may be increased 25% for dead load, and may be increased 50% for dead load plus seismic load required by Chapter 15.06. 
 
Notes: 
* All referenced tables and sections not carrying a 15.06 number are to be found in the Uniform Building Code, 1985 edition. 
1 Bolts and dowels to be tested as specified in Section 15.06.080 F. 
2 Bolts and dowels to be ½ inch minimum in diameter. 
3 Drilling for bolts and dowels shall be done with an electric rotary drill. Impact tools shall not be used for drilling holes or tightening anchor and shear bolt nuts. 
(Ord. 2493 § 1 (part), 1990)  
15.06.090 - Information required on plans. 
A.  Generally. In addition to the seismic analysis required elsewhere in this chapter, the licensed engineer or architect responsible for the seismic analysis shall determine and record the information required by this section on the approved plans. 
B.  Construction Details. The following requirements with appropriate construction details shall be made a part of the approved plans: 
1.  a.  All unreinforced masonry walls shall be anchored at the roof level with tension bolts through the wall as specified in Table 15.06.080 D or by approved equivalent at a maximum anchor spacing of six feet. 
b.  All unreinforced masonry walls shall be anchored at all floors with tension bolts through the wall or by existing rod anchors at the maximum anchor spacing of six feet. All existing rod anchors shall be secured to the joists to develop the required forces. Existing rod anchors shall be tested in accordance with the provisions of Section 15.06.080 (H). 
c.  When access to the exterior face of the building is restricted due to proximity of an adjacent building, wall anchors conforming to Items 5 and 6 of Table 15.06.080 D may be used. 
d.  Alternative devices to be used in lieu of tension bolts for masonry wall anchorage shall be tested as specified in Section 15.06.080 (I). 
2.  Diaphragm chord stresses of horizontal diaphragms shall be developed in existing materials or by addition of new materials. 
3.  Where trusses and beams other than rafters or joists are supported on masonry, ledgers or columns shall be installed to support vertical loads of the roof or floor members. 
4.  Parapets and exterior wall appendages not capable of resisting the forces specified in this chapter shall be removed, stabilized or braced to ensure that the parapets and appendages remain in their original position. 
5.  All deteriorated mortar joints in unreinforced masonry walls shall be pointed with Type S or N mortar (masonry cements shall not be used). Prior to any pointing, the wall surface must be raked and cleaned to remove loose and deteriorated mortar. All preparation and pointing shall be done under the continuous inspection of a registered deputy inspector certified to inspect concrete or masonry. At the conclusion of the project, the inspector shall submit a written report to the director of building and safety setting forth the scope of the work inspected. 
6.  Repair details shall be prepared for any cracked or damaged unreinforced masonry wall required to resist forces specified in this chapter. 
7.  A prominent note shall be placed on the plans prohibiting the use of impact type tools on unreinforced masonry walls or in other elements of the structure which will transmit impact shock to unreinforced masonry construction. 
C.  Existing Construction. The following existing construction information shall be made part of the approved plans: 
1.  The type of dimensions of existing walls and the size and spacing of floor and roof members; 
2.  The extent and type of existing wall anchorage to floors and roof; 
3.  The extent and type of parapet corrections, if any, which were previously performed in accordance with requirements of the Uniform Building Code; 
4.  Accurately dimensioned floor plans and masonry wall elevations showing dimensioned openings, piers, wall thickness and heights; 
5.  The location of cracks or damaged portions of unreinforced masonry walls requiring repairs; 
6.  The type of interior wall surfaces and whether reinstalling or anchoring of ceiling plaster is necessary; 
7.  The general condition of the mortar joints and whether or not the joints require pointing. 
(Ord. 2493 § 1 (part), 1990) 
Glossary of Symbols and Notations for Chapter 15.06 Tables 
	
C 	= Numerical coefficient as specified in Section 2312(d). 
C p 	= Numerical coefficient as specified in Section 2312 (g) and as set forth in Table 23-J. 
D 	= The dimension of the structure, in feet, in a direction parallel to the applied forces. 
f' c 	= Specified compressive strength of concrete, psi. 
F p 	= Lateral forces on a part of the structure and in the direction under consideration. 
F t 	= Allowable tensile stress, psi. 
h n 	= Height in feet above the base to level n. 
I 	= Occupancy Importance Factor as set forth in Table 23-K. 
S 	= Numerical coefficient for site-structure resonance. 
V 	= The total lateral force or shear at the base. 
W 	= The total dead load as defined in Section 2302 including the partition loading specified in Section 2304(d) where applicable. 
W p 	= The weight of a portion of a structure or nonstructural component. 
 
(Added by Ord. 2493, 1990)  
Chapter 15.12 - FIRE CODE 
Sections: 
 
15.12.010 - Fire code—Adopted by reference. 
A.  Title 32 of the Los Angeles County Code (the Los Angeles County Fire Code), as adopted and amended by the County of Los Angeles is hereby adopted by reference as the fire code of the city of Whittier. 
B.  In accordance with California Government Code Section 50022.6, one (1) copy of the Los Angeles County Fire Code shall remain on file with the building official within the community development department and shall be at all times maintained by the building official for use and examination by the public. 
(Ord. No. 3067 , § 1, 3-28-17) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3067 , § 1, adopted March 28, 2017, repealed the former § 15.12.010 and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former § 15.12.010 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 3022, § 1, adopted June 24, 2014.  
15.12.020 - Applicability. 
The provisions of the fire code shall apply to existing conditions as well as to conditions arising after the adoption thereof, except that conditions legally in existence at the adoption of the fire code but not in compliance therewith shall be permitted to continue if, in the opinion of the fire chief, they do not constitute a distinct hazard to life or property. 
(Ord. 2402 § 2 (part), 1987: Ord. 2275 § 2 (part), 1982: prior code § 3110.1 (part))  
15.12.030 - Hazards—Notice to property owner. 
Whenever the fire chief determines that a hazard as described in Section 15.12.020 exists, the chief shall, in writing, advise the affected property owner of such determination, which notice shall contain a reference to the provisions of Section 15.12.040 of this code. 
(Ord. 2402 § 2 (part), 1987: Ord. 2275 § 2 (part), 1982: prior code § 3110.1 (part))  
15.12.040 - Appeal from decisions of fire chief determination. 
Any decision of the fire chief made pursuant to the provisions of the fire code or this chapter shall be final and conclusive within twenty days of the chief's giving notice of such decision to the person or persons affected thereby. If within the twenty-day period any affected person is dissatisfied with such determination or interpretation by the chief, that person may appeal such decision in writing to the city council. Such appeal shall be perfected by filing the same with the city clerk-treasurer prior to the chief's determination becoming final. There shall be paid contemporaneously with the filing of such an appeal a filing and processing fee in an amount set by resolution of the city council. Upon receipt of such an appeal, the city clerk-treasurer shall give the appealing party at least five days' written notice of the time and place of the council hearing thereon. At the time of the hearing, the city council shall review the chief's determination in light of the relevant evidence presented, and shall, based thereon, issue an order resolving the dispute. Such determination shall be final and conclusive. No such appeal shall be valid for any purpose unless the same is timely filed, and unless the required filing and processing fee is timely paid. 
(Ord. 2402 § 2 (part), 1987: Ord. 2275 § 2 (part), 1982: prior code § 3110.2)  
15.12.050 - Very high fire hazard severity zone. 
Where a very high fire hazard severity zone has been established by the city council, the following construction and property maintenance standards shall be in effect within such zone. 
A.  Roof Covering. For all new construction, or when an existing structure has fifty percent or more of its roof covering replaced within a one-year period, a Class "A" or equivalent roof covering assembly shall be installed. 
B.  Spark Arrester. At the outlet of every chimney or stovepipe attached to any fireplace, stove, or other device that burns solid or liquid fuel, a screen shall be provided and maintained in accordance with the provisions of the Uniform Building Code. 
C.  Clearance of Brush and Other Flammable Vegetation. Properties shall be maintained clear of brush and other flammable vegetation in accordance with the requirements of Section 51182, et seq., of the Government Code of the state, and the fire code. Abatement shall be in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 8.08. 
(Ord. 2685 § 4, 1996)  
15.12.060 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3022, § 2, adopted June 24, 2014, repealed § 15.12.060 in its entirety, which pertained to modification to the Uniform Fire Code, 2002 Edition, as adopted by the county fire code and derived from Ord. 2869 § 48, 2006; Ord. 2852 § 2, 2004; Ord. 2402 § 3, 1987. Subsequently, Ord. No. 3067 , § 2, adopted March 28, 2017, repealed similar but uncodified provisions pertaining to the Uniform Fire Code, 2013 Edition.  
15.12.080 - Reference to other uniform codes. 
Whenever the fire code adopted by Section 15.12.010 refers to any other uniform code adopted pursuant to the provisions of the Whittier Municipal Code, the interpretation, administration and enforcement of the provisions shall be the responsibility of the building official. 
(Ord. No. 3067 , § 3, 3-28-17) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3067 , § 3, adopted March 28, 2017, repealed the former § 15.12.080 and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former § 15.12.080 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 2402, § 4, adopted in 1987; and Ord. No. 3022, § 3, adopted June 24, 2014.  
Chapter 15.16 - FIREWORKS 
Sections: 
 
15.16.010 - Prohibited generally. 
Except as is otherwise expressly provided in this chapter, it is unlawful for any person to possess, to store, to manufacture, fabricate or assemble, to offer for sale, to expose for sale, sale or resale, or to use or to explode any fireworks within the city. "Fireworks," as used in this chapter, shall be defined as set forth in the Health and Safety Code of the state. 
(Ord. 2890 § 2, 2007)  
15.16.020 - Exceptions for public displays of fireworks. 
Public displays of fireworks, as defined in the Health and Safety Code of the state, are allowed as follows: 
A.  A public display of fireworks that complies with all of the requirements of the Health and Safety Code is authorized on the fourth of July between the hours of eight p.m. and ten p.m. at the location where fireworks displays have historically taken place at the following locations, provided that the property owner, lessee, or occupier approves of and authorizes such use: City Hall, Friendly Hills Country Club, Joe Miller Field, and York Field. However, if conditions at any of these locations are determined by the fire chief to be unsafe for the discharge of fireworks at the date and time specified herein, the fire chief may suspend, terminate or limit the exception granted by this section by notifying the entity sponsoring the fireworks display, the property owner, lessee or occupier and the police chief at any time preceding or during the display. 
B.  A public display of fireworks that complies with all of the requirements of the Health and Safety Code is authorized on the fourth of July between the hours of eight p.m. and ten p.m. or on New Year's eve between the hours of eleven p.m. and one a.m. in any area specifically designated by the fire chief, provided that the property owner, lessee, or occupier approves of and authorizes such use and the fire chief provides supervision and control of the public display. The fire chief shall make the designation by posting a sign so indicating in the designated area, notifying the police chief, and by providing any other notice to the public that the fire chief deems necessary. 
(Ord. 2908 § 1, 2008)  
15.16.030 - Seizure by fire chief authorized. 
The fire chief is authorized and directed to seize, take, remove and store at the expense of the owner any fireworks offered for sale, stored or held or possessed in violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2890 § 4, 2007)  
15.16.040 - Concurrent authorities. 
This chapter is not the exclusive regulation for fireworks with the city of Whittier. It shall supplement and be in addition to the other regulatory codes, statutes, regulations and ordinances heretofore and hereinafter enacted by the city of Whittier, the state of California or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction. 
Any provision of the city of Whittier in conflict herewith are hereby repealed. This chapter supersedes any conflicting provisions of the Uniform Fire Code and Uniform Building Code. 
(Ord. 2890 § 5, 2007)  
Chapter 15.20 - HOUSE MOVING 
Sections: 
 
15.20.010 - Housemover's permit—Required. 
No person shall move any building or structure or any portion thereof over, upon, along or across any street or alley in the city without a written permit therefor issued by the city engineer. Such permit shall be referred to as a "housemover's permit." 
(Prior code § 8310)  
15.20.020 - Housemover's permit—Application—Issuance conditions. 
A.  The housemover's permit as required in this chapter shall be issued by the city engineer. Applicants for such permits must file a written application with the city engineer on forms to be furnished by him. Each applicant shall pay to the city engineer a fee of five dollars upon the filing of such application. The application shall show the nature and kind of building to be moved, the present location of such building, a description of the real property to which the building is proposed to be moved, and a detailed route over and along which the building is to be moved. 
B.  Upon the filing of such application, the city engineer shall, within five days thereafter, consider the application and either grant or deny the same. In granting the application the city engineer may make such conditions and restrictions in the moving of the building as may be reasonably necessary to protect the public peace, health and safety of the citizens of the city, and to cause the least possible damage to public streets, alleys, public utility poles, lines, water mains, gas mains and like appurtenances. 
(Prior code § 8310.8)  
15.20.030 - Housemover's permit—Deposit—Refund conditions. 
A.  No application for a housemover's permit shall be granted or issued for any building or portion thereof to be moved over, along, or across any public street or alley until the applicant therefor shall have deposited with the city engineer a reasonable sum, lawful money of the United States, to be fixed by the city engineer depending upon the distance to be traveled in the moving of the building or structure and the probable hazards to public streets and alleys involved. The amount to be deposited by the housemover shall not be less than three hundred dollars nor more than one thousand dollars. 
B.  In the event of any damage to any public street, alley, public place, culvert, bridge, fence or other appurtenance, by reason of the moving of any building or section thereof, the city engineer shall repair the same as may be necessary to restore such damaged portions to as good a condition as the same was prior to the damage caused by the moving of such building or structure, and shall charge the cost thereon to the person, firm or corporation to whom the permit was issued for the moving of such structure. If the same is not paid within five days after presentation, the amount thereof shall be deducted from the deposit required to be made by the applicant with the city engineer, as provided in this section. 
C.  Should the applicant allow such building or structure or any portion thereof to remain on a public street or alley for a period in excess of twelve hours without moving the same, then he shall pay to the city the sum of ten dollars for each twelve hours the building or structure or a portion thereof remains on a public street or alley in the city and is not moved, and such charge may be deducted from the deposit provided in this section to be made with the city engineer. 
D.  After the building is moved and relocated as provided in the application, and all fees, costs and damages are paid or deducted from the deposit made with the city engineer, then the balance remaining of the deposit so made shall be refunded by the city engineer to the person depositing same. 
(Prior code § 8310.9(part))  
15.20.040 - Relocation permit—Required. 
No housemover's permit to relocate a building within the city shall be issued by the city engineer until the director of building and safety has first approved the issuance of a permit to relocate a particular building or structure upon such premises. Such permit shall be referred to and known as a "relocation permit." 
(Prior code § 8310.1)  
15.20.050 - Relocation permit—Application. 
Every person desiring to move a building or structure and relocate the same on real property in the city other than where the building or structure originally was located shall make application to the building and safety department for a relocation permit. The application shall be in writing upon forms furnished by the department and shall set forth such information as may be required for processing and determination as to compliance with the provisions of this code. The application for such permit shall be filed with the director of building and safety. 
(Prior code § 8310.2)  
15.20.060 - Relocation permit—Inspection fee. 
Before any application for a relocation permit is accepted, a fee shall be paid as set forth by city council resolution. The fee is to cover the cost of inspection and the preparation of an inspection report defining remedial work necessary to make the structure compatible with the neighborhood in which it is to be located. This fee is in addition to any other fee required by any other city ordinance or resolution or code section. 
(Prior code § 8310.7)  
15.20.070 - Relocation permit—Issuance conditions. 
A.  No permit shall be issued to relocate any building or structure which is so constructed or is in such condition as to be dangerous, or which is infested with pests, or which is unsanitary, or if it is unfit for human habitation, or which is so dilapidated, defective, unsightly, or in such a condition of deterioration or disrepair that its relocation at the proposed site would cause irreparable harm to or be materially detrimental to the real property and improvements in the district within a radius of one thousand feet of the proposed site, or if the proposed use of the building, when relocated, is prohibited by the zoning laws of the city, or if the building is of a type prohibited at the proposed location by any fire district regulations. If the building admits of practicable and effective repair, a permit to relocate may be approved upon such terms and conditions as the director of building and safety may determine. 
B.  If the unlawful, dangerous or defective condition of the building or structure proposed to be relocated is such that repair or correction cannot practicably and effectively be made, the permit shall be denied. 
C.  The director of building and safety may in approving the issuance of any relocation permit impose thereon such terms and conditions as he may deem reasonable and proper, including, but not limited to, the requirements of changes, alterations, additions or repairs to be made to or upon the building or structure, to public safety or to public welfare or to the property and improvements, or either, in the district as limited in this chapter, to which it is to be moved. 
(Prior code § 8310.3)  
15.20.080 - Relocation permit—Bond required. 
A.  No relocation permit shall be issued unless the applicant therefor shall first post a bond with the director of building and safety, executed by the owner of the premises where the building is to be located as principal, and a surety company authorized to do business in California, as surety. The bond shall be joint and several and shall name the city as obligee, and shall be in an amount equal to the estimated cost, plus ten percent, of the work required to be done in order to comply with the conditions of the relocation permit as estimated by the director of building and safety. 
B.  A cash bond may be posted in lieu of the surety bond, but upon the same terms and conditions. The bond shall be conditional as follows: 
1.  All of the terms and conditions of the relocation permit shall be complied with to the satisfaction of the director of building and safety. 
2.  All of the work required to be done pursuant to the conditions of the relocation permit shall be performed within the time limit specified in the relocation permit, unless the director of building and safety shall extend such time in writing. 
C.  In the event of any default in the conditions of the bond, the city shall proceed to forfeit the bond and recover any amounts due thereunder to the city. 
(Prior code § 8310.4)  
15.20.090 - Relocation permit—Appeal of conditions. 
A.  An applicant who is denied a relocation permit, or who is aggrieved by the conditions and requirements imposed by the director of building and safety as conditions of approval of the permit, may appeal the decision or ruling to the city council. The appeal must be in writing and state the specific objections to the decision and the reasons for such objections. The same must be filed with the city clerk-treasurer within five days after receiving a notice of the decision of the director of building and safety. 
B.  A fee shall be paid in an amount set by the city council by the applicant for the purpose of filing the appeal. The appeal shall be referred to the city council and shall be expeditiously heard by the city council. At least ten days' written notice of the time and place of the hearing of the appeal shall be given to the appellant. 
C.  At the hearing all interested parties may be heard and evidence may be submitted bearing on the issue involved in the appeal. The city council may approve, grant, override, deny or modify the decision or any ruling of the director of building and safety, and such council action shall be final and conclusive. 
(Prior code § 8310.4.1)  
15.20.100 - Relocation site—Access granted city for inspection. 
The director of building and safety or any other employee of the city may inspect the relocation site of any building, and such employee shall have access to the premises described in the relocation permit for the purpose of such inspection. 
(Prior code § 8310.5)  
15.20.110 - Inspection—Exemption. 
The provisions of Sections 15.20.040 and 15.20.050, and 15.20.070 through 15.20.100 shall not apply where the building or structure to be moved is relocated on real property outside of the city limits. 
(Prior code § 8310.6)  
15.20.120 - Inspection—Inspector to be designated. 
The city engineer shall designate an inspector to be present at all times during the moving of any building provided for in this chapter, when the same is moved on or over the public streets in the city, which inspector shall inspect any damage to the streets, sidewalks, curbs, trees or other appurtenances on and along the route traversed in the moving of such building. The cost of such inspector shall be determined and included in the deposit money required in Section 15.20.030 and such cost shall be deducted from the deposit made as required in this section. 
(Prior code § 8310.9 (part))  
15.20.130 - Relocation—Consent of affected public utility required. 
A.  "Public utility" for the purposes of this chapter means any person or corporation owning or operating any wires, poles, signals, pipelines, tracks or necessary appurtenances or structures thereto, used for general public service. 
B.  No person shall move any building, structure or portion thereof on, over, along or across any public street or alley so as to interfere in any manner with any real or personal property of any public utility without first obtaining the permission and consent of the public utility. 
(Prior code § 8310.11)  
15.20.140 - Relocation—Red light required at night. 
No person shall move any building, structure or portion thereof, over, upon, along or across any public street or alley without keeping a red light burning at all times between sunset and sunrise at each corner of such building or structure, or at the end of any projection thereof, in order to warn all traffic meeting the building or structure of its size and location on the public street or alley. 
(Prior code § 8310.10)  
15.20.150 - Damage to trees or shrubs prohibited. 
No person shall move or cause to be moved any building or structure over, upon, along or across any public street or alley so as to damage, break, cut or trim any trees or shrubs on or along the street or alley except under the direction of the director of parks, recreation and community services. 
(Prior code § 8310.12) 
(Ord. No. 2958, § 3, 10-12-10)  
Chapter 15.28 - USE OF TENTS AND COMMERCIAL TRAILERS 
Sections: 
 
15.28.010 - Definitions. 
The following shall have the meanings used in this chapter: 
A.  "Occupancy" means the purpose for which a tent or trailer is used or intended to be used. 
B.  "Place of assemblage" means and includes any circus, sideshow, carnival, tent show, theater, skating rink or any other exhibition, production, engagement or offering, or other place of assemblage in or under which ten or more persons gather for any lawful purpose. 
C.  "Tent" is defined as any structure or enclosure constructed of canvas or other combustible fabric or any other material that is more conductive to the rapid spread of fire than one-inch nominal thickness Oregon pinewood. 
D.  "Trailer" means a vehicle with or without motive power which is designed for human habitation and which contains plumbing, heating or electrical equipment. Trailers permitted under this chapter must comply with state construction requirements and bear the seal of approval of the State Division of Housing. 
(Prior code §§ 8120.1—8120.4)  
15.28.020 - Permit—Required with certain uses. 
The temporary use of tents and trailers in the city on property zoned for commercial or manufacturing purposes is permitted when a permit therefor has been granted as provided in this chapter and upon the regulations and conditions set forth in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 8120)  
15.28.030 - Permit—Application. 
A.  Prior to the erection of any tent, or location of any trailer on property for the uses set forth in this chapter, an application shall be filed with the department of building and safety and a fee paid in an amount set by the city council. The application shall be in such form and contain such information as is required by the department of building and safety. It shall be verified by the applicant. When the application and property to be occupied has been checked for compliance with the provisions of this chapter and all conditions have been met, the applicant will be granted a permit in writing. 
B.  No tent or trailer may be used, occupied or maintained until a permit has been granted by the director of building and safety. 
(Prior code § 8120.18)  
15.28.040 - Inspection authority. 
For the purpose of these regulations, the inspection authority shall be the director of building and safety, or the county fire chief, or their legally constituted deputies. 
(Prior code § 8120.8)  
15.28.050 - Compliance required. 
No person shall use, establish, maintain or operate a place of occupancy, or a place of public assemblage in any tent, other fabric enclosure or trailer unless erection, treatment, location, maintenance, operation and all other conditions and requirements of this chapter are complied with. 
(Prior code § 8120.5)  
15.28.060 - Occupancy conditions. 
A.  A trailer may be used and occupied by not more than two people at any one time, provided the occupants are acting in the capacity of watchmen in connection with Christmas tree sales, fireworks sales or other similar commercial ventures requiring a security guard. 
B.  A trailer may be used and occupied by a charitable or eleemosynsary association or corporation to disseminate information or provide a service to the general public where no charge is made for any service rendered. 
C.  Such use and occupancy as provided in subsections A and B of this section may occur for not to exceed thirty days in any calendar year, provided that the director of building and safety issues a permit prior to any such use or occupancy. 
D.  In addition to those uses provided for in subsections A and B of this section, a commercial trailer may be used on any C- or M-zoned property: 
1.  The use of the trailer shall be limited to those functions normally associated with the construction of a new building. Such functions may include a construction office, storage facility, or a sales or leasing office. All such uses shall relate exclusively to the lot whereon the trailer is located; and 
2.  The use shall be permitted only during such periods as active construction work is under way on a building or structure authorized by a valid building permit. No such use shall continue for a period of more than one hundred eighty days, except that the director may, upon written request by the permittee, approve an extension of up to one hundred eighty days. No more than one extension may be granted for such use; and 
3.  The trailer shall bear the insignia of the Department of Housing and Community Development of the state, indicating approval for the intended use; and 
4.  Prior to the use or occupancy of any commercial trailer for a use as described herein, the applicant shall provide to the director such information as he deems necessary to determine whether the use should be permitted; and 
5.  Any commercial trailer permitted under the conditions described herein shall be removed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the building under construction; and 
6.  The director shall refuse the issuance of a permit hereunder if he finds: 
a.  That the location or appearance of the trailer will result in an interference with the peaceful and possession of adjacent property, and/or 
b.  That the issuance of the permit would result in a serious threat of injury. 
(Ord. 2312 § 1, 1983: prior code § 8120.6)  
15.28.070 - Exit requirements. 
A.  The aggregate width of exits from any tent shall not be less than one foot for each fifty persons. 
B.  No exit shall be less than thirty-six inches wide and seven feet high. 
C.  Exits shall be spaced at approximately equal intervals around the perimeter of the tent and shall be so located that no point in the seating area is more than one hundred feet from an exit. 
D.  Exit signs shall be provided as required by the inspection authority. 
E.  Exits shall be provided in accordance with the following table: 
Capacity of Tent 	Minimum Number of Exits 	Minimum Width Each Exit 	Minimum Total Width of All Exits in Feet 
20 to 49 	2 	3 feet 	6 feet 
50 to 299 	2 	4 feet 	8 feet 
300 to 599 	3 	5 feet 	15 feet 
600 to 999 	4 	6 feet 	24 feet 
1000 to 1999 	5 	8 feet 	40 feet 
2000 or more 	6 	1 additional foot for each 50 persons 	
 
F.  The inspection authority may require additional exits if, in his opinion, public peace, health and safety require the same. 
(Prior code § 8120.16)  
15.28.080 - Exit signs. 
Any tent having an occupant load of two hundred or more shall be provided with illuminated exit signs. The electrical energy supplying these signs shall be separate from the normal lighting source. 
(Prior code § 8120.17)  
15.28.090 - Tents—Location. 
A.  Tents shall be located not less than ten feet from any property line or permanent structure except where the property line is a street or alley. 
B.  Tents having floor area in excess of fifteen hundred square feet but less than fifteen thousand square feet shall be located not less than thirty feet from any other tent or structure. 
C.  Tents having an area in excess of fifteen thousand square feet shall be located not less than fifty feet from any other tent or structure. 
D.  Tents may be joined together by means of corridors, but such corridors shall be open to the sky. On each side of such corridor and directly opposite each other, there shall be provided openings equivalent to the width of the corridor. Such openings shall be left entirely open and clear of any obstruction. 
E.  An unobstructed passageway not less than six feet in width and free from guy ropes or other obstruction shall be maintained on all sides of all tents having an area of more than fifteen hundred square feet, but less than fifteen thousand square feet. If the area of the tent exceeds fifteen thousand square feet, or if the seating capacity exceeds one thousand persons, the unobstructed areaway shall be not less than ten feet in clear width. 
F.  The distance between tents, or tents and other structures, shall be measured from side wall to side wall. 
G.  Where conditions make it impossible to provide the required distance between tents as specified in subsections B and C, the inspection authority may approve the locating of tents closer than that specified if required passageways are provided, and in his opinion adequate safety will be afforded. 
(Prior code § 8120.9)  
15.28.100 - Tents—Structural stability. 
Tents and their appurtenances shall be adequately roped, braced and anchored to withstand the elements of weather against collapsing. 
(Prior code § 8120.10)  
15.28.110 - Flame-retardant treatment required. 
A.  The side walls, drops and top of all tents shall be treated with a fire-retardant solution that will, to the satisfaction of the inspection authority, withstand the fire test as provided in Title 19 of the California Administrative Code. All bunting and other flammable decoration or effects, and sawdust when used on floors or passageways shall likewise be treated with a flame-retardant solution. 
B.  An affidavit or affirmation signed by the person in charge of the tent shall be posted and retained on the premises on which the tent is located, attesting to the following information relative to the flame-retardant treatment of the fabrics: 
1.  Date fabric was last treated with flame-retardant solution; 
2.  Trade name of kind of chemical used in treatment; 
3.  The name of the person or firm treating the material; 
4.  The name and address of the owners of the tents. 
B.  A copy of the affidavit or affirmation shall be filed with the inspection authority before the tent is used. 
(Prior code § 8120.11)  
15.28.120 - Fire extinguishers. 
Fire extinguishers and other protective equipment shall be provided in every tent as required by the inspection authority. 
(Prior code § 8120.13)  
15.28.130 - Auxiliary fireman. 
A.  The owners or operators of any assemblage tent shall provide a qualified fireman in every such tent having a capacity of five hundred persons and one additional fireman for each one thousand additional persons. The fireman shall be on duty in the tent at all times when the tent is open to the public. He shall be proficient in the handling of fire extinguishers and equipment and shall be familiar with all required fire and panic safety regulations. The fireman shall be approved by the county fire chief. 
B.  The director of building and safety may waive or modify this requirement if in his opinion such guards are not necessary in the interest of the public safety and welfare. 
(Prior code § 8120.14)  
15.28.140 - Smoking, fire hazards prohibited. 
A.  Smoking shall not be permitted in any tent, nor in any adjacent areas where any flammable material is kept or stored. "No Smoking" signs shall be conspicuously posted in all tents open to the public. 
B.  No fireworks, open flame or any device emitting flame or fire shall be used in or immediately adjacent to any tent, except upon special permission from the inspection authority. 
C.  Toy balloons or other similar devices that are inflated with poisonous, explosive or flammable gas shall not be permitted in or upon the premises adjacent to any tent. 
(Prior code § 8120.12)  
15.28.150 - Abatement of other fire hazards. 
Any unforeseen condition that presents a fire hazard, or would contribute to the rapid spread of fire, or would delay or interfere with the rapid exit of persons from the tents, or would interfere with or delay the extinguishment of a fire, and which is not otherwise covered by these rules and regulations, shall be immediately abated, eliminated, or corrected as ordered by the inspection authority. 
(Prior code § 8120.15)  
Chapter 15.32 - SMALL RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR SYSTEMS 
 
15.32.010 - Intent and purpose. 
The intent and purpose of this chapter is to adopt an expedited, streamlined solar permitting process that complies with the Solar Rights Act and AB 2188 (Chapter 521, Statues 2014) to achieve timely and cost-effective installations of small residential rooftop solar energy systems. This chapter is designed to encourage the use of solar systems by removing unreasonable barriers, minimizing costs to property owners and the city, and expanding the ability of property owners to install solar energy systems. This chapter allows the city to achieve these goals while protecting the public health and safety. 
( Ord. No. 3041, § 1 , 9-8-15)  
15.32.020 - Definitions. 
"Association" means a nonprofit corporation or unincorporated association created for the purpose of managing a common interest development. 
"Board of appeals" means the board of appeals referenced in Section 15.04.024 of the Whittier Municipal Code. 
"Building department" means the building and safety division for the City of Whittier. 
"Building official" means the building official for the City of Whittier. 
"City" means the City of Whittier. 
"Common interest development" means any of the following: 
1.  A community apartment project. 
2.  A condominium project. 
3.  A planned development. 
4.  A stock cooperative. 
"Electronic submittal" means the utilization of one or more of the following: 
1.  E-mail. 
2.  The Internet. 
3.  Facsimile. 
"Expedited permitting" and "expedited review" means the process outlined in Section 15.32.060 entitled "Expedited permit review and inspection requirements." 
A "feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact" includes, but is not limited to, any cost-effective method, condition or mitigation imposed by the city on another similarly situated application in a prior successful application for a similar permit. 
"Reasonable restrictions" on a solar system are those restrictions that do not significantly increase the cost of the system or significantly decrease its efficiency or specific performance, or that allow for an alternative system of comparable cost, efficiency, and energy conservation benefits. 
"Restrictions that do not significantly increase the cost of the system or decrease its efficiency or specified performance" means: 
1.  For water heater systems or solar swimming pool heating systems: an amount exceeding ten percent of the cost of the system, but in no case more than one thousand dollars, or decreasing the efficiency of the solar energy system by an amount exceeding ten percent, as originally specified and proposed. 
2.  For photovoltaic systems: an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars over the system cost as originally specified and proposed, or a decrease in system efficiency of an amount exceeding ten percent as originally specified and proposed. 
"Small residential rooftop solar energy system" means all of the following: 
1.  A solar energy system that is no larger than ten kilowatts alternating current nameplate rating or thirty kilowatts thermal. 
2.  A solar energy system that conforms to all applicable state fire, structural, electrical, and other building codes as adopted or amended by the city and paragraph (iii) of subdivision (c) of Section 714 of the Civil Code, as such section or subdivision may be amended, renumbered, or re-designated from time to time. 
3.  A solar energy system that is installed on a single or duplex family dwelling. 
4.  A solar panel or module array that does not exceed the maximum legal building height as defined by the authority having jurisdiction. 
"Solar energy system" means either of the following: 
1.  Any solar collector or other solar energy device whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for space heating, space cooling, electric generation, or water heating. 
2.  Any structural design feature of a building whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for electricity generation, space heating, space cooling or water heating. 
"Specific, adverse impact" means a significant, quantifiable, direct and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified and written public health or safety standards, policies or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete. 
( Ord. No. 3041, § 1 , 9-8-15)  
15.32.030 - Applicability. 
This chapter applies to the permitting of all small residential rooftop solar energy systems in the city. Small residential rooftop solar energy systems legally established or permitted prior to the effective date of this chapter are not subject to the requirements of this chapter unless physical modifications or alterations are undertaken that materially change the size, type, or components of a small rooftop energy system in such a way as to require new permitting. Routine operation and maintenance or like-kind replacements shall not require a permit. 
( Ord. No. 3041, § 1 , 9-8-15)  
15.32.040 - Solar energy system requirements. 
A.  All solar energy system shall meet applicable health and safety standards and requirements imposed by the city and the State of California. 
B.  Solar energy systems for heating water in single family residences and for heating water in commercial or swimming pool applications shall be certified by an accredited listing agency as defined by the California Plumbing and Mechanical Code. 
C.  Solar energy systems for producing electricity shall meet all applicable safety and performance standards established by the California Electrical Code, the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers and accredited testing laboratories such as underwriters laboratories and where applicable, rules of the public utilities commission regarding safety and reliability. 
( Ord. No. 3041, § 1 , 9-8-15)  
15.32.050 - Duties of building department and building official. 
A.  All documents required for the submission of an expedited small residential rooftop solar energy system application shall be made available on the city's publicly accessible website. 
B.  Electronic submittal of the required permit application and documents via e-mail, the city's website, or facsimile shall be made available to all small residential rooftop solar energy system permit applicants. 
C.  An applicant's electronic signature shall be accepted on all form, application, and other documents in lieu of a wet signature. 
D.  The building department shall adopt a standard plan and checklist of all requirements with which small residential rooftop solar energy systems shall comply with to be eligible for expedited review. 
E.  The small residential rooftop solar system permit process, standard plans, and checklist shall substantially conform to the recommendations for expedited permitting, including the checklist and standard contained in the most current version of the California Solar Permitting Guidebook adopted by the Governor's Office of Planning and Research. 
F.  All fees prescribed for the permitting of small residential rooftop solar energy systems must comply with Government Code Sections 65850.55 and 66015 and Health & Safety Code Section 17951. 
( Ord. No. 3041, § 1, 9-8-15)  
15.32.060 - Expedited permit review and inspection requirements. 
A.  The building department has implemented an administrative, nondiscretionary review process to expedite the approval of small residential rooftop solar energy system applications. For an application for a small residential rooftop solar energy system that meets the requirements of the approved checklist and standard plan, the building department shall issue a building permit or other non-discretionary permit the same day for over-the-counter applications or within three business days for electronically filed applications so long as payment of all permit fees associated with an electronically filed application are paid the same day as filing. A building official may require an applicant to apply for a use permit if the official finds, based on substantial evidence, that the solar energy system could have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health and safety. Such decisions may be appealed pursuant to the procedures outlined in Section 15.04.026 of this code. 
B.  Review of the application shall be limited to the building official's review of whether the applicant meets local, state and federal health and safety requirements. 
C.  If a discretionary permit is required, a building official may deny an application for the use permit if the official makes written findings based upon substantive evidence in the record that the proposed installation would have a specific, adverse impact upon public health or safety and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact. Such findings shall include the basis for the rejection of the potential feasible alternative for preventing the adverse impact. Such decisions may be appealed pursuant to the procedures outlined in Section 15.04.026 of this code. 
D.  Any condition imposed on an application shall be designed to mitigate the specific, adverse impact upon health and safety at the lowest possible cost. The city shall use its best efforts to ensure that the selected method, condition, or mitigation meets the conditions of Civil Code Section 714(d)(1)(A)-(B). 
E.  The city shall not condition the approval of an application on the approval of an association as defined in Civil Code Section 4080. 
F.  If an application for a small residential rooftop solar energy system is deemed incomplete, a written correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information or documentation required to be eligible for expedited permitting shall be sent to the applicant for resubmission. 
G.  Only one inspection shall be required and performed by the Building Department for small residential rooftop solar energy systems eligible for expedited review. 
H.  The Inspection shall be done in a timely manner and should include consolidated inspections. An inspection will be scheduled within two business days of a request and will provide the applicant with a two-hour inspection window 
I.  If a small residential rooftop solar energy system fails inspection, a subsequent inspection is authorized but need not conform to the requirements of this chapter. 
J.  If an application for a small residential rooftop solar energy system is deemed incomplete, a written correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information or documentation required to be eligible for expedited permitting shall be sent to the applicant for resubmission. 
K.  City building permit approval does not authorize an applicant to connect the small residential rooftop energy system to the local utility provider's electricity grid. The applicant is responsible for obtaining such approval or permission from the local utility provider. 
L.  Prior to submitting an application, the applicant shall: 
1.  Self-certify through the use of standard engineering evaluation techniques that the support structure for the small residential rooftop solar energy system is stable and adequate to transfer all wind, seismic, and dead and live loads associated with the system to the building foundation; and 
2.  At the applicant's cost, self-certify using standard electrical inspection techniques that the existing electrical system including existing line, load, ground and bonding wiring as well as main panel and subpanel sizes are adequately sized, based on the existing electrical system's current use, to carry all new photovoltaic electrical loads. 
( Ord. No. 3041, § 1 , 9-8-15)  
Chapter 15.36 - NEW RESIDENTIAL ENERGY GUIDELINES 
 
15.36.010 - Intent and purpose. 
The intent and purpose of this chapter is to encourage energy efficiency improvements. This chapter is designed to promote an energy efficient infrastructure for residential units, minimizing costs to property owners and the city, and expanding the ability of property owners to conserve energy. This chapter allows the city to achieve these goals while protecting the public health and safety. 
( Ord. No. 3046, § 1 , 1-12-16)  
15.36.020 - Applicability. 
This chapter should serve as a guideline for all new residential homes in the city. Existing modifications to residential or alterations that are undertaken that materially change the size, type, or components of energy efficiency standards in such a way as to require new permitting. 
( Ord. No. 3046, § 1 , 1-12-16)  
15.36.030 - Energy efficiency requirements. 
A.  All energy efficiency measures shall meet applicable health and safety standards and requirements imposed by the city and the State of California. 
B.  The main electrical service for residential buildings should have a rating no less than two hundred amps or greater to accommodate future improvements. 
C.  The main electrical panel should have a minimum three-quarter-inch conduit routed to the rooftop for future solar installation. 
D.  The main electrical panel should have a minimum three-quarter-inch conduit routed to an enclosed garage for future electric vehicle charging station installation. 
E.  The single family residence should have a solar zone dedicated on the roof oriented between one hundred ten degrees and two hundred seventy degrees of true north. The recommended minimum solar area should be two hundred fifty square feet. 
F.  Water heating systems to serve individual dwelling units should be installed using solar hot water heating systems. 
( Ord. No. 3046, § 1 , 1-12-16)  
Chapter 15.38 - EXPEDITING PERMITTING PROCESSING FOR ELECTRICAL VEHICLE CHARGING SYSTEMS 
 
15.38.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to promote and encourage the use of electric vehicles by creating an expedited, streamlined permitting process for electric vehicle charging stations while promoting public health and safety and preventing specific adverse impacts in the installation and use of such charging stations. This chapter is also purposed to comply with California Government Code Section 65850.7. 
(Ord. No. 3069 , § 3, 8-8-17)  
15.38.020 - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
"Electric vehicle charging station" or "charging station" means any level of electric vehicle supply equipment station that is designed and built in compliance with Article 625 of the California Electrical Code, as it reads on the effective date of this Chapter, and delivers electricity from a source outside an electric vehicle into a plug-in electric vehicle. 
"Specific, adverse impact" means a significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, and written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete. 
"Electronic submittal" means the utilization of one or more of the following: 
1.  Electronic mail or email. 
2.  The internet. 
3.  Facsimile. 
"A feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact" includes, but is not limited to, any cost-effective method, condition, or mitigation imposed by the city on another similarly situated application in a prior successful application for a permit. 
(Ord. No. 3069 , § 3, 8-8-17)  
15.38.030 - Expedited permitting process. 
Consistent with Government Code Section 65850.7, the Building Official shall implement an expedited, streamlined permitting process for electric vehicle charging stations, and adopt a checklist of all requirements with which electric vehicle charging stations shall comply with in order to be eligible for expedited review. The expedited, streamlined permitting process and checklist may refer to the recommendations contained in the most current version of the "Plug-In Electric Vehicle Infrastructure Permitting Checklist" of the "Zero-Emission Vehicles in California: Community Readiness Guidebook" as published by the Governor's Office of Planning and Research. The city's adopted checklist shall be published on the city's website. 
(Ord. No. 3069 , § 3, 8-8-17)  
15.38.040 - Permit application processing. 
Prior to submitting an application for processing, the applicant shall verify that the installation of an electric vehicle charging station will not have specific, adverse impact to public health and safety and building occupants. Verification by the applicant includes but is not limited to: electrical system capacity and loads; electrical system wiring, bonding and overcurrent protection; building infrastructure affected by charging station equipment and associated conduits; areas of charging station equipment and vehicle parking. 
A permit application that satisfies the information requirements in the city's adopted checklist shall be deemed complete and be promptly processed. Upon confirmation by the building official that the permit application and supporting documents meets the requirements of the city adopted checklist, and is consistent with all applicable laws and health and safety standards, the Building Official shall, consistent with Government Code Section 65850.7, approve the application and issue all necessary permits. Such approval does not authorize an applicant to energize or utilize the electric vehicle charging station until approval is granted by the city. If the building official determines that the permit application is incomplete, he or she shall issue a written correction notice to the applicant, detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance. Consistent with Government Code Section 65850.7, the building official shall allow for electronic submittal of permit applications and associated supporting documentations. In accepting such permit applications, the building official shall also accept electronic signatures on all forms, applications, and other documentation in lieu of a wet signature by any applicant. 
(Ord. No. 3069 , § 3, 8-8-17)  
15.38.050 - Technical review. 
It is the intent to encourage the installation of electric vehicle charging stations by removing obstacles to permitting for charging stations so long as the action does not supersede the building official's authority to address higher priority life-safety situations. 
The building official shall administratively approve a complete application as provided in Section 15.38.040 herein, unless the building official makes a finding based on substantial evidence that the electric vehicle charging station could have a specific adverse impact upon the public health or safety, as defined in this chapter, the city may require the applicant to apply for a use permit. 
In the technical review of a charging station, consistent with Government Code Section 65850.7, the building official shall not condition the approval for any electric vehicle charging station permit on the approval of such a system by an association, as that term is defined by Civil Code Section 4080. 
The decision of the building official pursuant to this section may be appealed to the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 3069 , § 3, 8-8-17)  
15.38.060 - Use permit review. 
If the building official shall approve the application for a use permit unless the building makes the following two findings in writing: 
A.  A finding, based on substantial evidence that the electric vehicle charging station could have a specific adverse impact upon the public health or safety, as defined in this chapter; and 
B.  A finding that there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact. This finding shall include the basis for the impact. 
The decision of the building official pursuant to this section may be appealed to the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 3069 , § 3, 8-8-17)  
15.38.070 - Electrical vehicle charging station installation requirements. 
Electric vehicle charging station equipment shall meet the requirements of the California Electrical Code, the Society of Automotive Engineers, the National Electrical Manufacturers Association, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories, and rules of the public utilities commission or a municipal electric utility company regarding safety and reliability. 
Installation of electric vehicle charging stations and associated wiring, bonding, disconnecting means and overcurrent protective devices shall meet the requirements of Article 625 and all applicable provisions of the California Electrical Code. 
Installation of electric vehicle charging stations shall be incorporated into the load calculations of all new or existing electrical services and shall meet the requirements of the California Electrical Code. Electric vehicle charging equipment shall be considered a continuous load. 
Anchorage of either floor-mounted or wall-mounted electric vehicle charging stations shall meet the requirements of the California Building or Residential Code as applicable per occupancy, and the provisions of the manufacturer's installation instructions. 
Mounting of charging stations shall not adversely affect building elements. 
(Ord. No. 3069 , § 3, 8-8-17)  
Chapter 15.40 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION 
Sections:  
Article I. - General Provisions 
 
15.40.010 - Statutory authority. 
The Legislature of the state of California has in Government Code Sections 65302, 65560 and 65800 conferred upon local government units authority to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the city council of the city ordains the provisions set out in this chapter. 
(Ord. 2429 § 1, 1988)  
15.40.020 - Findings of fact. 
A.  The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
B.  These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights and velocities, and which inadequately anchored, damage uses in other areas. Uses than are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss. 
(Ord. 2429 § 1(A), 1988)  
15.40.030 - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed: 
A.  To protect human life and health; 
B.  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood-control projects; 
C.  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
D.  To minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
E.  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard; 
F.  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the second use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood blight areas; 
G.  To insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and 
H.  To insure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions. 
(Ord. 2429 § 1(B), 1988)  
15.40.040 - Methods of reducing flood losses. 
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and provisions for: 
A.  Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or flood heights or velocities; 
B.  Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
C.  Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel floodwaters; 
D.  Controlling filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage; and 
E.  Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas. 
(Ord. 2429 § 1(C), 1988)  
Article II. - Definitions 
 
15.40.050 - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined in this section, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application: 
1.  "Appeal" means a request for a review of the floodplain administrator's interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance. 
2.  "Area of shallow flooding" means a designated AD or AH zone on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to three feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident. 
3.  Area of Special Flood Hazard. See "Special flood hazard area". 
4.  "Base flood" means the flood having a one percent chance of being equalled or exceeded in any given year (also called the one-hundred-year flood). 
5.  "Basement" means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
6.  "Breakaway walls" means any type of walls, whether solid or lattice, and whether constructed of concrete, masonry, wood, metal, plastic or any other suitable building material which is not part of the structural support of the building and which is designed to break away under abnormally high tides or wave action without causing any damage to the structural integrity of the building on which they are used or any buildings to which they might be carried by flood waters. A breakaway wall shall have a safe design loading resistance of not less than ten and no more than twenty pounds per square foot. Use of breakaway walls must be certified by a registered engineer or architect and shall meet the following conditions: 
a.  Breakaway wall collapse shall result from a water load less than that which would occur during the base flood; and 
b.  The elevated portion of the building shall not incur any structural damage due to the effects of wind and water loads action simultaneously in the event of the base flood. 
7.  "Development" means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations. 
8.  "Flood" or "flooding" means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from (1) the overflow of floodwaters, (2) the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source, and/or (3) the collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels suddenly or caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforseeable event which results in flooding as defined in this definition. 
9.  "Flood boundary and floodway map" means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of flood hazard and the floodway. 
10.  "Flood insurance rate map (FIRM)" means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
11.  "Flood insurance study" means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the FIRM, the flood boundary and floodway map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
12.  "Floodplain" or "flood-prone area" means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. See definition of flooding. 
13.  "Floodplain management" means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations. 
14.  "Floodplain management regulations" means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction. 
15.  "Floodproofing" means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
16.  "Floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. Also referred to as "regulatory floodway." 
17.  "Functionally dependent use" means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
18.  "Highest adjacent grade" means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
19.  "Lowest floor" means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this chapter. 
20.  "Manufactured home" means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. For floodplain management purposes, the term "manufactured home" also includes park trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than one hundred eighty consecutive days. 
21.  "Manufactured home park or subdivision" means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for sale or rent. 
22.  "Mean sea level" means, for purposes of the Natural Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
23.  "New construction" means, for floodplain management purposes, structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by the community. 
24.  "One-hundred-year flood" means a flood which has a one percent annual probability of being equalled or exceeded. It is identical to the base flood, which will be the term used throughout this chapter. 
25.  "Person" means an individual or his agent, firm, partnership, association or corporation, or agent of the aforementioned groups, or this state or its agencies or political subdivisions. 
26.  "Remedy a violation" means to bring the structure or other development into compliance with state or local floodplain management regulations, or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of the ordinance or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development. 
27.  "Riverine" means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc. 
28.  "Special flood hazard area (SFHA)" means an area having special flood or flood-related erosion hazards, and shown on an FHBM or FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-30, AE, A99 or AH. 
29.  "Start of construction" means and includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement or other improvement was within one hundred eighty days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installations of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footing, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. 
30.  "Structure" means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
31.  a.  "Substantial improvement" means any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds thirty percent of the market value of the structure either: 
i.  Before the improvement or repair is started; or 
ii.  If the structure has been damaged, and is being restored, before the damage occurred. 
b.  For the purpose of this definition "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include either: 
i.  Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
ii.  Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places. 
32.  "Variance" means a grant or relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter. 
33.  "Violation" means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. 2429 § 2, 1988)  
Article III. - General Provisions 
 
15.40.060 - Applicability. 
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. 2429 § 3 (part), 1988)  
15.40.070 - Flood insurance study—Adopted by reference—Applicability. 
The areas of special flood hazard, identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency or the Federal Insurance Administration in a scientific and engineering report entitled, "Flood Insurance Study for the City of Whittier," dated September 30, 2005, with an accompanying flood insurance rate map, is adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter along with any subsequent flood insurance studies and rate map revisions made by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. This flood insurance study is on file at the city of Whittier, 13230 East Penn Street, Whittier, California, 90602. This flood insurance study is the minimum area of applicability of this chapter and may be supplemented by studies for other areas which allow implementation of this chapter and which are recommended to the city by the floodplain administrator. 
(Ord. 2877 § 1, 2006: Ord. 2429 § 3(A), 1988)  
15.40.080 - Compliance required. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violations of the provisions of this chapter by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the city from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. 2429 § 3(B), 1988)  
15.40.090 - Effect of other regulations. 
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where the ordinance codified in this chapter and other ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. 2429 § 3(C), 1988)  
15.40.100 - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: 
A.  Considered as minimum requirements; 
B.  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
C.  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. 2429 § 3(D), 1988)  
15.40.110 - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards, or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Insurance Administration, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. 2429 § 3(E), 1988)  
15.40.120 - Severability. 
This chapter and the various parts thereof are declared to be severable. Should any section of this chapter be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole, or any portion thereof other than the section so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
(Ord. 2429 § 3(F), 1988)  
Article IV. - Administration 
 
15.40.130 - Development permit—Required—Application—Contents. 
A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development begins within any area of special flood hazards, established in Section 15.40.070. Applications for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the floodplain administrator and may include, but not be limited to plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevation of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required: 
A.  Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures; in Zone AO or VO, elevation of highest adjacent grade and proposed elevation of lowest floor of all structures; 
B.  Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure will be floodproofed; 
C.  All appropriate certifications listed in Section 15.40.150(D) of this article; and 
D.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
(Ord. 2429 § 4(A), 1988)  
15.40.140 - Floodplain administrator—Appointment. 
The city engineer is appointed to administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying development permits in accordance with its provisions. 
(Ord. 2429 § 4(B), 1988)  
15.40.150 - Floodplain administrator—Duties and responsibilities. 
The duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to: 
A.  Permit Review. 
1.  Review all development permits to determine that the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied; 
2.  All other required state and federal permits have been obtained; 
3.  The site is reasonably safe from flooding; 
4.  Require until a regulatory floodway is designated, that no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zones A1-30 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. 
B.  Use of Other Base Flood Data. When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Section 15.40.070, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer Article V of this chapter. Any such information shall be submitted to the city council for adoption. 
C.  Whenever a watercourse is to be altered or relocated: 
1.  Notify adjacent communities and the California Department of Water Resources prior to the alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration; 
2.  Require that the flood carrying capacity of the altered or relocated portion of such watercourse is maintained. 
D.  Obtain and maintain for public inspection and make available as needed: 
1.  The certification required in Section 15.40.160 (C)(1), floor elevations; 
2.  The certification required in Section 15.40.160 (C)(2), elevations in areas of shallow flooding; 
3.  The certification required in Section 15.40.160 (C)(3)(c), elevation or floodproofing of nonresidential structures; 
4.  The certification required in Section 15.40.160 (C)(4)(a) or (C)(4)(b), wet floodproofing standard; 
5.  The certified elevation required in Section 15.40.180 (B), subdivision standards; 
6.  The certification required in Section 15.40.200 (A), floodway encroachments. 
E.  Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in Article VI of this chapter. 
F.  Take action to remedy violations of this chapter as specified in Section 15.40.080 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2429 § 4(C), 1988)  
Article V. - Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction 
 
15.40.160 - Construction standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required: 
A.  Anchoring. 
1.  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. 
2.  All manufactured homes shall meet the anchoring standards of Section 15.40.190. 
B.  Construction Materials and Methods. 
1.  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
2.  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
3.  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
4.  Require within zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
C.  Elevation and Floodproofing. 
1.  New construction and substantial improvement of any structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the base floor elevation. Nonresidential structures may meet the standards in subsection (C)(3) of this section. Upon the completion of the structure the elevation of the lowest floor including basement shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor, or verified by the community building inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification or verification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator. 
2.  New construction and substantial improvement of any structure in Zone AH or AO shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM, or at least two feet if no depth number is specified. Nonresidential structures may meet the standards in subsection (C)(3) of this section. Upon completion of the structure the elevation of the lowest floor including basement shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor, or verified by the community building inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification or verification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator. 
3.  Nonresidential construction shall either be elevated in conformance with subsection (C)(1) or (C)(2) of this section or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities: 
a.  Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water; 
b.  Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and 
c.  Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certifications shall be provided to the floodplain administrator. 
4.  Require, for all new construction and substantial improvements, that fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exist of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
a.  Either a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices; provided, that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters; or 
b.  Be certified to comply with a local floodproofing standard approved by the Federal Insurance Administration. 
5.  Manufactured homes shall also meet the standards in Section 15.40.190 of this article. 
(Ord. 2429 § 5(A), 1988)  
15.40.170 - Utility design and location standards. 
A.  All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge from systems into floodwaters. 
B.  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(Ord. 2429 § 5(B), 1988)  
15.40.180 - Standards for subdivisions. 
A.  All preliminary subdivision proposals shall identify the flood hazard area and the elevation of the base flood. 
B.  All final subdivision plans will provide the elevation of proposed structure(s) and pads. If the site is filled above the base flood, the final pad elevation shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor and provided to the floodplain administrator. 
C.  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
D.  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
E.  All subdivisions shall provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(Ord. 2429 § 5(C), 1988)  
15.40.190 - Manufactured homes and additions. 
All new and replacement manufactured homes and additions to manufactured homes shall: 
A.  Be elevated so that the lowest floor is at or above the base flood elevation; and 
B.  Be securely anchored to a permanent foundation system to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. 
(Ord. 2429 § 5(D), 1988)  
15.40.200 - Designation of floodways. 
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in Section 15.40.070 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply: 
A.  Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development unless certification by a registered professional engineer or architect is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
B.  If subsection A of this section is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this article. 
(Ord. 2429 § 5(E), 1988)  
15.40.210 - Flood-related erosion-prone areas. 
A.  The floodplain administrator shall require permits for proposed construction and other development within all flood-related erosion-prone areas as known to the community. 
B.  If a proposed improvement is found to be in the path of flood-related erosion or would increase the erosion hazard, such improvement shall be relocated or adequate protective measures shall be taken to avoid aggravating the existing erosion hazard. 
C.  Within Zone E on the flood insurance rate map, a setback is required for all new development from the ocean, lake, bay, riverfront or other body of water to create a safety buffer consisting of a natural vegetative or contour strip. This buffer shall be designated according to the flood-related erosion hazard and erosion rate, in relation to the anticipated "useful life" of structures, and depending upon the geologic, hydrologic, topographic and climatic characteristics of the land. The buffer may be used for suitable open space purposes, such as for agricultural, forestry, outdoor recreation and wildlife habitat areas, and for other activities using temporary and portable structures only. 
(Ord. 2429 § 5(F), 1988)  
Article VI. - Variance Procedure 
 
15.40.220 - Appeal board. 
A.  The city council shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter. 
B.  The city council shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
C.  In passing upon such applications, the city council shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and: 
1.  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
2.  The danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
3.  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
4.  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
5.  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
6.  The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage; 
7.  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
8.  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area; 
9.  The safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
10.  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters expected at the site; and 
11.  The cost of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and bridges. 
D.  Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing subsections (B)(1) through (B)(11) of this section have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
E.  Upon consideration of the factors of subsection (B) of this section and the purposes of this chapter, the city council may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. 
F.  The floodplain administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request. 
(Ord. 2429 § 6(A), 1988)  
15.40.230 - Issuance conditions. 
A.  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed in the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this section. 
B.  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
C.  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
D.  Variances shall only be issued upon: 
1.  A showing of good and sufficient cause; 
2.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and 
3.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of, the public or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
E.  Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use; provided, that the provisions of subsections (A) through (D) of this section are satisfied and that the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
F.  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor elevation below the regulatory flood elevation and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. A copy of the notice shall be recorded by the floodplain board in the office of the Los Angeles County recorder and shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land. 
(Ord. 2429 § 6(B), 1988)  
Title 16 - SIGNS 
Chapters:  
Chapter 16.10 - SPECIAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 
 
16.10.010 - Applicability. 
This chapter applies to temporary, noncommercial signs. "Noncommercial" means that the sign's primary purpose is not to direct attention to, or inform the public of, a commercial transaction or location. Refer to Chapter 18.76.080 (Temporary On-Premises Signs) for all other temporary on-premises sign regulations. 
(Ord. 2907 § 2 (part), 2008) 
( Ord. No. 3042, § 2 , 8-11-15)  
16.10.020 - Temporary noncommercial signs. 
All temporary noncommercial signs shall comply with the following provisions: 
A.  All signs shall be placed on private property only. Signs placed on public property are prohibited, except as provided for in Section 18.73.030 of the Whittier Municipal Code. 
B.  Signs are prohibited on all utility poles, street trees, traffic control devices, poles, signs, light poles and on any privately or publicly owned signs, utility equipment, telephone and electrical lines and infrastructure. Such signage shall not be placed in the public right-of-way except as provided for in Section 18.73.030(E) of this code. 
C.  Signs shall be placed at least five feet distance from each other. 
D.  Signs shall not be placed so as to obstruct ingress and egress into any private or public property. 
E.  No sign shall be placed so as to obstruct pedestrians' or motorists' view of signs erected by a local, state, or federal governmental agency, including, but not limited to, traffic signs, public directional signs, parking signs, and street address signs. 
F.  No sign shall be placed so as to obstruct or hinder sidewalk or street access by pedestrians and vehicles. 
G.  For signs posted on any property, the person or entity responsible for the sign shall obtain written permission from the property owner or their authorized representative prior to posting of any signs. 
H.  No sign shall exceed four square feet of gross sign area, and shall not exceed a height of five feet (as measured vertically from the bottom of the sign or the pole it is mounted on) to the top of the sign. 
I.  Temporary directional signs shall not be designed or constructed to cause undue distraction to motorists. For example, temporary signs in the public right-of-way shall not be illuminated, either internally or externally, shall not have flashing lights, shall not have any moving parts, and shall not generate any source sounds (including radio waves), nor any light, steam or smoke. 
(Ord. 2907 § 2 (part), 2008)  
16.10.030 - Summary abatement—Abatement fee. 
Signs placed in violation of the provisions of this chapter are subject to summary abatement by the city. Abated signs are subject to a sign removal fee, in an amount to be determined from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
Abated signs may be retrieved at the Whittier Police Department for fourteen days following their removal. Signs not retrieved within that time period shall be subject to destruction according to the city's regular procedures and timing for such destruction. 
If the owner of the signs can be reasonably ascertained, notice of the abatement, abatement fee, and time period to retrieve the abated signs shall issue within twenty-four hours of the removal of the signs. 
(Ord. 2907 § 2 (part), 2008)  
16.10.040 - Request for abatement fee hearing. 
A.  Anyone subject to an abatement fee may contest the fee by completing a "Request for Hearing Form," to be obtained from and returned to the Whittier police department within fifteen days from the date of service of the abatement fee notice, together with an advanced deposit of the fee. A hearing shall not be deemed filed unless all of the requirements of this subsection are met. 
B.  A hearing before a hearing officer on the abatement fee shall be set for a date that is not less than fifteen nor more that sixty days, except upon the consent of the person subject to the fee as to a shorter or longer period of time, from the date the request for hearing is filed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The person requesting the hearing shall be notified of the time and place set for the hearing at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing in writing at the address provided on the "Request for Hearing Form" filed with the city, or any updated address provided by the person making the request. 
(Ord. 2907 § 2 (part), 2008)  
16.10.050 - Abatement fee hearing procedure. 
A.  No hearing to contest an abatement fee before a hearing officer shall be held unless and until a "Request for Hearing Form" has been completed, filed and the fine has been deposited in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. 
B.  The hearing officer shall only consider evidence that is relevant to whether the violation(s) occurred and whether the responsible person caused and/or maintained, or allowed to be maintained, the violation(s) specified in the abatement fee notice. 
C.  At least ten days prior to the hearing, the person subject to an abatement fee shall be provided with copies of any and all citations, reports, and other documents submitted to the hearing officer or relied upon by the enforcement officer in relation to the hearing at the address provided or updated by the person requesting the hearing. The formal rules of evidence shall not apply. 
D.  The abatement fee notice and any additional documents submitted by the enforcement officer to the hearing officer for consideration at the hearing shall constitute prima facie evidence of the respective facts contained in those documents. 
E.  The person contesting the abatement fee shall be given the opportunity to testify and present witnesses and relevant evidence concerning the violation(s) charged in the abatement fee notice. 
F.  The failure of the person subject to an abatement fee notice, or his or her representative, to appear at the abatement fee hearing shall constitute a forfeiture of the right to a hearing, as well as an abandonment of the filed request for a hearing and a failure to exhaust his or her administrative remedies. The right to appeal the abatement fee shall not be deemed abandoned if the appellant can demonstrate, by a preponderance of the evidence, good cause for the failure to appear at the hearing. 
G.  The abatement fee notice and any additional documents submitted by the enforcement officer to the hearing officer shall constitute prima facie evidence of the respective facts contained in those documents. 
H.  Neither the enforcement officer nor any other representative of the city shall be required to attend the hearing, nor be required to submit to the hearing officer any evidence other than the fee notice; however, any such appearance and/or submission may be made at the discretion of the enforcement officer or any city employee or agent. 
I.  The hearing officer may continue the hearing and request additional information from the enforcement officer or the person subject to the abatement fee prior to issuing a written decision. 
(Ord. 2907 § 2 (part), 2008)  
16.10.060 - Hearing officer's decision. 
A.  After considering all of the testimony and evidence submitted at the hearing, the hearing officer shall issue a written decision, within ten days of the final conclusion of the hearing or the submittal of additional information requested by the hearing officer, to uphold, modify or revoke the abatement fee notice and shall list in the decision the reasons for that decision. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final. 
B.  If the hearing officer determines that the abatement fee notice is upheld, the amount of the fee on deposit with the city shall be retained by the city. 
C.  If the hearing officer determines that the abatement fee is revoked, the city shall refund the amount of the deposited fee within thirty days of the issuance of the hearing officer's decision. 
D.  The person subject to the abatement fee shall be served by way of first class U.S. mail with a copy of the hearing officer's written decision within five days from the date of the final hearing. The hearing officer's decision is final. 
E.  The decision must include notice that any legal challenge to the final decision shall be made pursuant to provisions of Government Code Section 53069.4 and shall be commenced within twenty days following issuance of the final decision. 
(Ord. 2907 § 2 (part), 2008)  
16.10.070 - Collection of unpaid fees. 
A.  The city at its discretion may pursue any and all legal and equitable remedies, to which the city may be entitled, for the collection of unpaid fees and penalties relating to the abatement of signs. Pursuit of one remedy does not preclude the pursuit of any other remedies. 
B.  Any fee required by an abatement notice or the provisions of this chapter shall be paid or deposited with the city clerk. 
(Ord. 2907 § 2 (part), 2008)  
16.10.080 - Right to judicial review. 
Any person or entity aggrieved by a decision of the hearing officer on an abatement fee may obtain review of the administrative decision by filing an appeal of the final decision or order in the Los Angeles County Superior Court in accordance with the requirements of California Government Code Section 53069.4. 
(Ord. 2907 § 2 (part), 2008)  
16.10.090 - Notices. 
Except as specifically provided in this chapter, all notices to be given by this chapter shall be served on the responsible person in accordance with the provisions of Section 1.04.200 of the Whittier Municipal Code. Failure to receive any notice specified in this chapter does not affect the validity of proceedings conducted in this chapter, but may be grounds for excusing the strict application of the provisions of this chapter, upon sufficient evidence of a failure to receive a notice. 
(Ord. 2907 § 2 (part), 2008)  
Title 17 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Chapters: 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2976, § 1, adopted July 26, 2011, repealed the former Title 17 and enacted a new Title 17 as set out herein. The former Title 17 pertained to similar subject matter. See the Ordinance List and Disposition Table and the Code Comparative Table and Disposition List for full derivation. 
 
Chapter 17.02 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 
 
17.02.010 - Purpose. 
A.  The provisions of this title are intended to supplement, implement and work with the California Subdivision Map Act, referred to in this title as the Act, as specified in Government Code Sections 66410 et seq., for the purpose of regulating the design and improvement of divisions of land within the city, as those sections may be replaced or amended from time to time. 
B.  This title is not intended to replace the Act, but is expected to be used in conjunction with the Act in the preparation of subdivision applications, in conjunction with the review, approval and improvement of proposed subdivisions. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 1, 7-26-11)  
17.02.020 - Title. 
This Title 17 shall be referred to as the city's "Subdivision Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 1, 7-26-11)  
17.02.030 - Statutory authority. 
The provisions of this chapter are adopted pursuant to the Subdivision Map Act (Section 66411 et seq. of the Government Code, hereafter "Act") for the purpose of regulating the design and improvement of subdivisions. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 1, 7-26-11)  
17.02.040 - Applicability. 
A.  Applicability of Chapter. 
1.  No person shall divide any real property for the purpose of sale, lease, or financing except in compliance with the provisions of this title and/or the Act, Government Code Sections 66410 et seq. 
2.  This title shall apply to all divisions of land, except those exempted by Government Code Sections 66412, 66412.1, 66412.2 and 66412.5. 
3.  In the event of divisions of land which are not subject to this title and/or the Act, a certificate of compliance shall be issued on a form prescribed by the director. 
B.  Each division of land within the city shall be authorized through the approval of a map or other entitlement in compliance with this title. 
C.  In the event of any conflicts between the provisions of this title and the Act, the Act shall control. 
D.  The approval or conditional approval of a subdivision map shall not authorize an exception or deviation from any zoning regulation in this Subdivision Ordinance, or as an approval to proceed with any development in violation of other applicable provisions of the Municipal Code or other applicable ordinances or regulations of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 1, 7-26-11)  
17.02.050 - Advisory agency and appeal board designated. 
Pursuant to the Subdivision Map Act, the following designations are made: 
A.  Advisory Agency. 
1.  The designated advisory agencies specified in this section shall have the duty of making investigations and reports on the design and improvement of proposed applications for the division of real property and imposing requirements and conditions on these applications, and shall have the authority to act upon the applications as specified below. 
2.  The advisory agency shall have the authority to refer an application to the planning commission or council for action, as indicated in Table 17-1 (Subdivision Review Authorities), below. 
3.  Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, any application filed in compliance with this title that has an associated permit application made in compliance with the provisions of this Subdivision Ordinance, and is subject to action by the planning commission or council, the application shall be subject to those same review and hearing requirements required for the associated permit application, in compliance with Table 17-1 (Review Authority). 
B.  Appeal Boards. 
1.  The planning commission shall be the review authority for any appeal of a decision of the city engineer or director. 
2.  The council shall be the review authority for any appeal of a decision of the planning commission. 
C.  City Engineer. The city engineer shall be responsible for all of the following: 
1.  Establishing subdivision and public improvement design and construction details, standards and specifications. 
2.  Determining whether proposed subdivision improvements comply with the provisions of this title and the Act. 
3.  Inspecting and approving subdivision improvements. 
4.  Review authority on amendments to recorded maps, subdivision improvement plans and waiver of parcel maps. 
5.  Providing assistance to the director on the review of certificates of compliance, final parcels maps, final tract maps and vesting final maps. 
TABLE 17-1 
Subdivision Review Authorities 	Role of Review Authority (1) 	
Type of Decision 	Applicable Section 	Director 	City 
Engineer 	Planning Commission 	Council (2) 	Required 
Findings 
Amendments to Approved Tentative Maps 	17.06.090 	Recommend 		Decision 	Appeal 	17.06.090(G) 
Amendments to Recorded Maps 	17.08.060 		Decision 	1 st Appeal 	2 nd Appeal 	17.08.060(A)(6) 
Certificates of Compliance 	17.10.020 	Decision 	Recommend 	1 st Appeal 	2 nd Appeal 	N/A 
Extensions of Time - Tentative Maps 	17.06.080 	Decision 		1 st Appeal 	2 nd Appeal 	17.06.080(D) 
Final Parcel Maps 	17.08.030 		Recommend 		Decision 	N/A 
Final Tract Maps, Vesting Tract Maps 	17.08.020 		Recommend 		Decision 	N/A 
Lot Line Adjustments 	17.10.030 	Decision 		1 st Appeal 	2 nd Appeal 	17.10.030(C) 
Parcel Mergers 	17.10.040 	Decision 		1 st Appeal 	2 nd Appeal 	N/A 
Reversion to Acreage 	17.10.050 	Recommend 		Decision 	Appeal 	17.10.050(D) 
Improvement Plans 	17.12.050 		Decision 	1 st Appeal 	2 nd Appeal 	N/A 
Tentative Tract Maps, Vesting Tentative Tract Maps 	17.06.020, 17.06.070 	Recommend 		Decision 	Appeal 	17.06.030(D) 
Tentative Parcel Maps 	17.06.020 	Recommend 		Decision 	Appeal 	17.06.030(D) 
Waiver of Parcel Maps 	17.08.040 		Decision 	1 st Appeal 	2 nd Appeal 	N/A 
 
Notes: 
1. "Decision" means that the approval authority makes the final decision on the matter; "Appeal" means that the approval authority may consider and decide upon appeals to the decision of an earlier decision-making body; "Recommend" means that the review authority makes a recommendation to the decision-making authority. 
2. All decisions of the city council are final. 
D.  Director. The director shall be responsible for all of the following: 
1.  Accepting certificate of compliance, lot line adjustment, parcel map, parcel merger, reversion to acreage, tentative map, vesting tentative map and similar applications for processing; and distributing the application materials to appropriate agencies and city departments for review. 
2.  Investigating tentative map applications for conformity to the general plan, zoning ordinance and applicable specific plans, and in consultation with other city departments and agencies, recommending action to the planning commission. 
3.  Conducting environmental analyses related to proposed applications in compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) specified in Public Resources Code Section 21000 et seq. 
4.  Review authority on tentative tract maps, vesting tentative tract maps and tentative parcels maps. 
5.  Approval authority for lot line adjustments, parcel mergers and certificates of compliance. 
E.  City Engineer. The city engineer shall be responsible for all of the following: 
1.  Approval authority on amendments to recorded maps, subdivision improvement plans and parcel map waivers. 
2.  Review authority on certificates of compliance, final parcel maps, final tract maps and vesting tract map. 
F.  Planning Commission. The planning commission shall be responsible for all of the following: 
1.  Hearing appeals of decisions of the city engineer and director. 
2.  Approval authority on amendments to recorded maps, extension of time - tentative maps, tentative tract maps and vesting tentative tract maps. 
G.  Council. The city council shall be responsible for all of the following: 
1.  Accepting offers of dedication and improvements for divisions of land resulting in five or more parcels. 
2.  Hearing appeals of decisions of the city engineer, director and planning commission. 
3.  Approval authority on final parcel maps, final tract maps, vesting tract maps, and reversion to acreage. 
4.  Taking action to approve, conditionally approve, or deny any application referred by another review authority or by appeal, or any land division application with an associated permit application filed in compliance with the requirements of this Subdivision Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 1, 7-26-11)  
17.02.060 - Type of subdivision approvals. 
Any subdivision of an existing parcel into two or more parcels shall require approval by the city in compliance with this title and the Act. In general, the procedure for subdivision first requires the approval of a tentative map, and then the approval and recordation in the office of the county recorder of a final map to complete the subdivision process. The city's review of a tentative map evaluates the compliance of the proposed subdivision with applicable city standards, and the appropriateness of the proposed subdivision design. Final maps are precise surveying documents that detail the location and dimensions of all parcel boundaries and public improvements in an approved subdivision. 
A.  Tentative Map Requirements. 
1.  Parcel Map. The filing and approval of a tentative parcel map is required for a subdivision or resubdivision of four or fewer parcels, as authorized by Government Code Section 66428; and 
2.  Tract Map. The filing and approval of a tentative tract map is required for a subdivision or resubdivision or of five or more parcels, and all other types of subdivisions required of having a tentative map approval by Government Code Section 66426. 
B.  Final Map Requirements. A final map (Chapter 17.08) shall be required as follows: 
1.  Final Parcel Map. The filing and approval of a final parcel map (Chapter 17.08) shall be required for a subdivision creating four or fewer parcels, with or without a designated remainder in compliance with Government Code Article 2, Chapter 1. 
2.  Final Tract Map. The filing and approval of a final tract map (Chapter 17.08) shall be required for a subdivision of five or more parcels, except a subdivision that is otherwise required to have a final parcel map by Government Code Section 66426. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 1, 7-26-11)  
17.02.070 - Fees. 
By resolution, the city council shall set appropriate filing and processing fees which shall apply to all subdivisions and other divisions of land contemplated by the Act. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 1, 7-26-11)  
17.02.080 - Exceptions to subdivision standards. 
A.  Exemptions from Subdivision Approval Requirements. The types of subdivisions specified by Government Code Sections 66411, 66412, 66412.1, 66412.2 and 66426.5, or other applicable Act provision as not being subject to the requirements of the Act, and/or not being considered to be divisions of land for the purposes of the Act, shall be exempt from the subdivision approval requirements of this title. 
B.  Exceptions from Map Preparation Requirements. The types of subdivisions specified by Government Code Section 66426, or other applicable Act provisions as not requiring the preparation of a tentative map, parcel map and/or a final map shall comply with Government Code Section 66426. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 1, 7-26-11)  
Chapter 17.04 - DEFINITIONS 
Sections: 
 
17.04.010 - General. 
This chapter provides definitions of the technical and other terms and phrases used in this title as a means of providing consistency in its interpretation. Where any definition in this chapter may conflict with definitions in other titles of the Whittier Municipal Code, these definitions shall prevail for the purposes of this code. If a word is not defined in this title or in other provisions of the Municipal Code, the most common dictionary definition is presumed to be correct. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 1, 7-26-11)  
17.04.020 - Definitions. 
"Advisory Agency" means a designated official or an official body charged with the duty of making investigations and reports on the design and improvement of proposed divisions of real property, the imposing of requirements or conditions thereon, or having the authority to approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove maps. 
"Certificate of Compliance" means a determination made by the city indicating that a property complies with the provisions of this Subdivision Ordinance. 
"City" means the city of Whittier. 
"City clerk-treasurer" means the city clerk-treasurer of the city. 
"City council" means the city council of the city. 
"City engineer" means the city engineer of the city. 
"Director" means the director of community development. 
"Encroachment" means any physical obstruction other than a motor vehicle and includes any structure or object of any kind or character placed, without the authority of law, either on, in, under or over any public right-of-way or public property. "Authority of law" includes any applicable local, state, or federal law or regulation. 
"Improvements" means any street work and utilities to be installed, or agreed to be installed, by the subdivider on the land to be used for public or private streets, highways, and easements, as are necessary for the general use of the lot owners in the subdivision and local neighborhood traffic and drainage needs as a condition precedent to the approval and acceptance of the final map thereof. Improvement also refers to any other improvements, the installation of which, either by the subdivider, by public agencies, by private utilities, or by any other entity, is necessary to ensure consistency with, or implementation of, the general plan or any applicable specific plan. 
"Lot" See "Parcel." 
"Lot Line Adjustment" means an adjustment or relocation of a property line between two to four existing adjacent parcels that does not result in the creation of additional parcels. 
"Map Act" or "Act." See "Subdivision Map Act." 
"Monuments" means an object or mark employed by a surveyor to fix or to establish boundaries or land location. 
"Parcel" or "Lot" means: 
1.  A parcel of real property shown on a subdivision or plat map, required by the Subdivision Map Act or this title to be recorded before sale of parcels shown on the map or plat, at the time the map was recorded; 
2.  A parcel of real property that has been issued a certificate of compliance as provided by Government Code Section 66499.35 and Section 18.06.200 et seq. of this title; or 
3.  A parcel of real property not described in (1) or (2) of this definition, provided the parcel resulted from a separate conveyance or from a decree of a court of competent jurisdiction which was [recorded] before the requirement of the filing of the subdivision map by the Subdivision Map Act or this title. 
"Parcel Map" means the map described by Article 3, Chapter 2 of the Subdivision Map Act, which is required by this title to complete subdivision of four or fewer lots. 
"Parcel merger" means a lot merger between two or more existing legal parcels, where the land taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel and where a greater number of parcels than originally existed is not thereby created. 
"Public right-of-way" means all or any part of the entire width of a street, alley, sidewalk, lane, trail, flood-control channel, railroad line, owned or controlled by the federal, state, or local government, irrespective of the rights-of-way use. 
"Reversion of acreage" means of recombining land which was previously subdivided. The process may be used to nullify rights and/or obligations effected by a previous subdivision of the property. 
"Subdivider" means a person, firm, corporation, partnership or association, a governmental agency, public entity or public utility, or the grantor to any such agency, entity, utility or subsidiary, who proposes to subdivide for him or herself or for others, except employees and consultants or such persons or entities acting in such capacity. 
"Subdivision Map Act" or "Map Act" or "Act" means Division 2, Title 7 of the California Government Code, commencing with Section 66410 as presently constituted, and any amendments thereto. 
"Subdivision" means the division, by any subdivider, of any unit or units of improved or unimproved land, or any portion thereof, shown on the latest equalized Los Angeles County assessment roll as a unit or as contiguous units, for the purpose of sale, lease or financing, whether immediate or future. Property shall be considered as contiguous units, even if it is separated by roads, streets, utility easement or railroad rights-of-way. 
"Tentative map" means a map made for the purpose of showing the design and improvement of a proposed subdivision and the existing conditions in and around it. 
"Tract map" means the process of subdividing real property into smaller lots. Typically, the tract map is used to create five or more residential lots. 
"Vesting tentative map" means a map that is filed and processed in the same manner as a tentative map except as otherwise provided by this title or the Subdivision Map Act. At the time a vesting tentative map is filed it shall have the words "Vesting Tentative Map" printed conspicuously on its face. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 1, 7-26-11)  
Chapter 17.06 - TENTATIVE MAP FILING PROCEDURES 
Sections: 
 
17.06.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter establishes requirements for the preparation and filing of tentative maps, consistent with the requirements of the Act. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 1, 7-26-11)  
17.06.020 - Tentative map required. 
Whenever a tentative map is required to be filed pursuant to the Act or this title, such map shall be filed with the director and approved in accordance with the provisions of the Act and this title (Title 17) prior to the submission for approval of a final map. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 1, 7-26-11)  
17.06.030 - Filing and processing requirements. 
A.  Submission of Tentative Maps. 
1.  The subdivider is strongly encouraged to confer with planning and engineering staff before preparing and submitting a tentative map. 
2.  Submission of a tentative map shall not constitute a complete filing with the city until all attachments and required statements, instructions, environmental forms, environmental clearances and a completed application form with appropriate fees are deposited with the department and a written receipt is provided to the applicant. Included with the application shall be a signed statement indicating whether the project site is located on a site included on any of the local lists prepared by the California Integrated Waste Management Board in compliance with Government Code Sections 65962.5(d) and (f). 
3.  The subdivider shall file with the department the number of tentative maps the director shall deem necessary, together with a certified copy of the current ownership title deed to the land proposed to be divided. 
4.  Failure to submit all materials and statements required by this section, as well as any other information deemed necessary for processing by the director, shall constitute an incomplete application. 
B.  Prepared by Civil Engineer or Surveyor. Tentative maps shall be prepared by or under the direction of a registered California civil engineer or a California licensed surveyor in good standing. 
C.  Maps to Be Clearly Drawn. Tentative maps shall be clearly and legibly drawn on one sheet. 
1.  Whenever practicable, map sheets should be no less than eighteen inches by twenty-six inches. The review authority may approve a modification in map sheet size when necessary to adequately show the subdivision. A one-inch margin shall be left between the trim line and the borderline. 
2.  The maps shall be prepared at a readable scale, but in no case shall the scale be less than one inch equals one hundred feet or a scale as [requested] by the city. 
3.  Tentative maps shall contain, at a minimum, all of the following information, as well as any additional information that may be specified in the application form or by the director (in writing): 
a.  A title, which shall contain the subdivision number, subdivision name and type of subdivision; 
b.  Name and address of the current legal owner(s), the subdivider and person preparing the map, including their registration or license number; 
c.  A sufficient legal description to define the boundary of the proposed subdivision; 
d.  Date, north arrow, scale, contour intervals and source and date of existing contours; 
e.  Existing and proposed land use(s); 
f.  Existing Conditions. Existing conditions of the proposed site and at least one hundred feet beyond its boundaries, including but not limited to all of the following: 
(1)  Existing topography with contours at one-foot intervals, or as required by the city engineer or director; 
(2)  The approximate location of all existing trees standing within the boundaries of the division of land and a clear indication as to which trees are to be removed. The location of all trees with a diameter greater than six inches, measured at breast height, shall be clearly indicated and a statement on the existing ground cover shall also be submitted; 
(3)  The approximate location and outline of existing structures identified by type. Structures to be removed shall be so marked; 
(4)  The approximate location of all areas subject to inundation or storm water overflow and the direction, location and width of flow of each water course; 
(5)  The grade, location, pavement and right-of-way width and name of existing streets or highways; 
(6)  The identity, location and widths of all existing easements; 
(7)  The location and size of existing sanitary sewers, storm drains and water mains and the approximate slope of existing sewers and storm drains shall be clearly indicated. The location of existing overhead and underground utility lines on peripheral streets shall be clearly indicated; and 
(8)  The pad elevations of all structures located on the surrounding properties adjacent to the subdivision; and 
(9)  The location, type and height of all perimeter fencing adjacent to the subdivision. 
g.  Proposed Improvements. Proposed improvements required to be shown shall include, but not be limited to, all of the following: 
(1)  The grade, location, centerline and curb return radii and arc length of curves, pavement, right-of-way width and names of all proposed adjacent streets; 
(2)  Typical sections of all existing and proposed streets; 
(3)  The location, nature and width of all easements; 
(4)  The approximate parcel layout and the approximate dimensions of each parcel and of each building site. Engineering data shall show the approximate finished grade of each parcel; 
(5)  Location and nature of all proposed recreation facilities; 
(6)  Location and nature of all proposed common areas and areas to be dedicated for public open space or reserved for common private open space; 
(7)  The elevation, location and size of proposed sanitary sewers, storm drains and water mains; 
(8)  Location and nature of all proposed slopes; 
(9)  Dimensions and setbacks for all new and existing structures from the new property lines; 
(10)  Phasing lines for proposed developments; and 
(11)  Proposed tree planting. 
(12)  All proposed finished grades and pad grades for the new lots; 
(13)  All property dedications and street improvements; 
(14)  All swales and stormdrains; 
(15)  The direction and flow of on-site water drainage; 
(16)  All existing street grades as well as the existing street grades that will serve the subdivision; and, 
(17)  Any or all known existing or abandoned oil wells, pipelines, tanks, etc. above and below ground. 
4.  The director and/or city engineer may require if additional information deemed necessary to be added to the tentative map. 
5.  If it is impossible or impractical to depict all required information on the tentative map, such information maybe be submitted separate from the map. 
D.  Required Findings for Approval. No tentative map shall be approved unless the planning commission or other approval authority makes all of the following findings: 
1.  That the proposed map and the design and/or improvements of the proposed subdivision are consistent with the general plan, applicable specific plans and Whittier Municipal Code requirements. 
2.  That the site is physically suitable for the type of development and for the proposed density of development. 
3.  That the design of the subdivision or type of improvements is not likely to cause serious public health problems. 
4.  That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will not conflict with easements, acquired by the public at large, for the access through or use of, property within the proposed subdivision. 
5.  That any discharge of waste from the proposed subdivision into an existing sewer system would not result in violation of existing requirements prescribed by the California Regional Water Quality Control Board, Los Angeles Region, pursuant to Division 7 of the Water Code of the State of California. 
6.  That the requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act have been satisfied. 
E.  Reports and Written Statements. The tentative map also shall be accompanied by the required number of copies of reports and written statements from the subdivider giving essential information regarding all of the following matters: 
1.  A description of the project scope; 
2.  A vicinity map showing data sufficient to locate the proposed subdivision and its relation to the community and existing cross streets; 
3.  Source of water supply; 
4.  Type of street improvements and utilities which the subdivider proposes to install; 
5.  Proposed method of sewage disposal and a sewer study, if required by the city engineer, prepared by a registered civil engineer; 
6.  Proposed stormwater sewer or other means of drainage (grade and size); 
7.  Protective covenants to be recorded; 
8.  A geological and/or geotechnical report, if required by the city engineer, prepared by a licensed geologist, registered civil engineer and/or geotechnical engineer, stating the effect of geological or soil conditions on the proposed development; 
9.  New and existing public and private easements that are within the subdivision or are impacted by the subdivision. All easement holders shall be identified on the tentative map. 
10.  An environmental initial study checklist and/or assessment as determined by the director; and 
11.  For all condominiums, stock cooperatives and planned unit developments, a site plan shall be submitted with the tentative map. The site plan shall contain all of the information required for design review in compliance with Chapter 18.56 (Development Review). 
F.  Name(s) of Any Geologist or Geotechnical Engineer. The name(s) of any geologist or geotechnical engineer whose services were utilized in the preparation of the design of the tentative map. 
G.  Additional Data and Reports Required. Tentative maps shall be accompanied, at a minimum, by the following data or reports, as well as any additional data and reports that may be required by the director to facilitate review of the tentative map: 
1.  Title Report. A preliminary title report dated no older than within sixty days of the filing date of the tentative map. 
2.  Owner's Affidavit. Written verification that the fee owner(s) of the real property have consented to the filing of the tentative map. 
H.  Referral to Affected Agencies. 
1.  Required Referrals. The director shall refer a tentative map application for review and comment to agencies that will be expected to provide service to the proposed subdivision, including, as appropriate, city agencies and departments, local agencies, public utilities, special districts and State agencies. 
2.  Anticipated Type of Response. The agencies that receive a tentative map application are expected to respond to the director with an evaluation of the proposal, a list of items (e.g., hydrology study, title report, traffic study, etc.) that may need to be filed and considered during the evaluation phase, and a list of proposed conditions of tentative map approval. 
3.  Time Limits for Referral and Response. 
a.  As required by Government Code Sections 66453 through 66455.7, referral shall occur within five days of the tentative map application being determined to be complete. 
b.  An agency wishing to respond to a referral shall provide the city with its recommendations within fifteen days after receiving the tentative map application. 
I.  Environmental Review. 
1.  The director, upon receipt of a tentative map application, shall conduct an environmental analysis, and determine the appropriate environmental documentation. 
2.  The application for tentative map approval shall not [be] considered until the environmental documentation has been completed. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 1, 7-26-11)  
17.06.040 - Notices and hearings. 
A.  Applicable Review Authority. The applicable review authority is set forth in Table 17-1. 
B.  Scheduling of Review Authority's Action. The review authority shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny a tentative parcel, tract map or vesting map application within sixty days from the date of adoption by the lead agency of a negative declaration, mitigated negative declaration, or determination that the project is complete for processing and exempt from CEQA, or if an environmental impact report is required, within one hundred eighty days after certification of the final environmental impact report. 
C.  Notice and Public Hearing Required. 
1.  The review authority shall hold a noticed public hearing on a tentative parcel map, tentative tract map or vesting tentative map. 
2.  Notice of the public hearing shall be given and the hearing shall be conducted in compliance with Government Code Sections 66410 et seq. 
D.  Review Authority's Action is Conclusive. In the absence of a timely filed written appeal, the decision of the review authority shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 1, 7-26-11)  
17.06.050 - Appeals. 
The subdivider or any interested person who believe they are adversely affected by a decision with respect to a tentative parcel, tract map, vesting map, or amendment to a map may appeal the decision, in compliance with the applicable appeals procedures specified in Government Code Section 66452.5 and as follows: 
A.  If the planning commission is the review authority, then the appeal shall be to the council which is established as the appeals board; 
B.  If the review authority is not the planning commission, then the first appeal shall be to the planning commission. The planning commission's decision may be appealed to the council. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 1, 7-26-11)  
17.06.060 - Effective date of tentative map approval. 
The approval of a tentative map shall become effective for the purposes of filing a final tract or parcel map, including compliance with the conditions of approval, thirty days following the date of decision by the applicable review authority in compliance with Government Code Section 66452.5, if no appeal is filed. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 1, 7-26-11)  
17.06.070 - Vesting tentative maps. 
A.  Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to establish procedures necessary for the implementation of the provisions of the Act relating to vesting tentative maps. 
B.  Application. Vesting tentative maps shall apply only to residential zoned properties. Whenever a provision of the Act as this chapter requires the filing of a tentative map or tentative parcel map for a residential development, a vesting tentative map may instead be filed. 
C.  Expiration. The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall expire at the end of the same time period, and shall be subject to the same extensions, established by the Act and/or this chapter for the expiration of the approval or conditional approval of a tentative map. 
D.  Vesting on Approval of Vesting Tentative Map. The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in accordance with Section 66474.2 of the Act. 
E.  Vesting Rights Conferred. However, if Section 66474.2 of the Act is repealed, the approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall be deemed to have conferred a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies and standards in effect at the time the vesting tentative map is approved or conditionally approved. 
F.  Vesting Rights Expiration. The vested rights referred to herein shall expire if a final map is not approved prior to the expiration of the vesting tentative map as provided in this chapter. If the final map is approved, the vested rights shall last for the following periods of time: 
1.  An initial time period of two years; 
2.  A subdivider may apply for a twelve-month extension thirty days before expiration in compliance with Subsection C (Expiration) above. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 1, 7-26-11)  
17.06.080 - Tentative map expiration and extensions. 
A.  Valid Timeframe. An approved tentative parcel or tract map is valid for twenty-four months after its effective date, except as otherwise provided by Government Code Section 66452.6, which, under specified circumstances, allows for a tentative map to be deemed valid for thirty-six months unless otherwise extended in accordance with the provisions of this title and the Act. 
B.  Filing of Extension Request. 
1.  The time limits for acting on maps and associated appeals, as specified in this title and Government Code Sections 66410 et seq., may be extended by mutual consent of the subdivider and the applicable review authority. 
2.  An extension request shall be in writing and shall be filed with the director not less than thirty days before the date of expiration of the approval or previous extension, together with the required filing fee in compliance with the planning fee schedule. 
C.  Expiration of an Approved Map. 
1.  Expiration of an approved tentative parcel or tract map or vesting tentative map shall terminate all proceedings. 
2.  The application shall not be reactivated unless a new tentative parcel or tract map application is filed in compliance with this title. 
D.  Approval of a Time Extension—Director. The director may grant one one-year extension to the initial time limit, only after first finding all of the following: 
1.  There have been no changes to the provisions of the general plan, any applicable specific plan, or this Subdivision Ordinance applicable to the project since the approval of the tentative parcel or tract map; 
2.  There have been no changes in the character of the site or its surroundings that affect how the policies of the general plan, any applicable specific plan, or other standards of this Subdivision Ordinance apply to the project; and 
3.  There have been no changes to the capacities of community resources, including but not limited to roads, sewage treatment or disposal facilities, schools, or water supply so that there is no longer sufficient remaining capacity to serve the project. 
E.  Appeal of Decision. If the tentative map extension request is denied, the subdivider may appeal the denial within thirty days after the effective date of the denial of the extension. 
F.  Filing of a Lawsuit. 
1.  If a lawsuit has been filed and is pending in a court of competent jurisdiction affecting the validity of the approval or conditional approval of a tentative parcel or tract map, the subdivider may apply to the city within ten days of the service of the initial petition or complaint upon the city for a stay of the time in which a tentative parcel or tract map will expire. 
2.  Within forty days after receiving the request, the director shall stay the map's expiration date until final conclusion of the action, if the director determines that the action affects the validity of the tentative parcel or tract map approval. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 1, 7-26-11)  
17.06.090 - Amendment to approved tentative maps. 
A.  Minor Changes to Approved Tentative Maps—Planning Commission. A subdivider may request minor changes or amendments to an approved tentative parcel or tract map or its conditions of approval before recordation of a final map in compliance with this section. Changes to a parcel or final map after recordation are subject to Section 17.08.050 (Correction and Amendment of Recorded Maps). 
B.  Minor Changes Defined. Minor changes or amendments to a tentative parcel or tract map that may be requested by a subdivider in compliance with this section include minor adjustments to the location of proposed parcel lines and improvements, and reductions in the number of approved parcels (but no increase in the number of approved parcels), and any changes to the conditions of approval, consistent with the findings required by Subsection G. (Required Findings for Approval), below. 
C.  Changes Other Than Minor Changes. All proposed changes or amendments not covered by this section shall require the filing and processing of a new tentative parcel or tract map in compliance with this chapter. 
D.  Application for Changes. The subdivider shall file an application and filing fee, as established by city council, with the director, using the forms furnished by the city, together with the following additional information: 
1.  A statement identifying the tentative parcel or tract map number, the features of the map or particular conditions to be changed and the changes requested, the reasons why the changes are requested, and any facts that justify the changes; 
2.  Any additional information deemed appropriate by the director. 
E.  Processing of Application. Proposed changes to a tentative parcel or tract map or conditions of approval shall be processed using the same procedures as the original tentative parcel or tract map, except as otherwise provided by this section. 
F.  Review Authority. The planning commission shall be the review authority for reviewing and either approving or denying minor changes to approved tentative maps. 
G.  Required Findings for Approval. The planning commission may approve changes or amendments to an approved tentative parcel or tract map or its conditions of approval if the planning commission first finds all of the following findings to be true, and that all of the applicable findings for approval required by Subsections 17.06.090 A. and B., above, can still be made: 
1.  No parcels are added, deleted, or substantially altered; 
2.  No proposed structure locations are substantially altered; 
3.  The changes are consistent with the intent and spirit of the original tentative parcel or tract map approval; and 
4.  There are no resulting violations of this title, the Act, or other applicable laws. 
H.  Effect of Changes on Time Limits. Approved changes to a tentative parcel or tract map or conditions of approval shall not be considered as approval of a new tentative map, and shall not extend the time limits provided by Section 17.06.080 (Tentative Map Expiration and Extensions), above, nor extend any right(s) in compliance with a vesting tentative map. 
I.  Recording of Amendments. Minor changes or amendments shall be indicated on the approved map and certified by the director. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 1, 7-26-11)  
Chapter 17.08 - FINAL TRACT MAPS AND PARCEL MAPS 
Sections: 
 
17.08.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter establishes requirements for the preparation, filing, processing, approval, conditional approval or denial, and recordation of final tract and parcel maps, consistent with the requirements of the Act. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 1, 7-26-11)  
17.08.020 - Final tract and parcel map form and content. 
A.  Form and Content. The form and content of final tract and parcel maps shall be as required by the Act and this chapter. The map shall be considered submitted when it is complete and complies with all applicable provisions of the Act, this chapter and this code. 
B.  Authorized Preparers. 
1.  The final tract or parcel map shall be prepared by, or under the direction of, a registered California civil engineer or California licensed land surveyor in good standing. 
2.  A final tract or parcel map shall be based upon a field survey made in compliance with the Professional Land Surveyors Act and as required by this chapter. 
C.  Certificates and Acknowledgments. 
1.  Before filing, the certificates and acknowledgements required by the Act and this chapter shall appear on the map and may be combined where appropriate. 
2.  The certificates and acknowledgments shall appear on the face of the map unless the city engineer advises the subdivider that the certificates and acknowledgments are to be made by separate instrument. 
3.  If a certificate or acknowledgment is made by separate instrument, there shall appear on the map a reference to the separately recorded documents. 
D.  Monuments. The location, number and type of monuments shall be as specified in the Act and this chapter and shall be in compliance with the standards prescribed in the California Business & Professions Code Section 8771. 
E.  Documentation Required for City Review and Approval. 
1.  The subdivider shall submit prints of the map to the city engineer for checking, who will distribute the map to other city departments and agencies for review. 
2.  The preliminary prints shall be accompanied by documents, plans and reports in a form approved by the city engineer, including but not limited to all of the following: 
a.  Improvement Plans. Improvement plans for all public improvements as required by the city engineer. 
b.  Geotechnical Report. 
(1)  A preliminary geotechnical report, based upon test borings and prepared in compliance with the requirements of the Building Code, as it may be amended and as referenced in Municipal Code Title 16 (Buildings and Construction), shall be required for all tract maps and for those parcel maps which involve commercial or industrial development. 
(a)  The geotechnical report shall be prepared by a state-registered civil or geotechnical engineer. 
(b)  The requirement of a preliminary geotechnical report may be waived or reduced in scope by the city engineer if, in the city engineer's opinion, the soil characteristics in the vicinity of the proposed subdivision have been established by previous analyses. 
(2)  Parcel maps which propose the construction of single-family dwellings shall require the preparation of a report which includes the subsurface soil classification, as well as the results of an expansive index test. 
c.  Title Report. A title report prepared by a title insurer, with the title report required to be dated no older than within sixty days of the filing of the final map. 
d.  Improvement Cost Estimate. An improvement cost estimate, which shall include all improvements located within public or private rights-of-way, common areas, or easements, on-site and off-site drainage improvements and utility trench backfill as provided by the subdivider, except for those utility facilities to be installed by a utility company under the jurisdiction of the public utilities planning commission. 
e.  Improvement Security. The necessary bonds, cash deposit, letter of credit, or other improvement security authorized by the Subdivision Map Act, if they are determined to be required by the city sufficient to ensure the completion of construction of improvements, pursuant to Section 17.12.080 (Improvements—Agreement Required). 
f.  Deeds for Easements and Rights-of-Way. 
(1)  Deeds for easements or rights-of-way required which are not proposed to be dedicated on the final map. 
(2)  The subdivider shall provide written evidence acceptable to the city in the form of rights of entry or permanent easements across private property outside of the subdivision granting access to perform necessary construction work and allowing the maintenance of facilities, if required. 
g.  Traverse Closure Calculations. Traverse closure calculations for the boundary blocks, easements, monument lines, parcels and street centerlines. 
h.  Hydrology and Hydraulic Calculations. Complete hydrology and hydraulic calculations. 
i.  Organization Documents. 
(1)  Any proposed declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions and all other organization documents for the subdivision in a form prescribed by the Civil Code Section 1355. 
(2)  All documents shall be subject to review and approval by the director and the city attorney. 
j.  Letter of Certification from Water Agencies. The subdivider shall submit written certification from the affected water provider that adequate domestic water facilities are or will be available to serve the proposed project and that all necessary financial arrangements have been made to ensure construction of the facilities. 
k.  Other Reports. Any additional calculations, data, reports, or information required by the city engineer, including but not limited to a grading and erosion control plan, water study, sanitary sewer study and drainage study. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 1, 7-26-11)  
17.08.030 - Filing and processing of final tract and parcel maps. 
A.  Official and Timely Filing of Map. 
1.  The subdivider shall cause the map to be officially filed with the city engineer at least twenty days before the expiration of the approved or conditionally approved tentative map or any approved extension of time granted in compliance with Section 17.06.080 (Tentative Map Expiration and Extensions). 
2.  The map shall not be considered officially filed until the engineer or surveyor has received notification from the city engineer that all provisions of the tentative map approval, the Act, the Municipal Code, this Subdivision Ordinance and applicable city standards have been complied with. 
3.  The filing of the official copy of the map with the city engineer shall constitute the timely filing of the map. 
B.  Review of Map. 
1.  After the issuance of a receipt for the map, the city engineer shall examine it as to sufficiency of affidavits and acknowledgements, correctness of surveying data, mathematical data and computations, and other matters which may require checking to ensure compliance with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act, this chapter and applicable city standards. 
2.  If the map is found to be in substantial compliance with the tentative map and is in correct form, the matters shown on the map are sufficient, and the city engineer is satisfied that all of the conditions of approval have been met, the city engineer shall endorse approval of the map. 
3.  The city engineer shall combine with the map the agreements, easements and securities as required by this chapter. 
4.  The material shall be transmitted to the council for its consideration of the map. 
C.  Time Limit for Filing Map. If the subdivider fails to file the map with the city engineer and the required accompanying data with the appropriate city departments within twenty-four months, or other period of time specified in Government Code Section 66452.6 and Section 17.06.080 (Tentative Map Expiration and Extensions), following the effective date of tentative map approval by the review authority, or within any authorized extension of time, the tentative map approval or conditional approval shall become void. In this case, a new filing fee shall be paid, as established by resolution of the city council, and an application for a new tentative map shall be filed. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 1, 7-26-11)  
17.08.040 - Final tract or parcel map approval and recordation. 
After determining that the map is in compliance with Section 17.08.010 (Final Map and Parcel Map Form and Content), above, and is technically correct, the city engineer shall execute the city engineer's certificate on the map in compliance with Government Code Section 66442, and forward the map to the city clerk for council action in the following manner: 
A.  Applicable Review Authority. The applicable review authority is set forth in Table 17-1. 
B.  Review and Approval by the Review Authority. 
1.  Timing of Review Authority's Review. The review authority shall approve or deny the map after it receives the map from the city engineer or, in the case of the council, at its regular meeting after the meeting at which it receives the map, unless that time limit is extended with the mutual consent of the director and the subdivider. 
2.  Criteria for Approval. 
a.  The council shall approve the map if it conforms to all of the requirements of the Act, all provisions of this Subdivision Ordinance that were applicable at the time that the tentative map was approved, and is in substantial compliance with the approved tentative map. 
b.  If the map does not conform, the review authority shall not approve the map. 
c.  Where a map does not include any offers for dedication or improvement, the director shall review the map(s) and shall approve each map if the map conforms to the applicable requirements of the Act and this chapter. If the map(s) does not conform, it shall not be approved. 
3.  Applicable Ordinances, Policies and Standards. In determining whether to approve or deny a map, the review authority shall apply only those ordinances, policies and standards in effect on the date the proposal for the subdivision was accepted as complete, in compliance with Government Code Section 66474.2. 
4.  Action Not to Approve a Final Tract or Parcel Map. 
a.  If a map is not approved due to its failure to meet any of the requirements imposed by the Act or this chapter, the denial shall be accompanied by findings identifying the requirements which have not been met or performed. 
b.  Approval of a map shall not be withheld when the failure of the map to comply is the result of a technical and inadvertent error which, in the determination of the council or, in the case of a map not involving any offers of dedication or improvement, the director, does not materially affect the validity of the map. 
C.  Map with Dedications. 
1.  If a dedication or offer of dedication is required on the map, the council shall accept, accept subject to improvement, or reject, on behalf of the public, of any real property offered for dedication to the public in compliance with the terms of the offer of dedication, at the same time as it takes action to approve the map. 
2.  If the council rejects the offer of dedication, the offer shall remain open and may be accepted by the council at a later date in compliance with Government Code Section 66477.2. 
3.  Any termination of an offer of dedication shall be processed in compliance with Government Code Section 66477.2 using the same procedures as specified by Streets and Highway Code Part 3 of Division 9. 
D.  Map with Incomplete Improvements. If improvements required by this Subdivision Ordinance, conditions of approval, or other applicable laws have not been completed at the time of approval of the map, the council shall require the subdivider to enter into an agreement with the city as specified in Government Code Section 66462, and Section 17.12.080 (Improvements—Agreements Required), as a condition precedent to the approval of the map. 
E.  Recording of Final Tract and Parcel Maps. 
1.  After action by the review authority, as applicable, to approve the map, and after the required signatures and seals have been affixed, the city clerk shall transmit the map back to the city engineer. 
2.  The city engineer or designee shall file the map with county recorder. 
3.  The county recorder shall oversee the recording of the map. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 1, 7-26-11)  
17.08.050 - Waiver of parcel map and exceptions. 
Not withstanding the provisions of this chapter, the city engineer may elect to waive the requirement for a parcel map subject to the preparation of written findings and as provided for in the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 1, 7-26-11)  
17.08.060 - Correction and amendment of recorded maps. 
A recorded final tract or parcel map (referred to as a map) may be amended by the city engineer to correct errors in the recorded map or to change characteristics of the approved subdivision in compliance with Government Code Chapter 3, Article 7. 
A.  Type of Corrections Allowed in Compliance with Government Code Section 66469. 
1.  Filing of a Certificate of Correction or an Amending Map. In the event that errors in a map are discovered after recordation, or that other corrections are necessary, the corrections may be accomplished by either the filing of a certificate of correction or an amending map, in compliance with Government Code Chapter 3, Article 7. 
2.  Error Defined. For the purposes of this section, "errors" include errors in course or distance (but not changes in courses or distances from which an error is not ascertainable from the map), omission of any course or distance, errors in legal descriptions, or any other map error or omission as approved by the city engineer that does not affect any property right, including but not limited to acreage, parcel numbers, street names and identification of adjacent record maps. 
3.  Other Corrections. Other corrections may include indicating monuments set by engineers or surveyors other than the one that was responsible for setting monuments, or showing the proper character or location of any monument that was incorrectly shown, or that has been changed. 
4.  Review Authority. The city engineer shall be the review authority for reviewing and either approving or denying corrections to and amendments of recorded maps in compliance with Government Code Section 66469. 
5.  Application and City Engineer's Review Process. 
a.  An application to amend a recorded map in compliance with Government Code Section 66469 shall be filed with the city engineer. 
b.  The city engineer shall determine if the changes requested may be approved with a certificate of correction or an amending map. 
c.  The city engineer may request additional information based upon that determination and shall approve the certificate of correction or the amending map if all of the required findings specified in Subparagraph 3. (Required Findings), below can be made. 
6.  Required Findings. A map may be amended only if the city engineer first finds all of the following to be true: 
a.  The change(s) requested only involves a minor map annotation correction(s); 
b.  The amendment(s) does not impose any additional burden on the fee owner(s) of the real property; 
c.  The amendment(s) does not alter any interest, right, or title in the real property reflected on the map; and 
d.  The map, as amended, is still in compliance with Government Code Section 66474. 
B.  Type of Corrections Allowed in Compliance with Government Code Section 66472.1. In the event that there are changes in circumstances which make any or all of the conditions of a recorded map no longer appropriate or necessary, the following procedures shall be followed to amend the map: 
1.  Application and City's Review Process. 
a.  An application to amend a recorded map in compliance with Government Code Section 66472.1 shall be filed with the city engineer. 
b.  Once approved by the city engineer, the application shall be sent to the council for approval of either a certificate of correction or an amending map. 
c.  The council shall approve the application if all of the required findings specified in Subparagraph 3. (Required Findings), below can be made. 
2.  Review Authority. The council shall be the review authority for reviewing and either approving or denying corrections to and amendments of recorded maps in compliance with Government Code Section 66472.1. 
3.  Required Findings. A map may be amended only if the council first finds all of the following to be true: 
a.  There is a change(s) in circumstances that make any or all of the conditions of the map no longer appropriate or necessary; 
b.  The amendment(s) does not impose any additional burden on the fee owner(s) of the real property; 
c.  The amendment(s) does not alter any interest, right, or title in the real property reflected on the map; and 
d.  The map, as amended, is still in compliance with Government Code Section 66474. 
C.  Recordation. After approval, the certificate of correction or amending map shall be submitted to the county recorder for recordation. 
D.  Amendment of an Approved Subdivision. In the event that a subdivider wishes to amend (e.g., change or modify) the characteristics of an approved subdivision (e.g., a recorded final tract or parcel map), including but not limited to the number or configuration of parcels, location of streets or easements, or the nature of required improvements, the construction of which has been deferred through the approval of an agreement in compliance with Section 17.12.080 (Improvements—Agreement Required), the subdivider shall file a new tentative, final, or parcel map in compliance with this title or comply with the requirements of Government Code Section 66499.20½. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 1, 7-26-11)  
Chapter 17.10 - LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTS, PARCEL MERGERS AND OTHER PROCEDURES 
Sections: 
 
17.10.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter establishes requirements consistent with the Act for certificates of compliance, lot line adjustments, parcel mergers and reversions to acreage. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 1, 7-26-11)  
17.10.020 - Certificates of compliance. 
A.  General Provisions. 
1.  The city shall process and approve or deny applications for certificates of compliance in compliance with Government Code Sections 66499.34 and 66499.35, and this section. 
2.  Filing Criteria and Applicability—When required. 
a.  A recorded certificate of compliance may be requested by any person owning real property to have the director determine whether the property complies with the provisions of this Subdivision Ordinance. 
b.  A recorded certificate of compliance shall be required for all lot line adjustments. 
c.  When contiguous deeds or surveys have ambiguities in which the property boundary can not be ascertained as determined by the director and an agreement is reached to establish the line by all parties, a boundary line agreement and a certificate of compliance shall be recorded. 
d.  When determined by the director, a certificate of compliance may be required for the remainder parcel(s) on final or parcel maps. 
B.  Application. An application for the approval of a certificate of compliance or conditional certificate of compliance shall be filed with the director and include the information required by the director, together with the processing fee specified by the planning fee schedule. 
C.  Review Authority. The director shall be the review authority for reviewing and either approving or denying certificates of compliance. 
D.  Review and Action. 
1.  The director shall review the completed application in light of public records and applicable law. 
2.  If the director is able to determine from this review that the parcel is clearly in compliance with the provisions of this title and the Act, a certificate of compliance shall be issued by the director and delivered to the county recorder for recordation. 
3.  If the director is unable to determine from this review that the parcel is in compliance with the provisions of this title and the Act, but can do so with appropriate conditions, a conditional certificate of compliance shall be issued by the director and delivered to the county recorder for recordation. 
4.  If the director is unable to determine from this review that the parcel is clearly in compliance, the procedures specified in Government Code Section 66499.35 shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 1, 7-26-11)  
17.10.030 - Lot line adjustments. 
A.  Conditions for Allowing Lot Line Adjustments. 
1.  Compliance with Government Code Section 66412(d). Lot line adjustments shall be allowed in compliance with Government Code Section 66412(d); provided, all of the following provisions are complied with. 
2.  Four or Fewer Parcels. A lot line adjustment is between four or fewer existing adjoining parcels, where the land taken from one parcel is added to an adjoining parcel, and where a greater or lesser number of parcels than originally existed are not created. 
3.  Who Shall Prepare Application. An application for a lot line adjustment shall be prepared by a licensed California land surveyor or California civil engineer, in good standing, who is authorized to practice land surveying by the state. 
4.  Application Requirements. 
a.  An application for a lot line adjustment shall be filed. 
b.  The application shall include the information and materials: 
(1)  Application form. 
(2)  Assessor's parcel map (with property outlined). 
(3)  Title report (within the last sixty days). 
(4)  Site plan. 
(5)  Exhibit "A" - legal description. 
(6)  Exhibit "B"- 8 ½" x 11" plat showing existing and proposed boundaries. Existing lot lines shall be shown in a different color than the proposed lot lines. 
(7)  Owner's statement (reason for lot line adjustment request). 
(8)  Signed and notarized statement of ownership. 
(9)  Documentation confirming that all lien holders, record owners and trust deed holders consent to the lot line adjustment. 
(10)  Application fees as established by city council resolution. 
(11)  All existing on-site structures and their respective setbacks from the proposed new lot lines. 
(12)  The location and size of all existing on-site easements on the properties affected by the lot line adjustment. 
(13)  The location of all existing perimeter fencing and wall on the properties affected by the lot line adjustment. 
(14)  The existing and proposed lot width and depth of all properties affected by the lot line adjustment. 
(15)  The existing and proposed lot area of all properties affected by the lot line adjustment. 
(16)  Contour lines of the properties affected by the lot line adjustment. 
c.  It is the responsibility of the applicant to provide evidence in support of the findings required by Subsection B. (Processing of Lot Line Adjustment Application - Findings Required for Approval), below. 
5.  Survey May Be Required. The director may, at the director's sole discretion, require a survey of the properties involved, if the director finds the survey necessary in order to provide an adequate description of the subject properties. 
B.  Review Authority. The director shall be the review authority for reviewing and either approving or denying lot line adjustments. 
C.  Processing of Lot Line Adjustment Application - Findings Required for Approval. 
1.  The director may approve a lot line adjustment only after first making all of the following findings: 
a.  The resulting parcels will conform to the general plan and any applicable specific plan; 
b.  The lot line adjustment will not violate any of the provisions of the Whittier Municipal Code. 
c.  No street or alley dedication or improvements are necessary to properly service the properties involved in the proposed lot line adjustment; 
d.  The parcels, as proposed by the lot line adjustment, will conform, in all respects, to the provisions of this title and those of this Subdivision Ordinance; 
e.  A greater or lesser number of parcels than originally existed are not created; 
f.  The new lot line(s) is located in a manner so as not to substantially alter the size and shape of the existing parcels, with "substantially alter" defined to be not reducing the parcel size by more than ten percent; 
2.  Where the director finds all of the above facts to be present, the director shall approve the lot line adjustment; and thereafter, the owner(s) of the parcels involved shall cause a lot line adjustment and map, in a form approved by the director, to be recorded. 
3.  If the director finds any of the foregoing facts specified in subparagraph 1., above, not present, the lot line adjustment shall be denied. 
a.  The applicant shall be advised of the director's action. 
b.  In case of denial, the applicant shall have the option of: 
(1)  Appealing the decision to the planning commission as a first appeal and the city council as a second appeal; or 
(2)  Filing a parcel or tract map in compliance with this title. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 1, 7-26-11)  
17.10.040 - Parcel mergers. 
A.  Purpose. 
1.  This section is provided in compliance with Government Code Division 2, Chapter 3, Article 1.5 (Merger of Parcels) for the purpose of establishing the authority of the city to merge two or more parcels or units of land held by the same owner. 
2.  Parcel mergers may be voluntary mergers initiated by the property owner(s) or mandatory mergers initiated by the city. 
3.  Parcels may also be merged in compliance with Government Code Sections 66499.20½, or 66499.20¾ pertaining to the reversion to acreage. 
B.  Voluntary Merger of Contiguous Parcels. 
1.  Description and Purpose. It is the purpose of this subsection to allow property owners to request a voluntary merger of contiguous parcels that are under the same ownership. 
2.  Review Authority. The director shall be the review authority for reviewing and either approving or denying parcel mergers. 
3.  Process. 
a.  An application for a parcel merger shall be filed. 
b.  The application shall include the information and materials: 
(1)  Application form. 
(2)  Assessor's parcel map (with properties outlined). 
(3)  Title report (within the last sixty days). 
(4)  Site plan. 
(5)  Exhibit "A" - legal description. 
(6)  Exhibit "B"- 8 ½" x 11" plat showing boundaries and adjoining properties. 
(7)  Owner's statement (reason for parcel merger request). 
(8)  Signed and notarized statement of ownership. 
(9)  Application fees as established by city council resolution. 
c.  The merger of the subject parcels become effective when the director causes a notice of merger specifying the names of the record owners and a description of the real property to be filed for record with the county recorder. 
4.  Requirements. A parcel may be voluntarily merged with one or more contiguous parcels held by the same owner: if any one of the contiguous parcels held by the same owner does not conform to standards for minimum parcel size or dimension specified by the applicable zone; if the property owner wishes to construct a structure across the property line(s) of two or more contiguous parcels; or, if at least one of the parcels meet one or more of the requirements specified in the Government Code Section 66451.11(b). 
C.  Where These Provisions Do Not Apply. 
1.  This subsection shall not apply to the sale, lease, or financing of one or more contiguous parcels or units of land which have been created under the provisions of city ordinances regulating the division of real property and Government Code Sections 66410 et seq., applicable at the time of their creation, or to parcels or units which were not subject to the provisions at the time of their creation, even though the contiguous parcels or units are held by the same owner. 
2.  However, if any one of the contiguous parcels or units held by the same owner does not conform to standards for minimum parcel size to allow use or development in compliance with this Subdivision Ordinance and the standards established by Subsection D. (Unmerged Parcels Prior to January 1, 1984), below, then those parcels or units shall be merged. 
D.  Unmerged Parcels. Any parcels or units which were deemed unmerged, before January 1, 1984, under the Act and which have not been merged subsequently shall be considered separate parcels or units for purposes of this subsection. 
E.  Mandatory Merger of Nonconforming Contiguous Parcels under Single Ownership. Contiguous parcels or units of land held by the same owner on the date that notice of intention to determine status, pursuant to Government Code Section 66451.13, is filed shall be involuntarily merged if one of the parcels or units does not conform to the minimum parcel size to allow use or development in compliance with this Subdivision Ordinance, and if all of the following requirements are satisfied in compliance with Government Code Section 66451.11(b): 
1.  At least one of the affected parcels is not developed with any structure for which a building permit was issued or for which a building permit was not required at the time of construction, or is developed only with an accessory structure(s), or is developed with a single structure, other than an accessory structure, that is also partially sited on a contiguous parcel or unit. 
2.  With respect to any affected parcel, one or more of the following conditions exists: 
a.  Comprises less than five thousand square feet in area at the time of the determination of merger. 
b.  Was not created in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances in effect at the time of its creation. 
c.  Does not meet current standards for sewage disposal and domestic water supply. 
d.  Does not meet slope stability standards. 
e.  Has no legal access which is adequate for vehicular and safety equipment access and maneuverability. 
f.  Its development would create health or safety hazards. 
g.  Is not consistent with the applicable general plan, zoning code and any applicable specific plan, other than minimum parcel size or density standards. 
3.  Subparagraph E. 2., above, shall not apply if any of the conditions specified in Government Code Sections 66451.11(A), (B), (C), (D) or (E) exist. 
F.  Proceedings for Notice of Intention to Determine Status. 
1.  Whenever the director has knowledge that real property has merged in compliance with this section, the director shall mail, by certified mail, to the current record owner(s) of the property a notice of intention to determine status. 
a.  The notice of intention shall state that the affected parcels may be merged in compliance with this subsection; that the owner may request, within thirty days from the date the notice of intention was recorded, a hearing before the planning commission to present evidence that the property does not meet the standards for merger; and that the notice of intention was recorded with the county recorder on the date the notice of intention was mailed to the property owner(s). 
b.  Upon receipt of a request for a hearing, the director shall set the hearing for a date not less than thirty days but not more than sixty days from the date of receipt of the request. 
c.  The property owner shall be notified of the hearing by certified mail. 
d.  After the hearing, the planning commission shall determine whether the affected property has merged in compliance with this section. 
e.  A determination of non-merger may be made whether or not the affected property meets the standards for merger specified in Subsection E., above. 
f.  The determination shall be made and notification of the determination shall be mailed to the property owner(s) within five working days following the date of the hearing. 
2.  If the parcels have merged, the director shall file a notice of merger with the county recorder within thirty days following the date of the hearing, unless the determination has been appealed in compliance with Subparagraph 3., below. 
a.  The notice of merger shall specify the name(s) of the record owner(s) and shall particularly describe the real property. 
b.  If the parcels have not merged, the director shall record a release of the notice of intention within thirty days following the date of the determination, and shall mail a copy of the release to the owner(s). 
c.  If no hearing is requested, the determination shall be made not later than ninety days after the mailing of the notice of the opportunity for a hearing. 
3.  If the owner(s) requested a hearing, the determination of the planning commission may be appealed to the council within thirty days following the date of mailing the notice of determination by filing a written appeal with the city clerk. 
a.  A fee in compliance with the planning fee schedule shall be paid at the time of filing the appeal. 
b.  Upon receipt of an appeal and payment of the fee, the city clerk shall place the matter on the council agenda not less than thirty, but not more than sixty, days following the date the appeal was filed. 
c.  If, after a hearing, the council grants the appeal, the city clerk shall, within thirty days, record a release of the notice of intention with the county recorder. 
d.  If the appeal is denied, the city clerk shall, within thirty days, record a notice of merger with the county recorder. 
e.  A copy of either the release or the notice of merger shall be sent to the property owner(s). 
G.  Unmerger. 
1.  Deemed Unmerged. Any parcel or unit of land which merged in compliance with the provisions of any law before January 1, 1984, but for which a notice of merger was not recorded on or before that date are deemed unmerged, if on January 1, 1984, all of the criteria established by Government Code Section 66451.30(a) are met, and if none of the conditions specified in Government Code Section 66451.30(b) exist. 
2.  Filing of a Certificate of Compliance. Upon request of an owner, the director shall file a certificate of compliance whenever the director determines that a parcel is unmerged in compliance with this subsection. 
H.  Request for Determination of Merger. 
1.  Director's Determination of Merged or Unmerged. 
a.  A property owner may request that the director determine whether property has merged in compliance with Subsection E. (Mandatory Merger of Nonconforming Contiguous Parcels under Single Ownership), above, or is deemed unmerged in compliance with Subsection G. (Unmerger), above. 
b.  A request for determination shall be made in writing and shall be accompanied by a fee in compliance with the planning fee schedule. 
2.  Determination of Merged. Upon determination that property has merged, the director shall issue to the owner(s) and record with the county recorder a notice of merger. 
3.  Determination of Unmerged. Upon determination that property is deemed unmerged, the director shall issue to the owner(s) and record with the county recorder a certificate of compliance showing each parcel as a separate parcel. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 1, 7-26-11)  
17.10.050 - Reversions to acreage. 
A.  Filing Provisions. 
1.  A reversion to acreage shall be initiated, processed, reviewed and approved or denied in compliance with Government Code Chapter 6, Article 1. 
2.  An application for reversion submitted by a property owner(s) shall include all information required by the director, and shall include the fee, as established by city council resolution. 
3.  A parcel map may be filed to revert to acreage land previously subdivided that consists of four or less contiguous parcels, in compliance with Government Code Section 66499.20¼. 
B.  Review Authority. The city council shall be the review authority for reviewing and either approving or denying reversions to acreage. 
C.  Procedures. 
1.  Public Hearing Required. 
a.  The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on all petitions for, and council initiations of, reversions to acreage. 
b.  The planning commission shall render its decision in the form of a written recommendation to the council. 
c.  The recommendation shall include the reasons for the recommendation and shall be transmitted to the council. 
d.  Upon receipt of the recommendation of the planning commission, the council shall hold a public hearing and the hearing shall be conducted in compliance with Government Code Sections 66410 et seq. 
e.  The council may approve a reversion to acreage only if it first makes all of the findings required by Subsection C. (Required Findings), below. 
D.  Required Findings. The review authority shall approve a reversion to acreage only after first making all of the following findings, as required by Government Code Sections 66499.16: 
1.  Dedications or offers of dedication to be abandoned or vacated by the reversion to acreage are unnecessary for present or prospective public purposes; and 
2.  Either: 
a.  All owners of an interest in the real property within the subdivision have consented to the reversion; 
b.  None of the improvements required to be made have been made within two years from the date the final or parcel map was filed for record, or within the time allowed by agreement for completion of the improvements, whichever is the later; or 
c.  No parcels shown on the final or parcel map have been sold within five years from the date the map was filed for record. 
E.  Recordation Procedures. 
1.  After the hearing before the planning commission and the council and approval of the reversion to acreage, the final or parcel map, as applicable, shall be delivered to the city engineer. 
2.  The reversion to acreage shall be effective upon the final or parcel map being filed for recordation by the county recorder. 
3.  Upon filing, all dedications and offers of dedication not shown on the final or parcel map for reversion shall be of no further force or effect. 
F.  Effect of Reversion. The filing of a final or parcel map, as applicable, to complete a reversion to acreage shall also constitute the merger of the separate parcels into one parcel, in compliance with Government Code Section 66499.20½. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 1, 7-26-11)  
Chapter 17.12 - SUBDIVISION DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT REQUIREMENTS 
Sections: 
 
17.12.010 - Purpose. 
A.  Requirements for the Design and Layout. This chapter establishes standards for the design and layout of subdivisions, and the design, construction and installation of public improvements within subdivisions. 
B.  Creation of New Usable Parcels. The purpose of these standards is to ensure, through careful site evaluation and design, the creation of new usable parcels that are consistent with the general plan and any applicable specific plan. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 1, 7-26-11)  
17.12.020 - Standards. 
Whenever improvements are required to be constructed, pursuant to the Act or this title, the construction of such improvements shall be accomplished in compliance with the city's standards therefor, which have been adopted by the city council. Copies of the standards are on file with the city engineer and are available for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 1, 7-26-11)  
17.12.030 - Street naming. 
A.  Naming a Street Created by a Subdivision. All public and private streets located within a proposed subdivision shall have names in compliance with the following established procedures: 
1.  Procedure. 
a.  Submittal. Naming a street either created by a proposed subdivision or naming an existing unnamed street contained within a proposed subdivision shall be shown on the tentative map and submitted with the application requirements for the tentative map. 
b.  Review and Approval. A proposed street name shall be shown on the tentative map and shall be approved by the city engineer at the time of tentative map approval. The approved names shall be shown on the final map or parcel map as submitted for city approval and recordation. 
c.  Review and Approval. Street names must be reviewed by the police and fire departments before they are approved by the city engineer. 
d.  Appeal. The decision of the review authority is final subject to an appeal to the city manager within ten days. The city manager's decision can be appealed to the city council within ten days. The city council decision shall be final. 
B.  Street Name Selection. Each selected street name shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  Objectives. A proposed street name should be pleasant sounding; easy to read (so that the public, and children in particular, can readily pronounce the name in an emergency); and add to community pride. 
2.  Criteria. Each street name shall comply with the following criteria: 
a.  The duplication of an existing street name within the same area shall not be allowed in a new subdivision unless the street is an obvious extension of and contiguous to an existing street. 
b.  A street shall not be named after a living person, except that a street may be named with a family surname prominently documented in local, regional, state or national history, even if a family member still resides in the area. 
c.  A street name shall be easy to pronounce. All names shall be of the commonly acceptable spelling, as appearing in a standard dictionary or are the traditionally-accepted spellings. 
d.  A street name shall be grammatically correct. 
e.  All new street names within a new subdivision shall be thematically related. 
f.  A street name shall include the appropriate street classification (e.g., lane, street, and way). 
g.  No slang, racist, or otherwise derogatory street names will be approved. 
3.  Continuity. 
a.  A street created by a proposed subdivision that continues an existing named street shall bear the name of the existing street. 
b.  A continuous street, or one proposed to be continuous, shall have the same name throughout its complete length. 
c.  If an otherwise continuous street is interrupted by a drainage channel, trail, railroad and etc. with no planned connection, the interrupted segments shall have different names. 
d.  Where streets intersect at an interior angle of one hundred ten degrees or less, each segment shall be given a different name if doing so will reduce confusion when locating an address. 
4.  Extra words. Unnecessary words shall be avoided. Words that may be used are limited to the following: 
a.  "East," "North," "South," and "West," indicating direction for a numbering base line; street naming and 
b.  "Lane," "Place," "Road," "Street," "Way," indicating the street classification. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 1, 7-26-11)  
17.12.040 - Development review required. 
No building permit shall be issued for the grading and development of any lots resulting from the subdivision of any property located within the R-E, R-1, R-2, R-3 or R-4 zones unless a development review plan has been approved therefor, in accordance with Chapter 18.56. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 1, 7-26-11)  
17.12.050 - Site preparation and grading. 
A.  Grading. Before the issuance of a building permit, a grading plan prepared and signed by a registered civil engineer shall be submitted to and approved by the city engineer. Grading plans shall show the elevations of the natural ground at all parcel corners, the finished grade at corners, the finished pad elevation, finished floor elevations, rates and directions of all drainage swales, elevation height of all retaining or perimeter walls and finished sidewalk elevations at all front lot lines, and existing topographic elevations and drainage direction a minimum of fifty feet outside the boundary of proposed project area and/or map or as required by the city engineer. 
1.  Hillside Residential Development Standards. Specific standards regulating hillside development are located in Chapter 18.14 (Hillside Residential Zone). 
2.  Minimum Slopes. The minimum grade of all drainage swales on parcels shall be one-half of one percent unless approved differently by the city engineer. 
3.  Pad Elevation. All building pad elevations shall be established in compliance with Title 15 (Buildings and Construction). 
4.  Drainage Plan. 
a.  No inter-parcel or "cross lot drainage" shall be allowed. 
b.  Each parcel shall drain its own water to a public street, approved public or private drainage facility, or natural drainage course without passing through or across an adjacent parcel, except where a legal right exists (e.g., a drainage easement), and is authorized by the city engineer. 
c.  No parcel shall drain water over the bank of a flood control channel. 
5.  Grading Practices. 
a.  All grading shall also meet the requirements identified in Chapter 12.28 (Excavations and Grade Changes) and Section 18.14.080 (Development standards—Compliance). 
b.  All grading within the city shall employ the best available management practices, as determined by the city engineer, to minimize airborne dust, erosion, sedimentation, stormwater and pollution runoff (in compliance with Chapter 8.36 - Stormwater and Pollution Runoff Control) and unnecessary grading. 
c.  Each building site on sloping parcels shall be individually prepared. 
6.  Grading Exceptions. Specific exceptions to the above grading requirements may be authorized at the discretion of the city engineer. 
7.  As-Built Grading Plan. Upon completion of grading operations the subdivider or individual parcel owner shall furnish to the city engineer two prints of an as-built grading plan prepared by the subdivider's or owner's engineer. 
8.  Compliance with California Building Code Required. Every map approved in compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall be conditioned on compliance with the requirements for grading and erosion control, including the prevention of sedimentation or damages to off-site property, in compliance with California Building Code Appendix Chapter 70, as adopted and amended from time to time by the city. 
9.  Retaining Walls. 
a.  Retaining walls shall be required at grade differences of one foot or more, unless a recorded slope easement is obtained. 
b.  Retaining walls on residential properties shall be constructed in compliance with Section 18.10.030(D) (Walls, Fences and Retaining Walls) and any other adopted city standards. 
c.  Retaining walls shall be constructed in a manner that is consistent with all applicable city standards. 
B.  Erosion and Sediment Control. A proposed subdivision shall be designed so that all grading incorporates appropriate erosion and sediment control measures. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 1, 7-26-11)  
17.12.060 - Improvements plan. 
After the approval of a tentative map and before the construction of any improvements or recording of the final map, the subdivider shall submit plans to the city in the following manner: 
A.  Preparation and Content. Improvement plans shall be prepared by a California registered professional engineer and shall include all of the following information: 
1.  All calculations, design reports, drawings, specifications, and other information required by the city engineer; 
2.  Grading, drainage, erosion and sediment control, and a storm water pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) for the entire subdivision; and 
3.  The improvement plan/specification checking and construction inspection fees, established by city council resolution. 
B.  Submittal of Plans. Improvement plans shall be submitted to the city engineer and other appropriate reviewing agencies for review and approval. Upon the approval of improvement plans in compliance with Subsection C. (Review and Approval), below, the subdivider shall also submit to the city engineer a detailed cost estimate of all improvements, based on guidelines provided by the city. 
1.  Street and Drainage Plans and Profiles. Plans, profiles, and specifications of proposed street and drainage improvements shall be submitted to the city engineer, checked and approved before presentation of the final map to the council for acceptance. These plans and profiles shall show full details of the proposed improvements in compliance with city standards. 
2.  Water Systems Plans. Plans, specifications, and all necessary details of the proposed water system shall be submitted to the city engineer for review; provided, the water purveyor has certified that it has reviewed and approved all of the plans, specifications, and all necessary details of the proposed water system and is willing and able to supply water upon request. 
a.  Connections. The subdivider shall install an approved water connection to the property line of each parcel within the subdivided area and pay the applicable water connection fees as established by city resolution or ordinance. 
b.  Mains. Water mains and house services shall be constructed to serve each parcel within the subdivided area and shall be of a size and design as designated by the city engineer or the private water company. 
3.  Sanitary Sewer Plans. Plans, profiles, specifications, and all necessary details of the sanitary sewers to be installed shall be submitted to the city engineer for review; provided, that before submitting the plans, they shall have been approved by the entity that will serve the subdivision, or if a private sewage disposal company is to provide service, the plans shall have been approved by the city engineer. 
C.  Review and Approval. Improvement plans shall be reviewed and approved by the applicable agency within the time limits specified by Government Code Section 66456.2. 
D.  Effect of Approval. 
1.  The final approval of improvement plans shall be required before approval of a parcel or final map. 
2.  The approval of improvement plans shall not bind the city to accept the improvements nor waive any defects in the improvements as installed. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 1, 7-26-11)  
17.12.070 - Improvements—Required. 
A.  No subdivision or other division of land contemplated by the Act and/or this title shall be approved unless the following improvements are constructed, or required to be constructed, in order to service the lots being created in addition to the requirements identified in Sections 17.12.120: 
1.  An adequate distribution system designed and constructed for the purpose of supplying water for domestic and firefighting purposes for each lot proposed to be created; 
2.  Any adequate sewage system designed and constructed to serve each lot being created; 
3.  An adequate stormwater drainage system designed and constructed so as to serve each of the lots proposed to be created; 
4.  An adequate public and/or private street and/or alley system designed and constructed to serve each lot proposed to be created; 
5.  An adequate underground system designed and constructed so as to provide all necessary utilities to each lot proposed to be created, including, but not limited to, facilities for water, natural gas, electricity, telephone services; and 
6.  Any and all other public improvements necessary to provide all services to each lot proposed to be created. 
B.  Each tentative map shall be reviewed by the staff, the advisory agency and/or the city council, and thereafter steps shall be taken to insure that all of the improvements reasonably required to service all of the lots proposed to be created are specifically required as conditions of approval on such tentative maps. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 1, 7-26-11)  
17.12.080 - Improvements—Existing lots. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of Sections 17.12.060 and 17.14.020, no improvements and/or dedications shall be required of any subdivision proposing to create four or less lots, where the lots proposed to be so created are already serviced by adequately existing improvements and/or dedications. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 1, 7-26-11)  
17.12.090 - Improvements—Limitations. 
Improvements and/or dedications required pursuant to Sections 17.12.060 and 17.14.020, with reference to a subdivision or other division of land contemplated by the Act and/or this title, may be so required whether the same are included within the boundaries of the tentative map for such subdivision or other division of land contemplated by the Act or this title, provided that such improvements and/or dedications are reasonably required to service the lots proposed to be created by such land division. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 1, 7-26-11)  
17.12.100 - Improvement agreement required. 
If all required improvements, engineering, and inspections are not satisfactorily completed before a parcel or final map is approved, the subdivider shall, before the approval of the parcel or final map, enter into an improvement agreement with the city whereby in consideration of the acceptance by the council of the streets, easements, and any other land offered for dedication, the subdivider and the subdivider's contractor agrees to furnish the equipment, labor, and material necessary to complete the work within the time specified in the agreement in compliance with Government Code Section 66499.3. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 1, 7-26-11)  
17.12.110 - Improvements—Security. 
A.  Security Required. To ensure that the work covered by the improvement agreement specified in Section 17.12.100 (Improvement Agreement Required), above, will be completed, improvement security shall be furnished, in an amount, form and manner consistent with the Act and/or as approved by the council based on a recommendation(s) of the city engineer, to guarantee the performance of any act or agreement. 
B.  Forfeiture on Failure to Complete. Upon the failure of a subdivider to complete any improvements and work within two years from the date the agreement is executed, the council may, upon notice in writing served by registered mail addressed to the last known address of the person, firm, or corporation signing the contract, determine that the improvement work or any part of the work is uncompleted and may cause to be forfeited to the city, the sum of money or bond(s) given for the faithful performance of the work as may be necessary to complete the work. The subdivider may apply to the director for a one-year extension at any time before the initial time period based on the findings contained in Section 17.06.080 (Tentative Map Expiration and Extensions). 
C.  Exoneration of Improvement Security. 
1.  With the exception of flood control or drainage works inspected by the Los Angeles County Department of Public Works or water facilities under the control of entities other than the city, it shall be the duty of the city engineer to inspect or receive certificates of completion of all improvements installed as to their compliance with this chapter and city standards. 
2.  The security furnished by the subdivider may be released in the following manner: 
a.  Security given for faithful performance of any act or agreement shall be released upon the performance of the act subject to a ten percent withholding until final completion and acceptance of the required work. 
b.  Security guaranteeing the payment to the contractor, subcontractors, and to persons furnishing labor, materials, or equipment shall, after passage of the time within which claims of lien are required to be recorded in compliance with Civil Code Article 3 (commencing with Section 3114) of Chapter 2 of Title 15 of Part 4 of Division 3 and other acceptance of the work, be reduced to an amount equal to the total claimed by all claimants for whom claims of lien have been recorded and notice of the claims given in writing to the council, and if no claims have been recorded, the security shall be released in full. 
c.  The release shall not apply to any required guarantee and warranty period, nor to the amount of the security deemed necessary by the city for the guarantee and warranty period, nor to cost and reasonable expenses and fees, including reasonable attorney's fees. 
d.  Maintenance security necessary for guarantee and warranty of the work for a period of twelve months following completion and acceptance of the work against any defective work or labor completed, or defective materials furnished, as specified in Subparagraph A.4., above, shall be released if no claims of defective work have been filed with the council. 
e.  In the event of defective work, the security shall be held until all work is considered satisfactory and acceptable by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 1, 7-26-11)  
17.12.120 - Improvements—Installation. 
Subdivision improvements required as conditions of approval of a tentative map approved in compliance with this article, see Chapter 17.06 (Tentative Map Filing Procedures), shall be installed as specified in this section. 
A.  Timing of Improvements. Required improvements shall be constructed or otherwise installed only after the approval of improvement plans in compliance with Section 17.12.050, above, and before the approval of a parcel or final map in compliance with Chapter 17.08 (Final Tract Maps and Parcel Maps), except where: 
1.  Improvements are deferred in compliance with Section 17.12.080 (Improvement Agreement Required); or 
2.  To avoid breaking up street paving, underground utility or service lines required to be installed as part of a subdivision and which are planned to run across or underneath a street or alley right-of-way shall be installed before the preparation of subgrade and before the surfacing of any streets or alleys. 
3.  In the event that the development of the subdivision requires the utility company to perform utility construction work, the subdivider shall pay a deposit satisfactory to the utility company within sufficient time to allow construction work to be performed before subgrade preparation. 
4.  In no event shall subgrade preparation commence before installation of all necessary utilities and laterals. 
B.  Inspection of Improvements. The inspection of the construction and installation of required subdivision improvements shall occur in the following manner: 
1.  Supervision. 
a.  Before starting any work, the contractor engaged by the subdivider shall designate in writing an authorized representative who shall have the authority to represent and act for the contractor in contacts with the city. 
b.  The designated representative shall be present at the work site at all times while work is in progress. 
c.  At times when work is suspended, arrangements acceptable to the city engineer shall be made for any emergency work that may be required. 
2.  Inspection Procedures. 
a.  Inspections Required. 
(1)  The agency that has required a specific action shall make any inspections as it deems necessary to ensure that all construction complies with the approved improvement plans. 
(2)  Where required by the agency, the subdivider shall enter into an agreement with the city to pay the full cost of any contract inspection services determined to be necessary by that agency. 
b.  Access to Site and Materials. The agency that has required a specific action shall have access to the work site at all times during construction, and shall be furnished with every reasonable facility for verifying that the materials and workmanship are in compliance with the approved improvement plans. 
c.  Authority for Approval. 
(1)  The work done and all materials furnished shall be subject to the inspection and approval of the agency that has required a specific action. 
(2)  The inspection of the work or materials shall not relieve the contractor of any obligations to fulfill the work as prescribed. 
d.  Improper Work or Materials. 
(1)  Work or materials not meeting the requirements of the approved plans and specifications may be rejected, regardless of whether the work or materials were previously inspected by the agency that has required a specific action. 
(2)  In the event that the agency determines that subdivision improvements are not being constructed as required by the approved plans and specifications, it shall order the work stopped and shall inform the contractor of the reasons for stopping work and the corrective measures necessary to resume the work. 
(3)  Any work done after issuance of a stop work order shall be a violation of this chapter. 
3.  Notification. 
a.  The subdivider shall notify the city engineer as part of condition compliance upon the completion of each stage of construction before recordation as specified in this chapter. 
b.  Further construction may only be completed if all required actions included in the conditions of approval have been accomplished and signed off by the agency that has required the action(s). 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 1, 7-26-11)  
17.12.130 - Improvements—Reimbursement for extra-capacity. 
Pursuant to Section 66485 of the Act, where the city council finds that the public interest so requires, it shall be a requirement of this chapter that in any subdivision or other division of land contemplated by the Act or this title, the subdivider shall supplement the size, capacity or number of any improvements otherwise required for the benefit of the lots proposed to be created, which supplemental size, capacity and/or number is for the benefit of property not included within such subdivision or other division of land contemplated by the Act or this title. Where such supplemental improvements are so required, reimbursement agreements shall be executed, as is provided in Section 66486 et seq. of the Act. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 1, 7-26-11)  
17.12.140 - Temporary real estate offices. 
With respect to the amount of security required to assure the removal of a temporary real estate subdivision office, the amount shall be one hundred percent of the total estimated cost of removal and/or storage of such structure, as determined by the director. Such security shall be in the form of a cash or equivalent deposit. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 1, 7-26-11)  
17.12.150 - Monuments. 
The location, number and type of monuments shall be as specified in the Government Code Chapter 4, Article 9 in compliance with the standards prescribed in the California Business & Professions Code Section 8771. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 1, 7-26-11)  
17.12.160 - Geotechnical report required. 
A.  A geotechnical report, as contemplated by Section 66490 of the Act, shall be required for each subdivision or other division of land contemplated by the Act or this title. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, the city council may waive the requirement of a preliminary soils report if it finds that due to staff knowledge concerning the quality of soils included within the subdivision or other division of land no such preliminary analysis is necessary. 
B.  Where geotechnical reports are required, and the same disclose an unstable condition, the city shall require appropriate steps to be taken to correct such condition; or if such unstable condition cannot be eliminated, the subdivision or other division of land shall be disapproved. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 1, 7-26-11)  
Chapter 17.14 - DEDICATIONS AND RESERVATIONS (N) 
Sections: 
 
17.14.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter establishes requirements for the for subdivider dedications of land or payment of fees, in conjunction with subdivision approval. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 1, 7-26-11)  
17.14.020 - Dedication—Real property interests. 
A.  No subdivision or other division of land contemplated by the Act or this title shall be approved, unless the subdivider and/or the owner dedicates to the city, or at the option of the city, makes irrevocable offers of dedication to the city of sufficient interests in real property, located within the boundaries of the subdivision or other division of land, to accommodate all streets, alleys, drainage facilities, sewage facilities, public utility easements and such other easements as may be deemed necessary to properly service the lots proposed to be created, including but not limited to dedication, or irrevocable offers of dedication, of access rights and/or abutter's rights of whatever kind or nature. Where appropriate on a particular subdivision or other division of land contemplated by the Act or this title, the waiver of direct access rights, as contemplated by Section 66476 of the Act, may be required if the public interest necessitates such waiver, as determined by the city council. 
B.  The areas proposed for such dedication or offers of dedication shall be established as conditions of approval on the tentative map proposed for such subdivision or other division of land. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 1, 7-26-11)  
17.14.030 - Dedication—Certificate required for map. 
Where dedication of property is required, with reference to a parcel map, such dedication shall be accomplished by a certificate placed upon the face of the parcel map, in the same manner as required of a final map pursuant to the Act. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 1, 7-26-11)  
17.14.040 - Reservation of land for public use. 
Where the city council finds that the public interest so requires, it may, as a condition of approval on a subdivision or other division of land contemplated by the Act or this title, require that there be a reservation of land made for parks, recreational facilities, fire stations, libraries or other public uses, as contemplated by Section 66479 of the Act. No such reservation shall be so imposed except in compliance with the provisions of the Act. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 1, 7-26-11)  
Chapter 17.16 - PARK LAND AND FEES DEDICATION 
Sections: 
 
17.16.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by Section 66477 of the Government Code of the state of California. The open space, park and recreational facilities for which dedication of land and/or payment of a fee is required by this section are in accordance with the Environmental Resource Management Element of the General Plan of the city of Whittier, adopted by the city of Whittier on March 19, 1974, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 1, 7-26-11)  
17.16.020 - Requirements. 
At the time of the approval of the tentative map or parcel map, the city council shall determine pursuant to Section 17.16.040 (Formula for Dedication of Land), the land required for dedication or in-lieu fee payment. As condition of approval of a final subdivision map or parcel map, the subdivider shall dedicate land, pay a fee in-lieu thereof, or both, at the option of the city, for neighborhood and community park or recreational purposes at the time and according to the standards and formulas contained in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 1, 7-26-11)  
17.16.030 - General standards. 
It is found and determined that the public interest, convenience, health, welfare and safety required that four and eight-tenths acres of property for each one thousand persons residing within this city be devoted to local park and recreational purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 1, 7-26-11)  
17.16.040 - Formula for dedication of land. 
A.  Where a park or recreation facility has been designated in the environmental resource management element of the general plan of the city, and is to be located in whole or in part within the proposed subdivision, the subdivider shall dedicate land for a local park sufficient in size and topography that bears a reasonable relationship to serve the present and future needs of the residents of the subdivision, based on an adopted ratio of four and eight-tenths acres of park per one thousand persons (0.0048 per 1,000 people). The actual amount of land dedication required per development, per dwelling unit shall be as periodically set by resolution of the city council and according to Section 66477(a) of the Government Code. 
B.  Dedication of land shall be made in accordance with the procedures contained in Section 17.16.100 (Procedure). 
C.  The subdivider shall, without credit: 
1.  Provide full street improvements and utility connections including, but not limited to, curbs, gutters, street paving, traffic control devices, street trees and sidewalks to land which is dedicated pursuant to this section; 
2.  Provide for fencing, as determined necessary by the city, along the property line of that portion of the subdivision contiguous to the dedicated land; 
3.  Provide improved drainage through the site; 
4.  Provide other minimal improvements, including rough grading, which the city council determines to be essential to the acceptance of the land for recreational purposes. 
D.  The land to be dedicated and the improvements to be made pursuant to this section shall be approved by the director of parks, recreation and community services. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 1, 7-26-11)  
17.16.050 - Formula for fees in-lieu of land. 
A.  General Formula. Where the proposed development is in close proximity to an already existing neighborhood park, as determined by the planning commission through the general plan, and if the already existing park is outside the proposed limits of the development, the developer will be required to make a cash payment, in-lieu of dedication, equal to the value of that land and in an amount determined in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.16.070 (Amount of Fee in-lieu of Land Dedication), such fee to be used for a local park which bears a reasonable relationship to serve the present and future residents of the area being subdivided. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 1, 7-26-11) 
B.  Fees in-lieu of land—Fifty parcels or less. 
1.  If the proposed subdivision contains fifty parcels or less, the subdivider shall pay a fee equal to the land value of the portion of the local park required to serve the needs of residents of the proposed subdivision, and in an amount determined in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.16.070 (Amount of Fee in-lieu of Land Dedication). 
2.  However, nothing in this section shall prohibit the dedication and acceptance of land for park and recreational purposes in subdivisions of fifty parcels or less, where the subdivider proposes such dedication voluntarily and the land is acceptable to the city council. 
C.  Use of Money. The money collected under this section shall be used only for the purpose of acquiring necessary land and developing new or rehabilitating existing park and recreational facilities reasonably related to serving the subdivision. 
D.  Sample computation of Quimby Act Fee. 
1.  2.0 (estimated average persons per unit in the city) x 0.0048 (acreage per person per 1,000 people) = 0.0096 acres (park dedication per person) 
2.  0.0096 acres (total park dedication per person) x 100 (total units within subdivision) = 0.96 acres (total park dedication) 
3.  0.96 acres (total park dedication) x $2,000,000 (appraised land value per acre) = $1,920,000 (total land value of dedication) 
4.  $1,920,000 (total land value of dedication)/100 (total units) = $19,200 per unit in park fees 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 1, 7-26-11)  
17.16.060 - Criteria for requiring both dedication and fee. 
In subdivisions of more than fifty parcels, the subdivider shall dedicate land and/or pay a fee in-lieu thereof in accordance with one or more of the appropriate provisions contained in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 1, 7-26-11)  
17.16.070 - Amount of fee in-lieu of land dedication. 
When a fee is to be paid in-lieu of land dedication, the amount of such fee shall be based upon the fair market value of the amount of land which would otherwise be required for dedication pursuant to Section 17.16.040 (Formula for Dedication of Land), plus corresponding fees as periodically set by resolution of the city council; or 
In the alternative, the amount of such fee shall be an amount equal to the fee established by city council resolution and assessed pursuant to Subsections A(4) of Section 3.48.080 (Imposition and Payment of Fees) of Chapter 3.48 (Development Impact Fees) of Title 3 (Revenue and Finance). 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 1, 7-26-11)  
17.16.075 - Appeal of in-lieu fee calculation. 
The decision of the director with regard to the appropriate amount of the fee in-lieu of land dedication, pursuant to Section 17.16.070 (Amount of Fee in-lieu of Land Dedication) may be appealed in writing to the city manager within fifteen calendar days of the decision. The decision of the city manager shall be final, unless appealed in writing to the city council within fifteen calendar days of the city manager's decision. All decisions of the city council shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 1, 7-26-11)  
17.16.080 - Determination of fair market value. 
The fair market value shall be determined by the city with a written professional appraisal report prepared and signed by a licensed appraiser acceptable to the city. The appraisal shall be made within thirty days immediately prior to the filing of the final map to the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 1, 7-26-11)  
17.16.090 - Credit for common open space. 
A.  No credit shall be given for common open space in the subdivision except as hereinafter provided. Where common open space usable for active recreational purposes is provided in a proposed planned development or real estate development as defined in Sections 11003 and 11003.1 of the Business and Professions Code, partial credit, not to exceed twenty-five percent may be given against the requirement of land dedication or payment of fees in-lieu thereof if the city council finds that it is in the public interest to do so. 
B.  The following standards will be utilized to determine the amount of credit given: 
1.  Yards, court areas, setbacks and other open space areas required by the zoning and building ordinances and regulations shall not be included in the computation of such common open space; and 
2.  Facilities proposed for open space are in substantial accordance with the provisions of the Environmental Resource Management Element of the General Plan of the city; 
3.  Proposed common open space shall be usable and accessible by the general public. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 1, 7-26-11)  
17.16.100 - Procedure. 
A.  At the time of approval of the tentative map or parcel map, the city council shall determine pursuant to Section 17.16.040 (Formula for Dedication of Land) the land required for dedication. If the city council requires in-lieu fee payment by the subdivider, the city council will set the amount of land upon which the in-lieu fee will be based at the time of final map approval. 
B.  At the time of the filing of the final subdivision map or parcel map, the subdivider shall dedicate the land as required by the city council. Where the city council has determined that fees shall be paid in-lieu of or in addition to the dedication of land, the city council shall set the in-lieu fees based on the land dedication requirements as established at the time of tentative map approval using current land values at the time of final map approval. The subdivider shall pay said fees in accordance with the following schedule: 
1.  For any subdivision consisting of nine or less lots, fees shall be paid, in their entirety, prior to the issuance of any building permit for any building or structure to be located upon any lot in the subdivision. 
2.  For any subdivision consisting of ten or more lots, fees shall be paid on a lot-by-lot basis prior to the issuance of any building permit for any building or structure to be located upon any one of the lots in the subdivision. 
C.  Open space covenants for private park or recreational facilities shall be submitted to the city prior to approval of the final subdivision map or parcel map and shall be recorded contemporaneously with the final subdivision map or parcel map. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 1, 7-26-11)  
17.16.110 - Disposition of fees. 
A.  Fees determined pursuant to Section 17.16.070 (Amount of Fee in-lieu of Land Dedication) shall be paid to the city clerk-treasurer and shall be deposited into the subdivision park trust fund, or its successor. Money in said fund, including accrued interest, shall be expended solely for acquisition or development of park land, or improvements thereto. 
B.  Collected fees shall be appropriated by the local agency to which the land or fees are conveyed within five years upon receipt of payment or within five years after the issuance of building permits on one-half of the lots created by the subdivision. 
C.  The city clerk-treasurer shall report to the city council at least annually on income expenditures, and status of the subdivision park trust fund. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 1, 7-26-11)  
17.16.120 - Exemptions. 
A.  Subdivisions containing less than five parcels and not used for residential purposes shall be exempted from the requirements of this chapter; provided, however, that a condition shall be placed on the approval of such parcel map that if a building permit is requested for construction of a residential structure or structures on one or more of the parcels the fee may be required to be paid by the owner of each such parcel as a condition to the issuance of such permit. 
B.  The provisions of this chapter do not apply to commercial or industrial subdivision; nor do they apply to condominium projects or stock cooperatives which consist of the subdivision of airspace in an existing apartment building which is more than five years old when no new dwelling units are added. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 1, 7-26-11)  
17.16.130 - Subdivider-provided park and recreation improvements. 
The value of park and recreation improvements provided by the subdivider to the dedicated land shall be credited against the fees or dedication of land required by this chapter. The city council reserves the right to approve such improvements prior to agreeing to accept the dedication of land and to require in-lieu fee payments should the land improvements be unacceptable. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 1, 7-26-11)  
17.16.140 - Agency to accept land or fee. 
Land or fees required under this chapter shall be conveyed or paid directly to the local public agency which provides park and recreational services on a community-wide level and to the area within which the proposed development will be located, if such agency elects to accept the land or fee. At the time of tentative map approval, the city council shall determine whether the city is the appropriate local agency. The city shall develop a schedule pursuant to Section 66477 of the Government Code specifying how, when and where it will use the land and/or fees to develop park or recreational facilities to serve residents of the subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 1, 7-26-11)  
Chapter 17.18 - OBSTRUCTION OF PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY AND PUBLIC PROPERTY 
Sections: 
 
17.18.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the health, safety and general welfare of persons and property within the city by preventing the encroachment which prevents and/or interferes with the use of any public right-of-way and public property by the public. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 1, 7-26-11)  
17.18.020 - Authority to remove encroachments. 
A.  The city engineer, or his/her designee, may immediately and summarily abate, remove, or by notice may require the removal of any of the following encroachments: 
1.  Any encroachment which prevents and/or interferes with the use of any public right-of-way by the public; 
2.  Any encroachment which consists of refuse, trash, garbage, construction debris, or containers for refuse, trash, garbage, or construction debris (except for garbage receptacles on designated trash pick-up days or in connection with official trash collection); 
3.  Any encroachment which presents a potential traffic hazard; 
4.  Any encroachment of public property. 
B.  The city engineer may return such encroachment to its owner, or otherwise dispose of it at his/her discretion, except that if the city engineer determines in good faith that the encroachment is of more than nominal value or is of significant personal value, he/she shall not effect such other disposition until he/she has made a reasonable attempt to identify and notify the owner of the encroachment and provide a reasonable time, but not less than ten days, for the owner to retrieve it under provisions of this chapter. The return of such encroachment may be conditioned upon payment of an amount sufficient to reimburse the city for the expenses of removal, storage and any damage caused by the encroachment. If the encroachment is not claimed or the costs paid within said reasonable time, the encroachment shall be deemed to be abandoned and may be sold, destroyed, or transferred to the city for public use. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 1, 7-26-11)  
17.18.030 - Notice to remove encroachment. 
The city engineer may, by notice, require the removal of any encroachment not specified in Section 17.18.020 (Authority to Remove Encroachments) of this chapter from any public right-of-way or public property. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 1, 7-26-11)  
17.18.040 - Service of notice—Contents. 
The notice referred to in Sections 17.18.020 (Authority to Remove Encroachments), 17.18.030 (Notice to Remove Encroachment) and 17.18.070 (Notice of Seizure and Hearing) of this chapter shall be served upon the occupant or owner of the land, or the person causing, controlling or owning the encroachment, or shall be left at the place of residence or business of such occupant, owner or person if such place is in the city. If the person upon whom notice is to be served does not reside or do business in the city, the notice shall be prominently posted on the encroachment. The notice shall specify the breadth of the public right-of-way or public property, the place and extent of the encroachment, and shall require the removal of such encroachment within forty-eight hours or such longer period of time as the city engineer deems appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 1, 7-26-11)  
17.18.050 - Removal of encroachment at owner's expense. 
A.  If the property owner (or person responsible for the encroachment) admits or fails to deny, within the time provided in Section 17.18.020(B) of this chapter, that an encroachment exists under Section 17.18.020 (Authority to Remove Encroachments) or 17.18.030 (Notice to Remove Encroachment) of this chapter, and if the encroachment is not removed within the time period set forth on the notice from and after service or posting of the notice, the city may remove the encroachment at the expense of the owner of the encroachment, the owner of the land, or any other person causing or allowing the encroachment to exist. 
B.  The city at its discretion may pursue any and all legal and equitable remedies, to which the city may be entitled, for the collection of unpaid costs for the abatement of the encroachment. Pursuit of one remedy does not preclude the pursuit of any other remedies. All remedies provided herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive. 
C.  The cost of abatement of an encroachment of public property, after its final confirmation by the city, may constitute a special assessment against any private real property to which it relates, and, after the recording of the order of confirmation in the official records of the county recorder's office as thus made and confirmed, it shall constitute a lien on the property in the amount of the assessment. A copy of the order and report shall be transmitted to the assessor and tax collector for the city, whereupon it shall be the duty of the assessor and tax collector to add the amounts of the assessment, or assessments, to the next regular bills of ad valorem taxes levied against the respective lot and parcels of land, and thereafter the amounts shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary ad valorem property taxes are collected. 
D.  Any responsible person who has unpaid and/or delinquent abatement costs, may be refused the issuance of a land use approval, or other city approval pertaining to the property, real or personal, that is the subject of the abatement costs pursuant to this chapter. 
E.  Any abatement costs required by the provisions of this chapter shall be paid or deposited with the city clerk-treasurer. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 1, 7-26-11)  
17.18.060 - Action for abatement of encroachment. 
If the property owner (or person responsible for the encroachment) denies, within the time provided for under Section 17.18.020(B) of this chapter, that an encroachment exists under Section 17.18.020 (Authority to Remove Encroachments) or 17.18.030 (Notice to Remove Encroachment) of this chapter, and the owner or occupant of the land, or the person causing, owning or controlling the alleged encroachment refuses either to remove it or permit its removal, the city may commence, in any court of competent jurisdiction, an action for abatement. Costs of the abatement shall be recovered by the city pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 1, 7-26-11)  
17.18.070 - Notice of seizure and hearing. 
A.  Whenever the city engineer, or his/her designee summarily abates an encroachment, as specified in Section 17.18.020 (Authority to Remove Encroachments) of this chapter, and the ownership of that encroachment is known or can be readily determined from identification on the encroachment, then the city engineer shall provide the owner of the encroachment with post-abatement notice and an opportunity for a hearing to determine the validity of the seizure. The owner of the encroachment and/or real property associated with the encroachment, or any person in possession or claiming any legal or equitable interest in any property which is the subject of a summary abatement pursuant to this chapter, may challenge the city engineer's determination to abate and/or the imposition of fees at a post-abatement hearing. A challenge shall be timely only if filed in writing to the city engineer within ten calendar days from and after the abatement, setting forth the grounds for the challenge. 
B.  Notice of such abatement shall be mailed or personally delivered to the registered and legal owners of the property and/or the encroachment within forty-eight hours of the abatement, excluding weekends and holidays, and shall include the following information: 
1.  The name, address and telephone number of the city engineer; 
2.  The location of the place from which the encroachment was seized and a description of the encroachment; 
3.  The authority and purpose for the removal of the encroachment; and 
4.  Specify that, in order to receive a post-seizure hearing, such owner or other interested person, or his/her agent, must request the hearing in writing, or by telephone to the city engineer within ten calendar days of the date appearing on the notice. 
C.  Failure of either the owner or other interested party, or his/her agent, to request or to attend a hearing as scheduled shall satisfy the post-storage validity hearing requirement of this section. 
D.  The city shall be responsible for the cost incurred for abating the encroachment if it is determined at the hearing that probable cause for the abatement cannot be established. Any part of the encroachment that the city engineer determined in good faith is of more than nominal value, or of significant personal value, shall be returned to the owner in the event the abatement is found not to have been supported by probable cause. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 1, 7-26-11)  
17.18.080 - Abatement and costs—Post-abatement hearing. 
A.  Upon receipt of a timely written challenge, the city engineer shall set a date for a post-abatement hearing, but in any event no later than twenty calendar days from the date the city engineer receives the request, unless waived by the party requesting the hearing. A filing and processing fee, if required by resolution of the city council, shall be paid contemporaneously by the requesting party with the filing of the request. The city engineer may authorize a city officer or employee, independent contractor, or other designated individual to conduct the hearing, so long as the hearing officer is not the same person who directed the storage of the encroachment. The city engineer shall issue a determination on the challenge within ten calendar days of the hearing, and shall notify the party requesting the hearing in writing. 
B.  The decision of the city engineer following the hearing may be appealed to the city manager. Within five calendar days after the giving of the notice, any person aggrieved by the city engineer's determination may appeal it to the city manager in the time and in the manner prescribed in this section. Any such appeal shall be in writing, and shall be filed with the city clerk-treasurer within the time permitted by this section. At the time of the filing, the appealing party shall deposit with the city clerk-treasurer a filing and processing fee if required by resolution of the city council. Thereafter, the city clerk-treasurer shall transmit to the city manager the city engineer's determination, a summary of the evidence presented to the city engineer at the post-abatement hearing, and copies of any written material submitted at the hearing held by the hearing officer. The city manager shall set a time and place for hearing upon the appeal, and at the time and place shall consider the documents transmitted from the city clerk-treasurer, as well as any documents or argument presented at the hearing by any interested party. The city manager shall, thereafter, uphold, or modify the determination of the city engineer; and issue a determination on the appeal, in writing to the appellant, within five calendar days of the hearing on the appeal and shall include citation to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6. The determination of the city manager shall be final and conclusive. Any action to review the decision of the city manager shall be commenced no later than the time period set forth in the California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 1, 7-26-11)  
17.18.090 - Violation—Penalty. 
No person shall place or authorize the placement of an encroachment in the street or on public property. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the penalties specified in Chapter 17.20 (Enforcement, Violations and Penalties). 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 1, 7-26-11)  
Chapter 17.20 - ENFORCEMENT, VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES 
Sections: 
 
17.20.010 - Enforcement authority. 
It shall be the duty of the city and all officers of the city to enforce this Subdivision Code. Any condition imposed as part of an approved subdivision case shall also be enforceable by the appropriate city officials. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 1, 7-26-11)  
17.20.020 - Compliance. 
No person shall sell, lease or finance any parcel or parcels of real property or commence construction of any building for sale, lease or financing thereon, except for model homes, or allow occupancy thereof, for which a final map or parcel map is required by this title or the Subdivision Map Act, until said final map or parcel map in full compliance with this title and the Subdivision Map Act has been filed for record with the Los Angeles County Recorder. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 1, 7-26-11)  
17.20.030 - Permit or approval. 
A.  No permit shall be issued or approval granted necessary to develop any real property which has been divided, or which has resulted from a division in violation of the Subdivision Map Act or this title if it is determined that development of such real property is contrary to public health or the public safety. The authority to deny such a permit or such approval shall apply whether the applicant was the owner of the real property at the time of such violation or whether the applicant is the current owner of the real property with, or without, actual or constructive knowledge of the violation at the time of the acquisition of said applicant's interest in such real property. 
B.  If a permit or approval is granted, such additional conditions as would have been applicable to the division of the property at the time the current owner of record acquired the property may be imposed. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 1, 7-26-11)  
17.20.040 - Notice of violation. 
A.  Notice of Intention. Upon determination that real property has been divided in violation of the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act or this title and an application is not pending for a certificate of compliance pursuant to Section 17.10.020 Certificates of Compliance, the director shall cause to be mailed by certified mail to the then current owner of record of the property a notice of intention to record a notice of violation, describing the real property in detail, naming the owners, and stating that an opportunity will be given to the owner to present evidence. The notice shall specify a time, date and place for a meeting of the planning commission at which the owner may present evidence to the planning commission why the notice should not be recorded. The notice shall also contain a description of the violations and the explanation as to why the subject parcel is not lawful. The date set for the meeting before the planning commission shall be no sooner than thirty days and no later than sixty days from the date of mailing of the notice of intention. 
B.  Planning Commission Meeting; Notice of Violation. If at the scheduled hearing, the owner of the real property fails to object to recording the notice of violation, the planning commission shall direct the recording of the notice of violation with the county recorder. If, after the owner has presented evidence, it is determined that there has been no violation, the director shall mail a clearance letter to the then current owner of record. If, however, after the owner has presented evidence, the planning commission determines that the property has in fact been illegally divided, the planning commission shall direct the recording of the notice of violation with the Los Angeles County Recorder. The notice of violation, when recorded, shall be deemed to be constructive notice of the violation to all successors in interest in such property. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 1, 7-26-11)  
17.20.050 - Penalties. 
Each violation of this title and the Subdivision Map Act by a person who is the subdivider or an owner of record, at the time of the violation, of property involved in the violation shall be punishable by imprisonment in the county jail not exceeding one year or in the state prison, by a fine not exceeding ten thousand dollars, or by both that fine and imprisonment. Every other violation of this title and the Subdivision Map Act is a misdemeanor (California Government Code § 66499.31). 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 1, 7-26-11)  
Title 18 - ZONING  
Division I. - Zoning  
Chapter 18.02 - GENERAL PLAN 
 
18.02.010 - Charter—Authority. 
Under authority of Article II, Section 200, and Article IV of the City Charter, the Council establishes the procedures necessary for the planning commission in exercising its powers and duties prescribed by the City Charter. 
(Prior code § 9700)  
18.02.020 - Definitions. 
A.  "General plan" means the long-term general plan for the development of the city and of land adjacent to the boundaries of the city, such plan to be used by the planning commission and the council in guiding the development of the city and its environs. Any portion of the general plan may be subsequently prepared in detail and adopted as a precise plan. Such general plan shall be adopted by resolution of the planning commission and of the city council. The term "general plan" shall have the same meaning as "master plan." 
B.  "Precise plan" means all or any portion of a general plan dealing with any one or more subjects contained in the general plan, but prepared in such detail as will qualify it for enactment by ordinance as a regulatory control. Precise plans may include: 
1.  Proposed regulations limiting the use of land and buildings, the height and bulk of buildings, and the open spaces about buildings; 
2.  Proposed regulations limiting the location of buildings and other improvements with respect to existing or planned rights-of-way; 
3.  Such other matters as will accomplish the purposes of the provisions of this code relating to zoning, including measures designed to insure the execution of the general plan of the city, and including procedure for the administration of such regulations. 
(Prior code §§ 9701 and 9702)  
18.02.030 - Adoption by planning commission. 
The planning commission shall prepare and adopt a long-term, comprehensive general plan for the physical development of the city, and of any land outside its boundaries which in the commission's judgment bears relation to its planning. The plan may be referred to as the general plan and shall be officially certified as the general plan upon its adoption by the planning commission and the council. 
(Prior code § 9703)  
18.02.040 - Purpose. 
The general plan shall be so prepared that all or portions of it may be adopted by the council as a basis for the development of the city. 
(Prior code § 9704)  
18.02.050 - Content. 
The general plan shall consist of a statement covering objectives, principles and standards used to develop it, and shall include all of the following elements: 
A.  A land use element which designates the proposed general distribution and general location and extent of the uses of the land for housing, business, industry, recreation, education, public buildings and grounds, and other categories of public and private uses of land; 
B.  A statement of the standards of population density and building intensity recommended by the various districts and other territorial units, and estimates of future population growth in the territory covered by the plan, all correlated with the land use element of the plan; 
C.  A circulation element consisting of the general location and extent of existing and proposed major thoroughfares, transportation routes, terminals, and other major public utilities and facilities, all correlated with the land use element of the plan. It may also include studies and recommendations concerning parking facilities and building setback lines, and the delineations of such systems on the land, a system of street naming, house and building numbering and such other matters as may be related to the improvement or circulation of traffic; 
D.  Supporting maps, diagrams, charts, description materials and reports. 
(Prior code § 9705)  
18.02.060 - Adoption procedures and amendment conditions. 
A general plan as defined may be adopted as follows: 
A.  The planning commission shall hold at least one public meeting thereon or any element thereof and shall report its recommendations to the city council by resolution. The entire file of the planning commission pertaining to such recommendations shall be forwarded to the city council for its consideration. Prior to the adoption of a general plan, or any element thereof, the city council shall hold at least one public hearing, at which time interested persons may be heard concerning any matter contained in the general plan or any element being considered. Each such public hearing shall be noticed by publication in the same manner as provided in Section 18.08.040 of this code. The adoption of the general plan or any element thereof shall be by resolution of the city council after the meeting. 
B.  Whenever it deems it in the public interest and welfare of the citizens of the city, the city council may initiate a new general plan or new element thereof. In such event the city council shall first refer the proposed new plan, or the proposed new element, to the planning commission for a report. Before making such a report, the planning commission shall hold at least one hearing on the proposed new general plan, notice of which shall be published and given in the manner as provided in Section 18.08.040 of this code. After the receipt of a report and recommendation from the planning commission, the council shall hold at least one public hearing on the proposed new general plan or any new element thereof after notice is given as required above. 
C.  The city council may at any time, by resolution or motion duly entered on its minutes, amend, alter, change, add to or take from all or any part, or any element, of an adopted general plan; provided, however, the city council shall not make any change or alteration in the general plan which affects the land use element, or any part thereof, designating the extent of the uses of the land for housing, business, industry, recreation, education and other categories of land used for private purposes, nor amend, alter, change, add to or take from the density and building intensity set forth in the general plan for the various districts or other units as correlated with the land-use element above described, except and on condition that if any change or alteration is deemed advisable by the city council, then the planning commission shall hold at least one public hearing thereon and shall report its recommendation to the city council by resolution. Prior to acting on the proposed change or alteration, as recommended by the planning commission, the city council shall likewise hold at least one public hearing on the proposed change or alteration. The public hearing shall be duly noticed by publication in the same manner as provided in Section 18.08.040. Any change or alteration shall be by resolution adopted by the city council. The city council shall have the right, power and authority, after holding the hearings required in this chapter, to change, alter and modify the general plan or any element thereof affecting land use or land density in such manner as it deems advisable, providing the foregoing procedure is followed. 
D.  The city council may change, alter, amend or modify any other part or portion of the general plan without a hearing by the planning commission or by the city council, and as it deems advisable. 
(Prior code § 9706)  
18.02.070 - Voting requirements. 
In every matter coming before the planning commission, the required vote shall be a majority of a quorum without regard to abstentions, but not less than two concurring votes. A quorum shall consist of three members entitled to vote, but shall not be broken by the withdrawal of any member from a meeting after a quorum has been established. A tie vote shall be deemed a denial of any application or other proposed action, if there is not a regular meeting date scheduled prior to any time within which the planning commission is required or directed to act. In all other cases, two tie votes at different meetings shall be deemed a denial. 
(Prior code § 9710)  
18.02.080 - Certain state requirements declared nonapplicable. 
The city council and the city shall not be governed by or required to conform to or with the provisions of Sections 65300 to and including 65506 of the Government Code of the state. 
(Prior code § 9707)  
18.02.090 - Conformance. 
A.  No county shall acquire real property for any purpose, nor dispose of any real property or construct or authorize a public building or structure within the corporate limits of the city, and the state shall not acquire real property nor dispose of any real property nor construct or authorize a public building or structure, unless the same is in conformity with the general plan or an element or part thereof, or unless the planning commission and the city council of the city approves such acquiring and use and amends the general plan accordingly. 
B.  A local agency shall not acquire real property or dispose of real property or construct or authorize a public building or structure in the city, unless the same conforms to the general plan, or unless the planning commission and the city council approve after a public hearing of any such acquisition and use which may be contrary to the general plan. 
C.  "Local agency" as used in this title means any agency of the state created for the performance of governmental or proprietary functions within a limited boundary. 
(Prior code § 9708)  
18.02.100 - Precise plan—Adoption and amendment. 
The procedure for adoption and amendment of any precise plan and regulation shall be as set forth in this title. 
(Prior code § 9709)  
18.02.110 - Precise plan—Administration. 
The authority for procedures, administrations, application and enforcement of precise plans and regulations shall be governed by the provisions of this chapter and by the provisions of this title. 
(Prior code § 9711)  
18.02.120 - Hearings. 
Hearings held by the planning commission pursuant to Sections 18.02.060 through 18.02.120 shall be subject to the provisions of Section 18.08.040 of this code. 
(Prior code § 9712)  
18.02.130 - Street dedication and improvement regulations adopted. 
The provisions of Chapter 12.16 of this code are incorporated by reference into this chapter and shall be deemed, for all purposes, to be zoning regulations, and shall be enforced as such. 
(Prior code § 9405)  
Chapter 18.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
18.04.010 - Title. 
The provisions of this title shall be referred to as the "Whittier Zoning Regulations." 
(Prior code § 9100)  
18.04.020 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the enactment of regulations contained in this title in classifying, designating, regulating and restricting the use of buildings, land and structures, is to permit the most compatible use of land within the city, consistent with the needs of residential, commercial, and industrial developments within the city, and the promotion of the public health, safety, welfare, and general prosperity of the city and its residents. 
(Prior code § 9101)  
18.04.030 - Applicability. 
The regulations contained in this title shall not apply to city-owned or leased property, when actually in use by the city. 
(Prior code § 9109.1)  
18.04.040 - References to other laws. 
Whenever reference is made in this title to other provisions or other laws, the references shall apply to all amendments now or hereafter adopted, with reference thereto, unless clearly otherwise stated. 
(Prior code § 9104)  
18.04.050 - Restrictions on existing permits. 
All zone variances, zone exceptions, conditional or special use permits, unclassified use permits and/or precise plans (hereafter "zoning device") heretofore issued by the city or the county of Los Angeles shall remain in full force and effect, provided that each such zoning device shall be subject to the provisions of Sections 18.52.160, 18.52.170 and 18.52.180. Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, no use authorized by such previously granted zoning device, which is being lawfully exercised in compliance with all conditions of approval imposed upon the authorizing zoning device, shall be deemed to be nonconforming, for any purpose, except as specifically set forth in this title. 
(Prior code § 9106)  
18.04.060 - Minimum requirements. 
In applying the provisions of these regulations to uses within the city, the same shall be deemed and construed to be the minimum standards required for the promotion of the public health, safety, interest and welfare, unless the context of a specific regulation clearly otherwise provides. 
(Prior code § 9103)  
18.04.070 - Pending proceedings—Compliance. 
If, as of the effective date of these regulations, legislative or administrative action is pending pursuant to the former zoning regulations of the city, such action shall be deemed to have been taken pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and shall be finally processed, insofar as possible, in accordance with the provisions of this title. 
(Prior code § 9107)  
18.04.080 - Continuation of provisions. 
Insofar as the regulations contained in this title are substantially similar to the former zoning regulations in effect as of the date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this title, such similar provisions shall be construed as restatements and continuations of such regulations, and not as new enactments. 
(Prior code § 9102)  
18.04.090 - Enforcement. 
The city manager shall designate the officer or officers who shall enforce the provisions of this title. 
(Prior code § 9108)  
18.04.092 - Owner's responsibility for property maintenance. 
A.  Every owner of real property within the city, whether commercial, industrial or residential, is required to maintain such property in a manner so as not to violate the provisions of the Whittier Municipal Code, the Whittier Zoning Code, or any specific plan, including but not limited to the Whittier Boulevard Specific Plan, the Uptown Whittier Specific Plan and the Whittwood Town Center Specific Plan, and such owner remains liable for violations thereof regardless of any contract or agreement with any third party regarding such property. 
B.  An occupant of property who is not the legal owner shall not be liable for any nuisance (as defined by Section 8.08.030) which the occupant did not create, and which the occupant did not knowingly maintain or permit to continue. 
(Ord. No. 2979, § 1, 9-13-11)  
18.04.100 - Effective date. 
The effective date of each of the regulations contained in this title is the operative date of the ordinance which adopted the regulation, unless a later date is specified in a particular regulation. 
(Prior code § 9109)  
18.04.110 - Period of validity—Extensions—Permits and other approvals. 
A.  Any zone variance, conditional use permit, development review approval, zoning administrator approval, and historic resource commission approval shall be null and void if the use or approval granted thereby is not commenced within the time specified in the resolution granting such use or approval or, if no time is so specified, if commencement does not occur within two years from the effective date of the approval except as provided for in this section. A one-year time extension of the period of validity may be granted by the approval authority subject to the specific findings outlined in Section 18.04.130, which must be made prior to any time extension(s) granted by any approval authority. Any other time extensions shall be approved by the city council, the commission or other approval authority as required elsewhere in this code applicable to the specific use or approval. In no case, however, shall any initial approval and/or combination of extensions exceed a cumulative total of three years, except as provided for in this section. The director, commission, city council or other approval authority may impose additional conditions, modify existing conditions, or delete existing conditions for the original approval in connection with any extension as may be necessary. These provisions shall apply to all valid land-use entitlements and development review applications in effect upon and subsequent to the adoption of this ordinance. 
An automatic twelve-month extension will be granted to existing land use and development entitlements. The intent of "existing" refers to entitlements approved prior to July 1, 2009. This provision shall also apply to entitlements due to expire between July 1, 2011, and the date Ordinance No. 2977 becomes effective. The granting of the automatic extension is a temporary measure and shall sunset on June 30, 2012. 
Developers with approved land use and development entitlements will not be required to apply for the twelve-month extension and the project approval authority will not be required to make findings to grant the extension. In addition, any project granted the herein twelve-month automatic extension, shall be entitled to an increased cumulative total, not to exceed five and one-half years. No additional extensions of time will be granted. 
B.  Entitlement permits approved in conjunction with subdivision maps shall expire on the same expiration date as the tentative map so long as the entitlement is necessary for the approval of the subdivision. Approval of a time extension for such maps shall constitute the approval of a time extension of the entitlement(s) which were (if any) filed in conjunction with it. The approval authority may impose additional conditions, modify existing conditions, or delete existing conditions for the original approval of the entitlement approved in connection with any time extension for a tentative map as may be necessary. Should a final subdivision map be recorded prior to the implementation of the entitlement permit, the provisions under Section 18.04.110(A) shall apply. 
(Ord. 2909 § 1, 2008) 
(Ord. No. 2930, § 2, 7-28-09; Ord. No. 2955, § 3, 6-27-10; Ord. No. 2977, § 3, 7-26-11)  
18.04.120 - Modification of conditions—Permits and other approvals. 
A.  Any condition imposed upon the granting of a zone variance, conditional use permit, certificate of appropriateness approval, development review approval, or zoning administrator approval, including any zoning entitlement granted prior to the adoption of these regulations, may be modified or eliminated, or new conditions added, provided that the approval authority, which shall be the planning commission absent specific requirements in this code otherwise, shall first conduct a noticed public hearing thereon, unless the city council granted or modified such use approval upon the specific condition that it be subject only to city council modification, in which case the lower approval authority or authorities may, but need not, make a recommendation concerning the revocation and the city council shall conduct the required public hearing. No such modification shall be granted or imposed unless the approval authority, or such approval authority may consider modifications on appeal as such appeal procedures may be elsewhere provided in this code, finds that such modification is necessary to protect the public peace, health and safety, or that such action is necessary to permit reasonable operation under the use or approval as granted. Any modification hearing conducted by an approval authority other than the city council pursuant to this section shall be subject to review on appeal as may be specifically provided in this code. 
B.  Notwithstanding the provisions contained within Section 18.04.120(A), the director of community development may approve minor modifications to approved plans from higher approval authorities without the benefit of a new public hearing. However, any such modification to an approved project may not alter the general nature, intent, or findings of the project, nor circumvent any adopted conditions of approval sanctioned by the higher approval authority to mitigate project impact(s). 
(Ord. 2909 § 2, 2008) 
(Ord. No. 2927, § 1, 8-25-09)  
18.04.130 - Findings required for approval of time extension(s). 
Any approval authority granting extension(s) as permitted in this chapter must make the following findings prior to granting a requested extension to an applicant or owner for any project, use or approval: 
A.  The project, use or approval for which the time extension(s) is proposed is substantially the same as originally approved by the approval authority and does not require the need for any new entitlement that was not previously approved for the project, use or approval; 
B.  The time extension will not adversely impact surrounding land uses, traffic or create any new, adverse, environmental impacts that were not previously considered or mitigated against when the project was originally approved by the approval authority; and 
C.  The time extension can be accommodated based on the existing conditions of approval for the project and/or with new or modified conditions of approval. 
(Ord. 2909 § 3, 2008)  
Chapter 18.06 - DEFINITIONS 
 
18.06.001 - Abandon. 
"Abandon" and "abandoned" with respect to any individual structure, site, leased area or use means the discontinuance of its use or occupancy, as evidenced by, but not limited to, any of the following: (1) its vacancy or cessation of use for more than one hundred eighty days; (2) disconnection of necessary public utilities to the structure, site, leased area or use for more than one hundred eighty days; or (3) removal of improvements, equipment, parts, or components necessary for the use of buildings or structures on the site or property or for the operation of a business or other activity or specific use of property. As to any proposed development, structure, alteration, addition, expansion or new use, allowing permits or approved development review applications specific to the nonconformity to expire, shall be deemed an abandonment. 
(Ord. 2806 § 1, 2002)  
18.06.003 - Abut, adjoining or contiguous. 
"Abut, adjoining or contiguous" means, in reference to real property, two or more lots sharing a common lot line. With reference to two or more objects, the same means in immediate contact with each other. 
(Prior code § 9111(A)(1))  
18.06.006 - Access. 
"Access" means the place or way by which pedestrians and/or vehicles shall have safe, adequate and usable ingress and egress to a lot from a public or private street or alley. 
(Prior code § 9111(A)(2))  
18.06.007 - Accessory dwelling unit. 
"Accessory dwelling unit" means any attached or detached residential unit which provides complete independent living facilities on the same parcel as a legal single family residence including, but not limited to, the permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation and those units previously referred to in this code as "secondary dwelling units," "secondary units," or "second units." An accessory dwelling unit also includes efficiency units as defined in Section 17958.1 of the Health and Safety Code and manufactured homes as defined in Section 18007 of the Health and Safety Code. 
(Ord. No. 3068 , § 2, 6-13-17)  
18.06.008 - Accessory living area. 
"Accessory living area" means habitable space within an accessory building limited to not more than three rooms, including a bathroom, with facilities for living, sleeping, or recreation, but excluding facilities for preparation of food, for use by guests of the occupants of the dwelling located upon such lot or domestic help employed by the occupants of the dwelling, and may not be rented, leased, or otherwise used as a permanent residence or separate dwelling unit. Accessory living areas include, but are not limited to, cabanas, recreation rooms, rumpus rooms, enclosed covered patios, guesthouses, and hobby rooms. Guest rooms with an outside entrance but which have access from within a dwelling unit through a common wall is considered attached and not defined as accessory living area. A separate shower and/or bathroom of less than fifty square feet of floor area used in conjunction with a swimming pool is not considered accessory living area. 
(Ord. 2619 § 1 (part), 1994: Ord. 2539 § 1, 1991)  
18.06.009 - Accessory use. 
"Accessory use" means a use which is directly related, but clearly subordinate, to a permitted principal use. All accessory uses shall be established and maintained on the same lot as the principal use which they serve, except as otherwise expressly provided in this title. 
(Prior code § 9111(A)(3))  
18.06.010 - Accessory building. 
"Accessory building" means any building or structure which is detached from, but related to, the building containing the permitted principal use of the property on which said accessory building is located. 
(Ord. 2619 § 1 (part), 1994)  
18.06.012 - Adjacent. 
"Adjacent" means two or more objects which are located in close proximity to each other. 
(Prior code § 9111(A)(4))  
18.06.015 - Adult day care center. 
"Adult day care center" means any facility where service is rendered, by trained and experienced personnel, to adults who require care during a portion of the day, as provided by Section 80001 of Title 22 of the Administrative Code of the state. 
(Ord. 2869 § 53, 2006: prior code § 9111(A)(13))  
18.06.018 - Alcoholism hospital. 
"Alcoholism hospital" means an institution intended solely for the admission, diagnostic and intensive short-term treatment of patients addicted to excessive use of alcohol, and related conditions. 
(Prior code § 9111(A)(5))  
18.06.021 - Alley. 
"Alley" means a public or private way designated as an alley by the city, other than a street, permanently reserved as a means of secondary vehicular access to adjoining properties. 
(Prior code § 9111(A)(6))  
18.06.022 - Antique mall. 
"Antique mall" means a building or buildings wherein the interior thereof has been partitioned into individual spaces or stalls leased or rented to individuals for the sale and display of antiques, replicas, collectibles and new or second hand goods, and wherein the management provides sales staff and security. 
(Ord. 2553 § 5 (part), 1991)  
18.06.024 - Apartment. 
"Apartment" means the same as "dwelling unit." 
(Prior code § 9111(A)(7))  
18.06.027 - Apartment house. 
"Apartment house" means a building containing three or more dwelling units. 
(Prior code § 9111(A)(8))  
18.06.030 - Arcade games. 
"Arcade games" means any establishment where five or more amusement machines, defined as such in this code, or any combination of five or more such machines and/or billiard or pool tables, are located. 
(Prior code § 9111(A)(12))  
18.06.033 - Assessed value. 
"Assessed value" means the then-assessed value of the land, building or structure, as is shown on the current assessment roll, in effect as of the time of the making of the determination of such assessed value. 
(Prior code § 9111(A)(10))  
18.06.036 - Assessor. 
"Assessor" means the tax assessor of the county of Los Angeles. 
(Prior code § 9111(A)(10))  
18.06.039 - Automobile repair and service garage. 
"Automobile repair and service garage" means a facility which provides for the repair and maintenance of motor vehicles, including but not limited to the repair and/or installation of tail pipes, mufflers, brakes, radiators and electrical systems; provided, that such facilities shall not include the painting of motor vehicles, nor body and fender repair. 
(Prior code § 9111(A)(11))  
18.06.042 - Basement. 
"Basement" means that portion of a building which is totally or partly below the level of the finished grade of the lot upon which it is located. 
(Prior code § 9111(B)(1))  
18.06.044 - Bedroom/Sleeping area. 
A habitable space that is a minimum of seventy square feet and includes an egress window or door to the exterior for the purpose of developing a room in which people sleep. 
(Ord. No. 2940, § 1, 12-8-09)  
18.06.045 - Billiard or pool hall. 
"Billiard or pool hall" means any establishment where five or more tables for the playing of billiards, pool, snooker, or similar games, or any combination of five or more such tables and amusement machines as defined in this code are located. 
(Prior code § 9111(B)(7))  
18.06.048 - Boardinghouse and rooming house. 
"Boardinghouse" and "rooming house" mean a dwelling unit or portion thereof, other than a hotel, which is used to accommodate with or without individual or group cooking facilities, for compensation, three or more individuals under separate rental, lease, or sublease agreements, either written or oral, whether or not the owner resides therein. The word "compensation" includes compensation in money, services or other things of value. This term shall not include a residential care facility, as defined in this chapter, serving six or fewer residents; shall not include a "family," as defined in this chapter, regardless of any number of rental agreements between members of a "family"; and shall not include dormitories owned and operated by colleges or private schools for student housing or shelters and transitional housing intended to and actually serving the homeless or other stranded or dislocated person(s). 
(Ord. 2897 § 3, 2008)  
18.06.051 - Building. 
"Building" means any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls, or combination thereof, and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of persons or property of any kind. 
(Ord. 2806 § 2, 2002)  
18.06.054 - Building, accessory. 
"Accessory building" means a separate detached building, housing a permitted accessory use, located on the same lot as the main building or principal use, and clearly subordinate to said building or use. 
(Ord. 2787 § 11, 2001: prior code § 9111(B)(4))  
18.06.057 - Building height. 
See "height." 
(Prior code § 9111(B)(5))  
18.06.060 - Building, main. 
"Main building" means a building in which is conducted one or more principal uses permitted upon the lot which it is situated. 
(Prior code § 9111(A)(6))  
18.06.061 - Body piercing parlor. 
"Body piercing parlor" means any establishment where the principal activity involves the puncturing or piercing of the skin for the purpose of wearing jewelry or other ornamental body paraphernalia. The term "principal activity" does not include establishments wherein the puncturing or piercing of the skin is incidental to the principal business activity, such as jewelry sales. Said puncturing or piercing of the skin shall comprise less than thirty percent of the gross receipts of the establishments. 
(Ord. 2691 § 3 (part), 1996)  
18.06.063 - Carport. 
"Carport" means a permanently roofed structure with not more than two enclosed sides, used or intended to be used for automobile shelter and storage. 
(Prior code § 9111(c)(1))  
18.06.066 - Cellar. 
"Cellar" means the same as "basement." 
(Prior code § 9111(c)(2))  
18.06.069 - Centerline. 
"Centerline" means the centerline, as determined by the city engineer, on any street, highway or alley. 
(Prior code § 9111(C)(3))  
18.06.072 - Child day care facility. 
"Child day care facility" means a facility which provides nonmedical care to children under eighteen years of age in need of personal services, supervision, or assistance essential for sustaining the activities of daily living or for the protection of the individual on less than a twenty-four-hour basis. Child day care facility includes day care centers and family day care homes. 
(Ord. 2573 § 2(b) (part), 1992: prior code § 9111(C)(4))  
18.06.075 - Children's day care center (emotionally disturbed). 
"Children's day care center (emotionally disturbed)" means an institution of one-bed capacity or more intended solely for the admission and treatment of minors with mental illness or behavioral or emotional disorders. 
(Prior code § 9111(C)(5))  
18.06.078 - City. 
"City" means the city of Whittier. 
(Prior code § 9111(C)(6))  
18.06.081 - City manager. 
"City manager" means the city manager of the city. 
(Prior code § 9111(C)(8))  
18.06.084 - Clerk. 
"Clerk" means the city clerk-treasurer of the city. 
(Prior code § 9111(C)(7))  
18.06.087 - Club, private. 
"Private club" means any building or premises used by an association of persons, whether incorporated or unincorporated, organized for some common purpose, but not including a group organized primarily to render a service customarily carried on as a commercial enterprise. 
(Prior code § 9111(C)(9))  
18.06.090 - Code. 
"Code" means the Whittier Municipal Code. 
(Prior code § 9111(C)(10))  
18.06.091 - Collection facility. 
A collection facility is a center for the acceptance, by donation, redemption or purchase, of recyclable materials from the public. Such a facility does not use power-driven processing equipment except a trash compactor. A collection facility may include any or all of the following: 
A.  Reverse vending machine(s); 
B.  A small collection facility which occupies an area of not more than five hundred square feet, and may include: 
1.  A mobile unit, and/or 
2.  Bulk reverse vending machines or a grouping of reverse vending machines occupying more than fifty square feet, and/or 
3.  Kiosk type units, which may include permanent structures, and/or 
4.  Unattended container placed for the donation of recyclable materials; 
C.  A large collection facility which may occupy an area of more than five hundred square feet and may include permanent structures. 
(Ord. 2423 § 1, 1987) 
(Ord. No. 3103 , § 4, 6-11-19)  
18.06.093 - Commercial recreation facility. 
"Commercial recreation facility" means a privately owned and operated establishment open to the public, with or without charge, where the public may participate in games of chance or skill, or a sport or other recreation activity. "Commercial recreation facilities" includes but is not limited to parks, playgrounds, pool or billiard halls, game arcades, skating rinks, bowling alleys, swimming pools and miniature golf courses. 
(Prior code § 9111(C)(17))  
18.06.096 - Commission. 
"Commission" means the planning commission of the city. 
(Prior code § 9111(C)(11))  
18.06.099 - Communications equipment buildings. 
"Communications equipment buildings" means buildings housing operating electrical and mechanical equipment utilized in conducting a public utility communications operation. 
(Prior code § 9111(c)(12))  
18.06.102 - Condominium. 
"Condominium" means the same as "dwelling, multiple." 
(Prior code § 9111(C)(13))  
18.06.105 - Convalescent home. 
"Convalescent home" means the same as "nursing and convalescent hospital." 
(Prior code § 9111(C)(14))  
18.06.108 - Convenience market. 
"Convenience market" means a market with a limited line of grocery, notion and beverage items in a building not exceeding six thousand square feet in gross floor area. 
(Prior code § 9111(C)(18))  
18.06.111 - Council. 
"Council" means the city council of the city. 
(Prior code § 9111(C)(15))  
18.06.114 - Court. 
"Court" means an area which is open and unoccupied by any building or structure, bounded on three or more sides by the exterior walls of a building. An inner court is a court entirely enclosed within the exterior walls of a building. All other courts are outer courts. 
(Prior code § 9111(C)(16))  
18.06.117 - Dairy. 
"Dairy" means any premises where one or more cows or goats, or any combination thereof, are kept or maintained for the purpose of producing milk. 
(Prior code § 9111(D)(1))  
18.06.119 - Day care center. 
"Day care center" means any child day care facility other than a family day care home and includes, but is not limited to, infant centers and preschools. 
(Ord. 2573 § 2(b) (part), 1992)  
18.06.120 - Day center (mentally retarded). 
"Day center (mentally retarded)" means a facility intended solely for the admission of mentally retarded patients who are not permitted to remain overnight, and who are provided with a daytime program of education or training, handicraft, vocational and recreational activities. 
(Prior code § 9111(D)(2))  
18.06.123 - Day treatment hospital. 
"Day treatment hospital" means a place intended solely for the admission and treatment of patients with mental illness or mental disorders, who are provided with a daytime program of organized treatment, activities and supervision under medical direction, but are not permitted to remain overnight. 
(Prior code § 9111(D)(3))  
18.06.125 - Destroyed. 
"Destroyed" means demolished or damaged structures or other improvements to property, by any cause, to an extent of greater than fifty percent of the total cost estimate to reconstruct, repair, or rehabilitate the damaged structure or other improvements on the property, as determined in accordance with Section 18.62.160 of this Title. 
(Ord. 2806 § 3, 2002)  
18.06.129 - Director. 
"Director" means the director of community development for the city. 
(Ord. 2897 § 4, 2008)  
18.06.132 - Director of building and safety. 
"Director of building and safety" means the director of building and safety of the city. 
(Prior code § 9111(S)(13))  
18.06.135 - Drive-in restaurant. 
"Drive-in restaurant" means a restaurant use with facilities which would allow the service of prepared foods directly to a patron while that patron is in a motor vehicle, whether or not for consumption on the premises. 
(Ord. 2658 § 3, 1995: prior code § 9111(D)(6))  
18.06.136 - Driveway. 
"Driveway" means the vehicular access from the street or alley to a legal parking space, which serves the lot upon which the parking space is located. 
(Ord. 2610 § 1(A)(1), 1993)  
18.06.138 - Dump, inert-solid. 
"Inert-solid dump" means an area devoted to the disposal of non-water soluble, non-decomposable inert solids such as natural earth, rock, sand and gravel, paving fragments, concrete brick, plaster and plaster products, steel mill slag, glass, asbestos fiber and products therefrom. 
(Prior code § 9111(D)(12))  
18.06.141 - Dump, rubbish and refuse. 
"Rubbish and refuse dump" means an area devoted to the disposal of inert solid and/or decomposable organic refuse and scrap metal. 
(Prior code § 9111(D)(13))  
18.06.144 - Duplex. 
"Duplex" means the same as "two-family dwelling." 
(Prior code § 9111(D)(7))  
18.06.147 - Dwelling, single-family. 
"Single-family dwelling" means a building containing one dwelling unit. 
(Prior code § 9111(D)(8))  
18.06.148 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3068 , § 2, adopted June 13, 2017, repealed § 18.06.148, which pertained to second dwelling and derived from prior code § 9111(D)(10); Ord. 2318, § 1(a), adopted in 1984; and Ord. 2824, § 2, adopted in 2003.  
18.06.150 - Dwelling, two-family. 
"Two-family dwelling" means a building containing two dwelling units. 
(Prior code § 9111(D)(9))  
18.06.153 - Dwelling unit. 
"Dwelling unit" means one or more habitable rooms in a building which are designed to be occupied by any one person or one family, with facilities for living, sleeping, cooking, eating and sanitation. 
(Prior code § 9111(D)(11))  
18.06.156 - Educational institution. 
"Educational institution" means any public, private or parochial, elementary, junior high, high school, university or other school giving general academic instruction in the several branches of learning. 
(Prior code § 9111(E)(1))  
18.06.159 - Engineer. 
"Engineer" means the city engineer of the city. 
(Prior code § 9111(E)(2))  
18.06.162 - Explosives. 
"Explosives" mean any explosive substance as defined in Section 12000 of the Health and Safety Code of the state. 
(Prior code § 9111(E)(3))  
18.06.165 - Facilities for the rehabilitation of drug abusers. 
"Facilities for the rehabilitation of drug users" means any building where two or more resident patients are kept under medical, psychological or psychiatric supervision for the purpose of curing them of drug addiction. 
(Prior code § 9111(F)(1))  
18.06.168 - Family. 
"Family" means two or more persons living together in a manner that is compatible with residential uses, as a relatively permanent bona fide housekeeping unit in a domestic relationship based upon birth, marriage, or other domestic bond of social, economic, and psychological commitments to each other as distinguished from a group occupying a boardinghouse, lodging house, club, dormitory, fraternity, sorority, hotel, motel, rest home. Residents of residential care facilities, as defined in this chapter, serving six or fewer persons shall constitute a "family" for purposes of the city's zoning code; other residential care facilities may or may not constitute a "family," depending upon whether such facilities satisfy the above definition on a case-by-case basis. 
(Ord. 2897 § 5, 2008)  
18.06.170 - Family day care home. 
"Family day care home" means a home which regularly provides care, protection and supervision of twelve or fewer children, in the provider's own home, for periods of less than twenty-four hours per day, while the parents or guardians are away, and includes the following: 
A.  "Large family day care home" which means a home which provides family day care for children consistent with Health and Safety Code Section 1597.465 or any successor statute. 
B.  "Small family day care home" which means a home which provides family day care for children consistent with Health and Safety Code Section 1597.44 or any successor statute. 
(Ord. 2864 §§ 1—2, 2005: Ord. 2573 § 2 (b) (part), 1992)  
18.06.171 - Family home (mentally ill). 
"Family home (mentally ill)" means a facility intended solely for the admission of not more than six mentally ill or emotionally disordered patients who are provided with a program of services and protective supervision in a home setting. 
(Prior code § 9111(F)(3))  
18.06.174 - Family home (mentally retarded). 
"Family home (mentally retarded)" means a facility intended solely for the admission of one or more mentally retarded patients who are provided with a program of services and protective supervision in a home setting. 
(Prior code § 9111(F)(4))  
18.06.177 - Fence. 
"Fence" means a structure made of wood, metal (i.e. iron, steel, or other similar alloy), or other pre-manufactured material, like vinyl, or other composite that mimics the look of a wood fence, with substantially wider columns set at regular intervals and comprised of concrete block, masonry, wood, metal or pre-manufactured material, like vinyl, or other composite that mimics the look of wood; fence can include a base comprised of block, masonry, wood, metal or pre-manufactured material, like vinyl, or other composite that mimics the look of wood; built to industry standards. 
(Ord. 2839 § 3, 2004)  
18.06.180 - Floor area, net. 
"Net floor area" means the total horizontal floor area of all the floors of a building included within the surrounding walls, exclusive of vents, shafts, courts, elevators, stairways and similar facilities. 
(Prior code § 9111(F)(6))  
18.06.182 - Fortunetelling. 
"Fortunetelling" means the telling of fortunes, forecasting of future events or furnishing of any information not otherwise obtainable by the ordinary process of knowledge, by means of any occult or psychic power, faculty or force, including, but not limited to, clairvoyance, clairaudience, cartomancy, psychology, psychometry, spirits, tea leaves or other such reading, mediumship, seership, prophecy, augury, astrology, palmistry, necromancy, mind-reading, telepathy, or other craft, art, science, cards, talisman, charm, potion, magnetism, magnetized article or substance, crystal gazing, oriental mysteries or magic of any kind or nature. 
(Ord. 2371 § 1, 1986)  
18.06.183 - Fraternity. 
"Fraternity" means the same as "private club." 
(Prior code § 9111(F)(7))  
18.06.186 - Frontage, street. 
"Street frontage" means the length of a lot line of a lot which abuts a street. 
(Prior code § 9111(F)(8))  
18.06.189 - Garage. 
"Garage" means any building with three enclosed sides, provided with a closeable access door or doors, which is used or intended to be used for automobile shelter or storage. 
(Prior code § 9111(G)(1))  
18.06.192 - Gender. 
When consistent with context, words in the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter genders. 
(Prior code § 9111(G)(2))  
18.06.195 - Gradient. 
"Gradient" means the rate of vertical change of a ground surface expressed as a percentage figure and determined by dividing the vertical distance by a horizontal distance. 
(Prior code § 9111(G)(3))  
18.06.199 - Habitable space. 
"Habitable space", as used in this title means space within a structure for living, sleeping, recreation, eating or cooking, bathing and sanitation, halls, closets, storage and utility space. Storage and utility space located within a garage is not considered habitable space. 
(Ord. 2619 § 1 (part), 1994)  
18.06.201 - Height. 
"Height" means the vertical distance measured from the grade of the lot immediately beneath the portion of the building or structure being measured, to the highest point of such building or structure, based on a topographic survey. 
(Ord. 2610 § 1 (A)(2), 1993: prior code § 9111(H)(1))  
18.06.204 - Highway. 
"Highway" means the same as "street." 
(Prior code § 9111(H)(2))  
18.06.207 - Hillside area. 
"Hillside area" means those properties included within the area described in Section 18.14.020. 
(Prior code § 9111(H)(3))  
18.06.210 - Hillside plan. 
"Hillside plan" means a plan described in Chapter 18.14. 
(Prior code § 9111(H)(4))  
18.06.212 - Historic resource. 
"Historic resource" means a building, structure or collection of buildings or structures, and their associated sites deemed of importance to the history, architecture, or culture of an area by an appropriate local, state or federal agency or organization. This shall include designated structures on official inventories such as the National Register of Historic Places, State Historical Landmarks, State Points of Historical Interest, the Whittier Local Official Register of Historic Resources and resources eligible for listing on such inventories by reason of their age, association with people or events important to the history of the area, or unique design or architecture. 
(Ord. 2489 § 2, 1990)  
18.06.213 - Home for the aged. 
"Home for the aged" means any building or portion thereof, other than a hospital or rest home, used and maintained to provide living accommodations, including board, room or care, for ambulatory aged persons, but not including kitchen facilities within individual rooms. 
(Ord. 2343 § 1 (part), 1985: prior code § 9111(H)(5))  
18.06.216 - Home based business. 
"Home based business" means an occupation, calling or profession carried on by a resident of a building located on an R-zoned lot, as an accessory use. The home based business shall not change the integrity and residential character of a neighborhood. 
(Ord. 2707 § 2(B), 1997: prior code § 9111(H)(6))  
18.06.219 - Hospital, general. 
"General hospital" means an institution staffed and equipped to provide the various types of intensified hospital care, including, but not limited to, short-term care in acute medical, surgical and obstetrical services, but shall not include the treatment, other than on a temporary emergency basis, of alcoholic or mental patients. 
(Prior code § 9111(H)(7))  
18.06.222 - Hospitality houses. 
"Hospitality houses" means any buildings used by a nonprofit organization to provide emergency housing and means on a temporary basis to stranded, evicted, transient, or otherwise dislocated and homeless persons until a satisfactory solution to their immediate problem is found. 
(Prior code § 9111(H)(7)(a))  
18.06.225 - Hotel. 
"Hotel" means any building or portion of any building with access provided through a common entrance, lobby or hallway, to one or more guestrooms, which have no cooking facilities and which are designed and intended to be used or are used, rented or hired out as temporary or overnight accommodations for guests. 
(Prior code § 9111(H)(8))  
18.06.228 - Household pets. 
"Household pets" means and is limited to the following pets, maintained principally within a dwelling unit: 
A.  Domesticated cats; 
B.  Domesticated dogs; 
C.  Fish, without a limit on number; 
D.  1.  Any bird which is: 
a.  Customarily kept in residence of man; 
b.  Kept, at all times, within a dwelling unit; 
2.  Specifically, "bird" shall not include, among others, for the purpose of these regulations, chickens, hens, roosters, geese or ducks. 
(Prior code § 9111(H)(9))  
18.06.229 - Housing, senior citizen. 
"Senior citizen housing" means a housing development which consists of individual dwelling units designed for and/or restricted to occupancy by one person or a group of two or more persons who will live regularly together in the same dwelling unit, whose head, spouse, or sole member is: 
A.  Sixty-two years of age or older; 
B.  Under a disability as defined in Section 223 of the Social Security Act; or 
C.  Handicapped within the meaning of the Housing Act of 1959. 
(Ord. 2343 § 1 (part), 1985: prior code § 9111(H)(10))  
18.06.230 - Internet cafe. 
"Internet cafe" means an establishment with five or more computers or gaming devices, wherein computers, having online capabilities, are available to customers to rent for a fee. 
(Ord. 2808 § 1 (part); 2002)  
18.06.231 - Kennel. 
"Kennel" means a place where four or more adult dogs and/or cats are kept, whether by the owner of such dogs and cats or by other persons, providing facilities and care, whether or not for compensation. An "adult" dog or cat, for the purpose of these regulations, is one that has reached the age of four months. 
(Prior code § 9111(K)(1))  
18.06.234 - Kitchen. 
"Kitchen" means any room or space within a building designed and intended to be used for the storage and preparation or cooking of food, and which includes or provides space for full-size refrigerators, stoves and sinks. An undercounter refrigerator of not more than three cubic feet and/or a wet bar do not constitute a kitchen. 
(Ord. 2539 § 2, 1991: prior code § 9111(K)(2))  
18.06.237 - Landscaping and landscaped areas. 
A.  "Landscaping" means the planting and maintenance of natural and/or artificial trees, shrubs, vines, ground covers, flowers and lawns. In addition, the same may include natural features such as rock and stone; and structural features, including, but not limited to, fountains, reflecting pools, art works, screens, walls, fences and benches. 
B.  "Landscaped area" means an area upon which landscaping is required, by these regulations, to be continuously maintained. 
(Prior code § 9111(L)(1))  
18.06.238 - Landscaping, appropriate. 
"Appropriate landscaping" means maintaining a variety of plants, including a variety of species and a mixture of sizes (i.e. trees, hedges, vines), within a yard, planter, or other "landscaping area" that is consistent with the type of planting found onsite and compatible with the neighborhood, with a priority placed on drought tolerant, native plants. 
(Ord. 2839 § 4, 2004: Ord. 2838 § 4, 2004)  
18.06.240 - Livestock. 
"Livestock" means a use involving the grazing, care and maintenance of cattle and/or horses for commercial or noncommercial purposes. 
(Prior code § 9111(L)(2))  
18.06.241 - Lodging facility. 
"Lodging facility" means any structure, or any portion of any structure, which is occupied or intended or designed for transitory or temporary occupancy for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes with access provided through a common entrance, lobby or hallway, to one or more guestrooms which may or may not have cooking facilities. 
(Ord. No. 3099 , § 2, 5-28-19)  
18.06.243 - Long-term facility. 
"Long-term facility" means an institution of seven-patient capacity or more intended primarily for the admission of chronic mentally ill, or mentally disordered or other incompetent persons who are provided medical care, nursing services and intensive supervision. 
(Prior code § 9111(L)(3))  
18.06.246 - Lot or parcel of land. 
"Lot or parcel of land" means: 
A.  A parcel of real property which is shown as a single lot in a lawfully recorded subdivision, approved pursuant to the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act; or 
B.  A parcel of real property, the dimensions and boundaries of which are designated as a single lot by a lawfully recorded record of survey map; or 
C.  A parcel of real property shown on a parcel map as a single lot, lawfully recorded pursuant to the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act; or 
D.  Any parcel of real property otherwise lawfully created and dimensioned prior to the adoption of these regulations; or 
E.  Two or more lots which are combined, by an appropriate recorded written instrument, or two or more lots which are combined by a common usage, shall be deemed, for all purposes, a single lot. 
(Prior code § 9111(L)(4))  
18.06.249 - Lot area. 
"Lot area" means the total area, measured by a horizontal plane, included within the lot lines of a lot. 
(Prior code § 9111(L)(5))  
18.06.252 - Lot, standard corner. 
"Standard corner lot" means a lot situated at the intersection of two or more streets. (See figure below.) 
  
(Ord. 2839 § 5, 2004)  
18.06.255 - Lot depth. 
"Lot depth" means the horizontal distance measured between the midpoints of the front and rear lot lines. 
(Prior code § 9111(L)(7))  
18.06.258 - Lot, interior. 
"Interior lot" means a lot, other than a corner or reversed corner, or through lot. 
(Prior code § 9111(L)(8))  
18.06.261 - Lot, key. 
"Key lot" means a lot which has a side lot line which is a common lot line with the rear lot line of a reversed corner lot. (See figure below.) 
  
(Ord. 2839 § 6, 2004)  
18.06.264 - Lot line, front. 
"Front lot line" means a lot line separating an interior lot from a street; in the case of a corner or reversed corner, the lot line separating the narrowest street frontage of the same shall mean the narrowest lot line parallel and closest to the nearest street or highway, as determined by the director. 
(Prior code § 9111(L)(10))  
18.06.267 - Lot line, rear. 
"Rear lot line" means the lot line which is approximately parallel to, and most distant from, the front lot line. 
(Prior code § 9111(L)(11))  
18.06.270 - Lot line, side. 
"Side lot line" means any lot line which is not a front or rear lot line. 
(Prior code § 9111(L)(12))  
18.06.273 - Lot, minimum-width. 
"Minimum-width lot" means the horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured along the line constituting the rear of the required front yard area, or between two points each located on the side lot lines at a distance midway between the front and rear lot lines, whichever is lesser. 
(Prior code § 9111(L)(15))  
18.06.276 - Lot, reversed corner. 
"Reversed corner lot" means a corner lot, the side lot line of which is substantially a continuation of the front lot line of an adjacent key lot. (See figure below.) 
  
(Ord. 2839 § 7, 2004)  
18.06.279 - Lot, through. 
"Through lot" means a lot having frontage on two approximately parallel streets. 
(Prior code § 9111(L)(14))  
18.06.280 - Low impact recreational use. 
Nonconsumptive uses which have little or no adverse effect on native habitat and wildlands. 
(Ord. 2694 § 2 (part), 1996)  
18.06.282 - Manufacturing. 
"Manufacturing" means the creation of a product from raw materials. 
(Prior code § 9111(M)(3))  
18.06.285 - Map. 
"Map" means the zoning map of the city, referred to in Section 18.08.020. 
(Prior code § 9111(M)(2))  
18.06.288 - May. 
"May" is permissive. 
(Prior code § 9111(M)(1))  
18.06.291 - Medical and/or dental clinic. 
"Medical and/or dental clinic" means any facility providing health service, or medical, surgical or dental care of the sick or injured, but does not include inpatient or overnight accommodations. "Medical and/or dental clinic" includes health centers, health clinics, doctors' and dentists' offices. 
(Prior code § 9111(M)(4))  
18.06.294 - Mobilehome. 
"Mobilehome" means a building which is transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed and equipped to contain not more than one dwelling unit, to be used without a foundation. 
(Prior code § 9111(M)(5))  
18.06.297 - Mobilehome, foundational. 
"Foundational mobilehome" means a mobilehome home which is: 
A.  Installed on a permanent foundation system; and 
B.  Manufactured and certified under the National Mobilehome Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974. 
(Prior code § 9111(M)(5.1))  
18.06.300 - Mobilehome park. 
"Mobilehome park" means a lot where two or more mobilehomes and/or mobilehome sites are rented or leased or held out for rent or lease. 
(Prior code § 9111(M)(6))  
18.06.303 - Mobilehome site. 
"Mobilehome site" means that portion of a mobilehome park designated for use or occupancy of one mobilehome, and including all appurtenant facilities thereon. 
(Prior code § 9111(M)(7))  
18.06.304 - Mobile recycling unit. 
A mobile recycling unit means a motor vehicle, as defined in the Vehicle Code, which is used for the collection of recyclable materials. A mobile recycling unit includes the bins, boxes or containers located on a motor vehicle and used for the collection of recyclable materials. Mobile recycling units shall provide an area clearly marked to prohibit other vehicular parking during hours when the mobile unit is scheduled to be present. 
(Ord. 2423 § 2, 1987)  
18.06.306 - Motel. 
"Motel" means one or more buildings containing rooms without kitchen facilities, each having a separate entrance leading directly from the outside of the building or from an inner court, which rooms are designed for rental for temporary or overnight accommodations for guests, and are offered primarily to automobile tourists or transients by signs or other advertising media. One unit, for use by a resident manager, may have kitchen facilities. "Motel" includes auto courts, motor lodges and tourists' courts. 
(Prior code § 9111(M)(8))  
18.06.308 - Moving and storage. 
"Moving and storage" means the business of transferring household and business goods from one location to another and including the temporary storage of such goods while in transit and awaiting delivery. 
(Ord. 2375 § 1(a), 1986)  
18.06.309 - Nonconforming site. 
"Nonconforming site" means a lot or parcel of land which was lawfully developed in accordance with zoning regulations in effect at the time of development but which does not comply with current regulations with respect to, but not limited to: density; coverage; yards; setbacks; parking layout and paving; site orientation; fencing and walls; landscaping; refuse storage; outdoor storage, or any other provision specific to site development, regardless of whether or not the site was previously deemed conforming. 
(Ord. 2806 § 4, 2002)  
18.06.310 - Nonconforming structure. 
"Nonconforming structure" means a structure, or portion thereof, which was lawfully constructed or altered in accordance with zoning regulations in effect at the time of the construction or alteration but which does not comply with current regulations with respect to, but not limited to: size; height; width; materials; massing; equipment screening, or any other provision specific to the structure's physical form, regardless of whether or not the structure was previously deemed conforming. 
(Ord. 2806 § 5, 2002)  
18.06.312 - Nonconforming use. 
"Nonconforming use" means the use of any lot, structures or any combination thereof, which use conformed to the zoning regulations in effect at the time use was established, but which does not comply with current zoning regulations. Nonconforming use shall also include uses established prior to the establishment of zoning on such lots or uses that were granted as exceptions to applicable zoning regulations in effect at such time as said exception was granted, regardless of whether or not the use was previously deemed a conforming use. 
(Ord. 2806 § 6, 2002)  
18.06.313 - Non-view obscuring. 
"Non-view obscuring" relative to fences, means that at least fifty percent of the fence area between the columns is open with no visual barriers. 
(Ord. 2839 § 8, 2004: Ord. 2838 § 8, 2004)  
18.06.315 - Notice. 
Whenever written notice is required to be given under this title, the same shall be given by personal service thereof upon the person or persons to be notified, or by United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to such person or persons, at his last known address; such notice shall be conclusively deemed to have been given as of the time of personal service, or as of the time the same is deposited in the course of postal transmission. 
(Prior code § 9111(N)(2))  
18.06.318 - Nursery (mentally retarded). 
"Nursery (mentally retarded)" means a facility intended primarily for the admission of nonambulatory mentally retarded patients, who are provided nursing services primarily in crib accommodations. 
(Prior code § 9111(N)(3))  
18.06.321 - Nursery school. 
"Nursery school" means the same as "child care center." 
(Prior code § 9111(N)(4))  
18.06.324 - Nursing and convalescent hospital. 
"Nursing and convalescent hospital" means any place or institution which provides bed accommodations for one or more chronic or convalescent patients who, by reason of illness or physical infirmity, are unable to properly care for themselves. Alcoholics, drug addicts, persons with mental or communicable diseases, including contagious tuberculosis, shall not be admitted or cared for in nursing and convalescent hospitals. 
(Prior code § 9111(N)(5))  
18.06.327 - Oath. 
"Oath" means and includes affirmation. 
(Prior code § 9111(O)(1))  
18.06.330 - Open space. 
"Open space" means an area, other than a required yard area, driveway or off-street parking facility, which has no building or structure located therein except for those used exclusively for recreational purposes. To meet the requirement of open space, such area, referred to as usable open space, shall meet the following: 
A.  If the same is located upon the ground, or upon the roof of a subterranean garage, such contiguous area shall not be less than five hundred square feet in area; and 
B.  If the roof of such subterranean garage is utilized for such open space, all such roof areas may be utilized provided that the same is not in excess of two feet above the grade of the lot immediately adjacent thereto; and 
C.  That where such open space is located on any roof area, other than a subterranean garage, not to exceed twenty-five percent of such roof area may be utilized to meet the open space requirement; and 
D.  Notwithstanding subsection A, any partially or totally enclosed patio or balcony located immediately adjacent to a dwelling unit may be utilized to meet the open space requirement. 
(Prior code § 9111(O)(2)(a—d))  
18.06.333 - Open space, private. 
"Private open space" means open space on a residential lot which is enclosed by a fence or wall, or consists of a balcony which is designed and intended for the exclusive use of the occupant of the immediately adjacent dwelling unit, located on the lot, having direct access to such area. 
(Ord. 9111(O)(2)(e))  
18.06.334 - Owner. 
"Owner" means any or all of the following: 
A.  The owner or owners of the fee interest in real property; 
B.  The owner or owners of any beneficial interest under a trust deed relating to real property; 
C.  The purchaser and vendor under a land-sale contract relating to such property; or 
A tenant under a written and recorded lease, easement, or other legal document as such interests are shown by a title search conducted by a qualified title company. 
(Ord. 2806 § 7, 2002)  
18.06.336 - Parking space, off-street. 
"Off-street parking space" means a readily accessible area on a lot not including driveways, ramps, loading or work areas, maintained exclusively for the parking of one automobile. 
(Prior code § 9111(P)(1))  
18.06.337 - Parolee. 
"Parolee" means an individual who has been released from a prison term prior to its expiration and who is subject to regular monitoring by a law enforcement officer for a set period of time, during such monitoring time period. This term shall include all of the following: 
A.  An individual who was convicted of a federal crime, was sentenced to a United States federal prison, and received conditional and revocable release in the community under the supervision of a federal parole officer; 
B.  An individual who is serving a period of supervised community custody, as defined in California Penal Code Section 3000, following a term of imprisonment in a state prison, and is under the jurisdiction of the California Department of Correction, Parole and Community Services Division; 
C.  An adult or juvenile individual who was sentenced to a term in the California Youth Authority and received conditional and revocable release in the community under the supervision of a youth authority parole officer; and 
D.  An individual who meets the above equivalent criteria in another state. 
This term shall only include those individuals who are subject to parole relating to a serious felony, as that term defined in California Penal Code Section 1192.7(c) or any successor provision thereto. 
(Ord. 2897 § 7, 2008)  
18.06.339 - Person. 
"Person" means any individual, firm, copartnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, district, public agency, public utility, or any group or combination acting as a unit. "Person" does not include the city. 
(Prior code § 9111(P)(2))  
18.06.342 - Plural. 
When consistent with the context, words in plural include the singular. 
(Prior code § 9111(P)(3))  
18.06.345 - Precision engine rebuilding. 
"Precision engine rebuilding" means the disassembly, cleaning, inspection, machining and reassembly of engines or engine parts, but shall not include the removal of engines from vehicles or the running or bench testing of reassembled engines. 
(Prior code § 9111(P)(4)(2))  
18.06.348 - Principal use. 
"Principal use" means a use specifically allowed of right, in any one or more of the zones set forth in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 9111(P)(4))  
18.06.351 - Processing. 
"Processing" means, when used in reference to commercial or industrial use, one or more acts or operations which have the effect of changing the form of a product or material, so as to render the same more salable or usable. 
(Prior code § 9111(P)(5))  
18.06.352 - Processing facility. 
A processing facility is a use located in a building or within view-obscuring walls intended and used for the collection and processing of recyclable materials. Processing means the preparation of material for efficient shipment, or to an end-user's specifications, by such means as baling, briquetting, compacting, flattening, grinding, crushing, mechanical sorting, shredding, cleaning, and remanufacturing. A processing facility includes the following: 
A.  A light processing facility consists of a gross area of a lot under forty-five thousand square feet for collection, processing and storage area and may have an average of not to exceed two outbound truck shipments per day. A light processing facility is limited to baling, briquetting, crushing, compacting, grinding, shredding and sorting of source-separated recyclable materials and repairing of reusable materials sufficient to qualify as a certified processing facility. A light processing facility shall not shred, compact, or bale ferrous metals other than food and beverage containers. 
B.  A heavy processing facility is any processing facility other than a light processing facility. 
(Ord. 2423 § 3, 1987)  
18.06.354 - Psychiatric hospital. 
"Psychiatric hospital" means an institution intended primarily for the admission, diagnosis and intensive short-term treatment of patients with mental illness or behavior or emotional disorders. 
(Prior code § 9111(P)(6))  
18.06.357 - Quarry. 
"Quarry" means any place on a lot where dirt, soil and gravel, rock or other similar material is removed by excavation or otherwise. "Quarry" does not include the excavation and removal of materials from a lot preparatory to construction of a building for which a building permit has been issued, and remains in full force and effect, provided that such excavation is confined to that necessary for such building construction. 
(Prior code § 9111(Q)(1))  
18.06.360 - Real estate subdivision sales office, temporary. 
"Temporary real estate subdivision sales office" means a temporary structure or building, including a foundational mobile home, intended to be used for the sale of lots within a recorded residential subdivision. 
(Ord. 2296 § 1(c), 1983; prior code § 9111(T))  
18.06.363 - Recorder. 
"Recorder" means the county recorder of the county of Los Angeles. 
(Prior code § 9111(R)(1))  
18.06.364 - Recyclable material. 
Recyclable material is reusable material, including, but not limited to metals, glass, plastic and paper, which are intended for reuse, remanufacture, or reconstitution for the purpose of using the altered form. Recyclable material does not include refuse as defined in this code, nor hazardous materials. Recyclable material may include used motor oil collected and transported in accordance with Section 25250.11 and 25143.2(b)(4) of the California Health and Safety Code. 
(Ord. 2423 § 4, 1987)  
18.06.365 - Recycling facility. 
A recycling facility is a center for the collection and/or processing of recyclable materials. A certified recycling facility or certified processor means a recycling facility certified by the California Department of Conservation as meeting the requirements of the California Beverage Container Recycling and Litter Reduction Act of 1986. A recycling facility does not include storage containers or processing activity located on the premises of a residential, commercial or manufacturing use and used solely for the recycling of material generated by that residential property, business or manufacturer. Recycling facilities may include collection facilities and processing facilities. 
(Ord. 2423 § 5, 1987)  
18.06.365A - Refuse storage area. 
"Refuse storage area" means an exterior area, not including a driveway, ramp, loading area, parking space or required open space, that is permanently reserved and exclusively used for the storage of refuse containers. 
(Ord. 2755 § 2 (part), 1999)  
18.06.366 - Regulations. 
"Regulations" means the provisions of this title. 
(Prior code § 9111(R)(2))  
18.06.369 - Residential care facility. 
"Residential care facility" means any of the facilities specified herein which generally provide personal care in a residential setting for children, adults, or children and adults. 
"Residential care facility" includes "residential care facilities," as defined by the California Community Care Facilities Act; California Health and Safety Code Section 1502(a)(1). 
The term "residential care facility" includes the following health facilities, as set forth in California Health and Safety Code Section 1267.8: an intermediate care facility/developmentally disabled habilitative, an intermediate care facility/developmentally disabled-nursing, or a congregate living health facility. 
The term shall also include the following facilities: residential care facilities for persons with chronic life-threatening illnesses, as set forth in California Health and Safety Code Section 1568.0831; residential care facilities for the elderly, as set forth in California Health and Safety Code Section 1569.85; pediatric day health and respite care facilities, as set forth in California Health and Safety Code Section 1761.4; alcoholism or drug abuse recovery or treatment facilities, as set forth in California Health and Safety Code Section 11834.23; and any state-authorized, certified, or licensed family care homes, foster homes, or group homes serving mentally disordered or otherwise handicapped persons or dependent and neglected children, as set forth in the Lanterman-Petris-Short Act, California Welfare and Institutions Code Section 5116. 
The term "residential care facility" includes any other facilities which are deemed by any other applicable law to be a residential use of property and required by law to be treated the same as other single-family residences for local zoning purposes. 
The term "residential care facility" shall not include family day care homes, as defined in Section 18.06.170; family day care homes shall be regulated pursuant to the provisions of Section 18.10.020(K) of this code. 
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this section, the term "residential care facility" is limited to those facilities, places or buildings that are both subject to regulation by the state of California and actually licensed by the state of California. No facility, place or building that may otherwise be regulated by the state of California, but which is not actually licensed by the state of California, shall be deemed a "residential care facility" for purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2897 § 6, 2008)  
18.06.370 - Residential development. 
"Residential development" means the construction of, addition to, or exterior remodeling of, a single-family dwelling, foundational mobilehome, or multiple-family development which requires the issuance of a building permit, and including accessory structures, reroofing, changing of windows, or changing of exterior siding materials. 
(Ord. 2580 § 4, 1992)  
18.06.372 - Residential facility (former drug abusers). 
"Residential facility (former drug abusers)" means a building with six or more guestrooms for eleven or more persons participating in a program of rehabilitation and social readjustment for former drug abusers. Residential facility shall not mean any facility wherein professional medical, psychiatric, psychological or nursing care is provided for the purpose of curing persons of drug addiction. 
(Prior code § 9111(R)(7))  
18.06.375 - Residential facility (mentally retarded). 
"Residential facility (mentally retarded)" means an institution of one-bed capacity or more, intended solely for the admission of mentally retarded patients who require supervision and who are provided with an organized program of services. 
(Prior code § 9111(R)(3))  
18.06.378 - Residential facility limited (former drug abusers). 
"Limited residential facility (former drug abusers)" means a building with not more than five guestrooms for not more than ten persons participating in a program of rehabilitation and social readjustment for former drug abusers. Residential facility limited means any facility wherein professional medical, psychiatric, psychological or nursing care is provided for the purpose of curing persons of drug addiction. 
(Prior code § 9111(R)(8))  
18.06.381 - Residential school (mentally retarded). 
"Residential school (mentally retarded)" means a facility intended primarily for the admission, care and treatment of educable and trainable mentally retarded patients. The facility shall provide an educational program on the premises as one of its services. 
(Prior code § 9111(R)(4))  
18.06.384 - Rest home. 
"Rest home" means the same as "nursing and convalescent hospital." 
(Prior code § 9111(R)(5))  
18.06.385 - Reverse vending machine. 
A.  A reverse vending machine is an automated mechanical device which accepts at least one or more types of empty beverage containers including, but not limited to aluminum cans, glass and plastic bottles, and issues a cash refund or a redeemable credit slip with a value not less than the container's redemption value as determined by the state. A reverse vending machine sorts and processes containers mechanically provided that the entire process is enclosed within the machine. In order to accept and temporarily store all three container types in a proportion commensurate with their relative redemption rates, and to meet the requirements of certification as a recycling facility, multiple grouping of reverse vending machines may be permitted. 
B.  A bulk reverse vending machine is a reverse vending machine that is larger than fifty square feet; is designed to accept more than one container at a time; and will pay by weight instead of by container. 
(Ord. 2423 § 6, 1987)  
18.06.387 - Secretary. 
"Secretary" means the secretary of the commission. 
(Prior code § 9111(S)(1))  
18.06.389 - Self-storage. 
"Self-storage" means a controlled-access building or group of buildings which contain varying sizes of individual, compartmentalized, and user-securable stalls or lockers for the storage of the user's goods, wares or records. 
(Ord. 2375 § 1(b), 1986)  
18.06.390 - Service station. 
A.  "Service station" means a retail place of business engaged primarily in the sale of motor fuels, but also engaged in supplying goods and services generally required in the operation and maintenance of motor vehicles. Such goods and services include: 
1.  Sale of petroleum products; 
2.  Sale and servicing of tires, batteries and automotive accessories; 
3.  Washing and lubrication services; 
4.  The performance of minor automotive maintenance and repair; and 
5.  The supplying of other incidental customer services and products. 
B.  Major automotive repairs, painting, body and fender work, and automobile or truck rental or storage shall not be deemed permitted as a part of such service station usage. 
(Prior code § 9111(S)(3))  
18.06.391 - Setback. 
"Setback" means the area which defines the depth of the required yard. Said setbacks are to be measured from the ultimate right-of-way of a street or a distance perpendicular from the property line for the required yard. 
(Ord. 2515 § 8, 1990)  
18.06.393 - Shall. 
"Shall" is mandatory. 
(Prior code § 9111(S)(2))  
18.06.396 - Singular. 
When consistent with the context, words in the singular number shall include the plural. 
(Prior code § 9111(S)(4))  
18.06.399 - Solid fill. 
"Solid fill" means any noncombustible materials insoluble in water, such as soil, rock, sand or gravel, that can be used for grading land or filling depressions. 
(Prior code § 9111(S)(5))  
18.06.402 - Solid-fill project. 
"Solid-fill project" means any operation which involves the importation and deposit of one thousand or more cubic yards of solid fill material on a lot, for the purpose of reclaiming such lot or portion thereof. 
(Prior code § 9111(S)(6))  
18.06.405 - Sorority. 
"Sorority" means the same as "club, private." 
(Prior code § 9111(S)(7))  
18.06.408 - State. 
"State" means the state of California. 
(Prior code § 9111(S)(8))  
18.06.411 - Story. 
"Story" means that portion of building included between the upper surface of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, except that the topmost story shall be that portion of a building included between the upper surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above. "Story" includes a basement. 
(Prior code § 9111(S)(9))  
18.06.414 - Street. 
"Street" means a public or private way permanently reserved as a primary means of vehicular access to adjoining property. "Street" does not include an alley. 
(Prior code § 9111(S)(10))  
18.06.417 - Street frontage. 
"Street frontage," see "frontage, street." 
(Prior code § 9111(S)(11))  
18.06.420 - Structure. 
"Structure" means a building or anything constructed or erected which has a fixed location on the ground, or is attached to a building or other object having a fixed location on the ground. A fixed location shall include, but not be limited to, the following: a concrete foundation, footing, foundation system, concrete floor; or elements buried in, or adhered to, the ground. 
(Ord. 2806 § 8, 2002)  
18.06.422 - Swap meet. 
"Swap meet" means a building or open area in which stalls or sales areas are set aside, and rented or otherwise provided, and which are intended for use by unrelated individuals to sell, trade, exchange or swap articles that are either new, homemade, homegrown, old, obsolete or antique and includes the selling of goods and or services at retail by business or individuals who are generally engaged in retail trade. 
(Ord. 2553 § 5 (part), 1991)  
18.06.423 - Tenses. 
When consistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the past and future tenses and words in the future tense include the present tense. 
(Prior code § 9111(T)(1))  
18.06.424 - Theater. 
"Theater" means a building or area designed and intended for the presentation of motion pictures, slides, closed circuit television pictures, plays, concerts or other live entertainment; or other events, before an individual or assemblage of persons, whether such assemblage be of a public, restricted or private nature, except a home or private dwelling where no fee, or other admission charge, is charged. The term "theater" shall include auditorium and playhouse. 
(Ord. 2630 § 3 1994: Ord. 2382 § 3, 1986)  
18.06.425 - Temporary. 
"Temporary," unless otherwise specified, shall mean not to exceed thirty days. 
(Ord. 2619 § 1 (part), 1994)  
18.06.426 - Transfer station. 
"Transfer station" means an area, including any necessary buildings or structures, for the temporary storage and salvage of rubbish, garbage or industrial waste. 
(Prior code § 9111(T)(2))  
18.06.429 - Triplex. 
"Triplex" means the same as "dwelling, three-family." 
(Prior code § 9111(T)(3))  
18.06.430 - Tattoo parlor. 
Any establishment where principal activity is the indelible marking or coloring of the skin with a needle injecting ink, dye or other coloring material upon or under the skin so as to leave permanent marks or designs on the skin. Tattoo parlor does not include tattooing performed by a licensed dermatologist on premises licensed as a dermatology office, hospital, or similarly state-licensed institution. 
(Ord. 2691 § 3 (part), 1996)  
18.06.431 - Tattooing. 
The activity of indelibly marking or coloring the skin with a needle by injecting ink, dye or other coloring material upon or under the skin so as to leave permanent marks or designs on the skin. 
(Ord. 2691 § 3 (part), 1996)  
18.06.432 - Unclassified use permit. 
"Unclassified use permit" means the same as "conditional use permit." 
(Prior code § 9111(U)(3))  
18.06.435 - Underlying zone classification. 
"Underlying zone classification" means, when used in reference to an overlay zone, the zone classification of the lot or lots established as such by Section 18.08.010 of this code. 
(Prior code § 9111(U)(1))  
18.06.438 - Use. 
"Use" means the utilization of a lot, building, structure or any combination thereof. 
(Prior code § 9111(U)(2))  
18.06.439 - View-obscuring. 
"View-obscuring," relative to fences and walls, means constructed in such a manner as to substantially obstruct a person's ability to see through the fence or wall. 
(Ord. 2632 § 1 (G), 1994)  
18.06.441 - Wall. 
'Wall" means a view-obscuring structure comprised of concrete block, cement or masonry; with a footing, columns set at regular intervals and a trim cap or other similar treatment denoting the top of the wall; which is built to industry standards. 
(Ord. 2839 § 9, 2004)  
18.06.442 - Wall, Crib 
"A crib wall" is a retaining wall system that does not exceed a three to one slope and that provides for landscape pockets with a minimum dimension of four inches wide by four inches tall. 
(Ord. 2839 § 10, 2004: Ord. 2838 § 10, 2004)  
18.06.444 - Writing. 
"Writing" means and includes any form of message recorded in English and capable of visual comprehension. 
(Prior code § 9111(W)(2))  
18.06.447 - Yard. 
"Yard" means an area upon a lot, other than a court or open space, required as a front, side or rear yard, which shall be maintained unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward without any encroachments therein, except as expressly authorized in this title. 
(Prior code § 9111(Y)(1))  
18.06.448 - Yard, above grade. 
"Yard above grade" means a lot, which has a yard setback that slopes up away from the street or alley a minimum slope of ten percent. 
(Ord. 2839 § 11, 2004: Ord. 2838 § 11, 2004)  
18.06.449 - Yard, below grade. 
"Yard below grade" means a lot, which has a yard setback that slopes down away from the street or alley with a minimum slope of ten percent. 
(Ord. 2839 § 12, 2004: Ord. 2838 § 12, 2004)  
18.06.450 - Yard, front. 
"Front yard" means a yard extending across the full width of a lot, immediately adjacent to the front lot line thereof. The depth of a required front yard shall be the specified horizontal distance measured between the front lot line and a line parallel thereto on the lot. 
(Prior code § 9111(Y)(2))  
18.06.453 - Yard, rear. 
"Rear yard" means a yard extending across the full width of a lot, immediately adjacent to the rear lot line thereof. The depth of a required rear yard shall be the specified horizontal distance measured between the rear lot line and a line parallel thereto on the lot. 
(Prior code § 9111(Y)(3))  
18.06.456 - Yard, side. 
"Side yard" means a yard extending from the rear line of a required front yard, or the front lot line where no front yard is required, to the front line of the required rear yard, or the rear lot line where no rear yard is required. The width of the required side yard shall be the specified horizontal distance measured between each side lot line and the line parallel thereto on the lot. 
(Prior code § 9111(Y)(4))  
18.06.459 - Zones. 
"Zones" means those zones established pursuant to Section 18.08.010 of this code. 
A.  "R zones or R-zoned lots" means and includes all lots classified in the R-E, H-R, R-1, R-2, R-3, and R-4 zones. 
B.  "C zones or C-zoned lots" means and includes the C-O, C-1, C-2 and C-3 zones. 
C.  "M zones or M-zoned lots" means and includes all lots classified in the M zone. 
D.  "T zones or T-zoned lots" means and includes all lots classified in the T-zone. 
E.  "OS zones or OS-zoned lots" means and includes all lots classified in the OS zone." 
(Ord. 2694 § 2 (part), 1996: prior code § 9111(Z)(1))  
18.06.462 - Zoning map, map. 
"Zoning map or map" means the official zoning map of the city, referred to in Section 18.08.020 of this code. 
(Prior code § 9111(Z)(2))  
Chapter 18.08 - ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONES AND ZONING MAP 
 
18.08.010 - Zones designated. 
A.  The following zones are established within the city, in order to carry out the purpose of this title: 
OS 	Open Space 
R-E 	Single family residential estate 
H-R 	Hillside residential 
R-1 	Single-family residential 
R-2 	Light multiple-family residential 
R-3 	Medium multiple-family residential 
R-4 	Heavy multiple-family residential 
C-O 	Commercial-office 
C-1 	Light commercial 
C-2 	General commercial 
C-3 	Commercial-manufacturing 
M 	Manufacturing 
T 	Transitional (former parking zone) 
 
B.  The most restrictive zone under this title shall be the OS zone; the other zones shall be deemed less restrictive in the order set forth. 
(Ord. 2694 § 2 (part), 1996: prior code § 9115)  
18.08.020 - Map adopted. 
There is adopted an "Official Zoning Map" for the city, a true copy of which is marked as such. It is attached to the ordinance codified in this section, and incorporated herein by this reference. All properties within the city are placed in the zones as indicated on the map. The map shall remain on file in the office of the city clerk-treasurer. All changes to the map shall be noted on the map by the director, as soon as the same become effective. The map shall be amended by reference to this section. 
(Prior code § 9116)  
18.08.030 - Unclassified property. 
Any property which for any reason is not designated on the map as being classified in any zone shall be classified as zone R-E. 
(Prior code § 9117)  
18.08.040 - Applicability of state law. 
Except as expressly provided in this title, the provisions of Articles I, II and III of Chapter 4, Title 7 of the Government Code of the state, consisting of Sections 65800 through and including 65803, inclusive; Sections 65850 through and including 65861, inclusive; and Sections 65900 through and including 65908, inclusive, the same being a portion of the Planning and Zoning Law of the state, are made applicable to the city. All matters presently pending in the city shall be processed insofar as is possible in conformity with the applicable provisions of the Planning and Zoning Law referred to in this section. 
(Prior code § 9118)  
18.08.050 - Minimum lot area. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, any zoning designation which includes, in parentheses, a number, the same shall be deemed to be the minimum lot area; if such number is greater than one hundred, it means the minimum lot area in square feet. If the number is less than one hundred, it shall indicate the minimum lot area in acres. 
(Prior code § 9119)  
18.08.055 - Minimum lot width. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, a zoning designation which includes in parenthesis a number followed by the letter "w" shall include a minimum lot width required in the zone equivalent in feet to that number. 
(Ord. 2469 § 2(a), 1989)  
18.08.060 - Redevelopment plans and specific plans. 
Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this chapter, whenever an area of the city has been included in an approved redevelopment plan, or a specific plan adopted pursuant to Section 65000 et seq. of the Planning and Zoning Law of the state, if such plan contains any standards relating to land usage, such standards shall control to the exclusion of any contradictory provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 9119.1)  
Chapter 18.09 - OS OPEN SPACE ZONE 
 
18.09.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the open space (OS) zone and provisions of this chapter is the delineation of wildlands, wildlife and wildlife habitat. Restoration and protection of such areas provides valuable resources for the community, and surrounding communities, through conservation and integrated use. The OS zone standards shall endeavor to continuously provide appropriate access to open space areas while minimizing visitor impact on preserve resources, and avoiding conflicts between various activities. 
Extremely limited development and disturbance of natural features within designated OS areas will be permitted, and only in the interest of public use, safety, or welfare shall such modifications occur. 
(Ord. 2694 § 2 (part), 1996)  
18.09.020 - Applicability. 
The OS zone shall be applied to areas in which wildlands, wildlife and natural ecosystems are to be protected or conserved. Such areas may be modified to accommodate low impact recreational activities. Alterations to existing land forms and topography shall be limited. 
(Ord. 2694 § 2 (part), 1996)  
18.09.040 - Permitted uses. 
Land shall be essentially unimproved and devoted, used or utilized for the preservation of natural resources, plant and animal life, and low impact recreational uses. The following uses shall be permissible in the OS zone, specifically when deemed necessary for public safety, welfare or interest: 
A.  Water facilities, reservoirs, flood control facilities, debris basins, and any use common and appurtenant to the containment, control, storage or distribution of water; 
B.  Electrical transmission substations, communications equipment, microwave radio and telephone transmission facilities necessary for the operation of public utility functions and/or easements thereto; 
C.  Fire control measures, including vegetation clearance and management, where necessary to ensure public safety and welfare. 
(Ord. 2694 § 2 (part), 1996)  
18.09.060 - Prohibited uses. 
The following uses shall be prohibited within the OS zone: 
A.  Residential uses, other than property caretaker units; 
B.  Commercial uses (except unmanned wireless telecommunication facilities, subject to the development standards contained within Chapter 18.47); 
C.  Industrial uses. 
(Ord. 2694 § 2 (part), 1996) 
(Ord. No. 2949, § 1, 2-23-10)  
Chapter 18.10 - RESIDENTIAL ZONES GENERALLY 
Sections: 
 
18.10.010 - Generally. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to each lot classified in any R zone, hereafter "such lots." 
(Prior code § 9120)  
18.10.020 - Accessory uses. 
In addition to the principal uses allowed in R zones, the following accessory uses, and no others, shall be permitted on all such lots: 
A.  Household Pets. 
1.  R-E, H-R and R-1 zones: dogs and/or cats, not to exceed three per lot, 
2.  R-2, R-3 and R-4 zones: dogs and/or cats, not to exceed two per dwelling unit, and 
3.  All R zones: any number of fish or birds, if allowed by, and subject to, the provisions of Section 18.06.228; 
B.  Building Materials. The outdoor storage of building materials is permitted during the construction of any building or structure on that lot, and for a period of thirty days after such construction is completed; 
C.  Home Based Business. Home based businesses, other than cottage food operations governed by Subsection (L) below, are permitted, provided that: 
1.  No display or storage of goods, materials or products connected with a home occupation shall be allowed in a garage or carport, attached or detached, except that such storage may be kept in cabinets, shelves or as specified in this section. Such cabinets or shelves must not obstruct the required parking area. Trailers used in conjunction with the home based business must comply with the following: 
a.  That such trailers shall not exceed twelve feet in length, nor six feet in height, and 
b.  That such trailers shall not be parked or stored within required front or side yards, including driveways, and 
c.  That such trailers shall be parked or stored only in a legal parking space or vehicle storage area, and 
d.  That no part of the required parking shall be used to store such trailers, and 
e.  That parking or storage of such trailers shall be screened from view of the public street by a six foot high fence or wall, 
2.  No one other than persons residing on the lot where the home occupation is located is regularly employed in such occupation, 
3.  No equipment is used in conjunction with such occupation which emits dust, fumes, noise or odor, which would or could interfere with the peaceful use and enjoyment of adjacent properties, 
4.  The area to be used for business may encompass not more than one room of the main dwelling or accessory structure, and not exceed twenty-five percent of the floor area or two hundred square feet, whichever is the lesser. No portion of the required parking may be used for the conduct of the business, 
5.  No appreciable increase of traffic, pedestrian or vehicular, results from such occupation, 
6.  There is no structural alteration of any building or structure, 
7.  There is no use of any sign not otherwise permitted in the zone in which the occupation is located; and 
8.  That green waste resulting from gardening business shall not be stored at the residence. 
D.  Parking. Off-street parking facilities; 
E.  Open Space. Open spaces; 
F.  Customary Accessory Uses. Those uses found to be customarily utilized as accessory uses pursuant to Section 18.50.030; 
G.  Garage Sales. Garage sales involving only the sale of personal property owned by the owner or occupant of the lot upon which conducted shall be permitted if conducted in accordance with the following: 
1.  That not more than one such sale shall be permitted on a lot during any three-month period, and permitted on a lot during any three-month period, and 
2.  That no portion of any required front or side yard area shall be utilized for such purposes, and 
3.  That such sales shall be conducted only during the hours of nine a.m. and six p.m. of any day, and 
4.  That no such sale shall be of a duration in excess of two days. 
H.  Accessory Living Area. One accessory living area may be permitted on lots in the H-R, R-E, and R-1 zones with not more than one dwelling unit or accessory dwelling unit, subject to the following: 
1.  Each lot, for which an application for an accessory living area in excess of four hundred square feet is submitted, shall have a lot area equal to the minimum lot area plus twenty square feet of lot area for each one square foot of floor area in excess of four hundred square feet, provided that in the R-1 zones with minimum-lot-area of twelve thousand square feet or larger, an accessory living area in excess of six hundred square feet shall have a lot area equal to the minimum lot area plus twenty square feet of lot area for each one square foot of floor area in excess of six hundred square feet, 
2.  No accessory living area shall have a floor area in excess of one thousand square feet, unless a conditional use permit has first been approved therefor, 
3.  Accessory living areas shall have no kitchen facilities, 
4.  No accessory living area shall be in excess of one story in height and shall be prohibited on the second floor, unless a minor conditional use permit has first been approved therefor, 
5.  An accessory living area may have no more than four plumbing fixtures, including one bar sink with a drain opening of not greater than one and one-half inches in diameter, 
6.  The applicant for approval of a permit for an accessory living area shall record a restrictive covenant approved as to form and content by the city attorney, which clearly states the restrictions (not to be used as a rental and/or permanent residence) on the use of the structure. The covenant shall require that the planning director be notified prior to removing the deed restriction, 
7.  Accessory living areas shall be designed in the same style and of the similar materials, where appropriate, as the main structure, 
I.  Accessory Dwelling Units. Accessory dwelling units shall be permitted in the R-E and R-1 zones including multi-family residentially zoned properties with an existing single owner occupied dwelling in accordance with the following regulations: 
1.  Location. One accessory dwelling unit may be located on any property zoned R-E and R-1 including multi-family zoned properties with an existing single owner occupied dwelling as the primary use of the property except that no accessory dwelling unit shall be permitted in any area of the city identified by resolution of the planning commission and/or city council as being significantly impacted by insufficient capacity for sewers, traffic circulation, parking, public utilities or similar infrastructure needs. 
2.  Number of Units Per Parcel. A maximum of one accessory dwelling unit shall be allowed per existing single-family parcel. All units shall comply with the California Building Code. 
3.  Distance. The distance between any detached accessory dwelling unit and the main dwelling shall not be less than ten feet except that if the entrance of the accessory dwelling faces the rear of the main building then the distance between the accessory dwelling and the main building shall not be less than twenty feet as provided in Section 18.10.030(C)(2). 
4.  Lot Coverage. An accessory dwelling unit shall adhere to the lot coverage requirements applicable to the main dwelling unit. In no case shall an accessory dwelling unit be constructed on a lot that is substandard in size by more than five percent for its zoning classification. 
5.  Unit Size. 
A.  The minimum floor area for an accessory dwelling unit shall be at least one hundred fifty square feet to accommodate an efficiency unit. The maximum floor area allowed for the construction or conversion of an accessory dwelling unit attached to the main structure shall not exceed fifty percent of the living area of the main structure or one thousand two hundred square feet, whichever is less. If the accessory dwelling unit is detached from the main structure the maximum floor area shall be one thousand two hundred square feet. 
B.  On lots twenty thousand square feet and greater, the maximum floor area allowed for the construction of an accessory dwelling unit which is attached or detached from the main structure shall not exceed one thousand five hundred square feet 
6.  Setback. The accessory dwelling unit shall adhere to the setback requirements applicable to the primary dwelling unit. 
7.  Parking. 
A.  On-site parking for an accessory dwelling unit one thousand two hundred square feet and under shall consist of one tandem or non-tandem parking space that is either covered or uncovered elsewhere on-site as allowed by this code. No additional curb cuts are permitted for an accessory dwelling unit unless approved by the director of public works. 
B.  Lots that are twenty thousand square feet and greater which are developed with an secondary accessory dwelling unit that exceeds one thousand two hundred square feet shall provide on-site parking for the second accessory dwelling unit consisting of a minimum of two covered, non-tandem, parking spaces. 
C.  The parking standards for an accessory dwelling unit do not apply in any of the following instances: 
(i)  The accessory dwelling unit is located within one-half mile of public transit. 
(ii)  The accessory dwelling unit is located within an architecturally and historically significant historic district. 
(iii)  The accessory dwelling unit is part of the existing primary residence or an existing accessory structure. 
(iv)  When on-street parking permits are required but not offered to the occupant of the accessory dwelling unit. 
(v)  When there is a car share vehicle located within one block of the accessory dwelling unit. 
8.  Architectural Standards. The accessory dwelling unit shall be compatible in exterior appearance with the primary unit, as well as existing dwellings in the vicinity of the lot or parcel on which it is proposed to be constructed, in accordance with code design standards and guidelines applicable to the zone. 
9.  Height. An accessory dwelling unit shall not exceed one story and shall be no greater than twelve feet in height, unless additional height is necessary to match the roof pitch of the primary structure. When an accessory dwelling unit is located above a garage or accessory structure, the height shall be measured from the top of the first floor top plate and shall conform to the following: 
A.  Accessory structures with habitable space, as defined by the California Building Code, or which have bathing facilities, are considered accessory area and subject to the requirements of Section 18.10.030(H). 
B.  The second floor area of a two-story accessory building shall not exceed seventy-five percent of the ground floor area of the accessory structure. 
C.  The entry to accessory structures buildings other than structures designed exclusively as garages shall face the principal dwelling on the lot. 
D.  Stairway access to the second floor shall be interior. 
10.  Development Standards. The accessory dwelling unit shall comply with all zone appropriate development standards listed in Sections 18.10.030, 18.12.030 and/or 18.16.030 of the Whittier Municipal Code for the R-E and/or R-1 zoning district. 
11.  Occupancy. One of the residential dwellings on a lot on which the accessory unit is proposed to be established shall be occupied as the primary residence of the owner of the lot and shall not be rented or leased as long as the accessory unit exists. If, thereafter, the owner occupies neither unit, the accessory unit shall automatically become a non-habitable space, shall not be used as a dwelling and shall not be rented. 
12.  Deed Restrictions. Before obtaining an accessory dwelling unit permit, the property owner shall file with the county recorder a declaration or agreement of restrictions, which has been approved by the city attorney as to its form and content, containing a reference to the deed under which the property was acquired by the owner and stating that: (a) the accessory dwelling unit shall not be sold separately; (b) the accessory dwelling unit is restricted to the maximum size allowed per the development standards set forth in this section, (c) the accessory dwelling unit shall be considered legal only so long as either the primary residence, or the accessory dwelling unit, is occupied by the owner of record of the property; and (d) the restrictions shall be binding upon any successor in ownership of the property and lack of compliance shall result in legal action against the property owner. 
13.  Historic Preservation. If the accessory dwelling unit is to be constructed on a parcel identified on any federal, state or local list of historic or eligible historic resources, the accessory unit shall not adversely impact the property's integrity to convey its historic significance through the seven aspects of integrity consisting of: setting, location, design, materials, workmanship, feeling or association, as described in National Register Bulletin 15. Likewise, the accessory dwelling unit shall not be placed or constructed so as to result in a modification of any existing historic resource on the parcel, unless alterations to the existing historic resources on the property conform to the United States Secretary of Interior's Standards for Treatment of Historic Properties. 
14.  Approval. The application for an accessory unit shall be reviewed by the Community Development Director or his or her designee for compliance with the provisions of this Section. The Community Development Director shall ministerially approve the creation of an accessory dwelling unit if the accessory dwelling unit complies with this section and all of the following: 
(A)  The unit is not intended for sale separate from the primary residence and may be rented. 
(B)  The lot is zoned for R-E or R-1 single-family or multifamily use. 
(C)  The lot contains an existing single-family dwelling. 
(D)  The accessory dwelling unit occupies a pre-existing structure that is either attached to an existing dwelling or detached from the dwelling, located on the same lot as the existing dwelling. 
(E)  The increased floor area of an attached accessory dwelling unit shall not exceed fifty percent of the existing living area, with a maximum increase in floor area of one thousand two hundred square feet, whichever is less. However, if the lot size is equal to or exceeds twenty thousand square feet the accessory dwelling unit shall not exceed fifty percent of the existing living area with a maximum floor are of one thousand five hundred square feet, whichever is less. 
(F)  The total area of floor space for a detached accessory dwelling unit shall not exceed one thousand two hundred square feet, unless the lot size is equal to or greater than twenty thousand square feet in which case the accessory dwelling unit shall not exceed one thousand five hundred square feet. 
(G)  Requirements relating to height, setback, lot coverage, architectural review, site plan review, fees, charges, and other zoning requirements generally applicable to residential construction in the zone in which the property is located. 
(H)  Local building code requirements that apply to detached dwellings have been met. 
(I)  Approval by the local health officer has been given where a private sewage disposal system is being used. 
(J)  Does not impact the ability of any on-site resources to retain sufficient integrity to convey historical significance. 
(K)  All requisite on-site parking is provided. 
15.  Interpretation by Planning Commission. If a question arises in relation to interpretation or applicability of a provision of this section, the matter shall be considered by the planning commission as a report and recommendation item, and determined by resolution. 
J.  Antennas and Flagpoles. Flagpoles, satellite television receiving antennas, and amateur radio receiving and transmitting antenna, utilized for the private noncommercial use by the occupant of a residence located upon the lot. 
K.  Large Family Day Care Facilities. Large family day care facilities shall be permitted in all residential zones in accordance with the following regulations: 
1.  A large family day care home shall conform to all applicable standards of the residential zoning district it is located in; 
2.  Stationary play equipment shall not be located in the required front or side yards; 
3.  Fencing the perimeter of the play area(s) that complies with Section 18.10.030(D) shall be provided which secures the site and reduces potential noise; 
4.  A passenger-loading plan to minimize noise and parking issues to the greatest extent possible; 
5.  All family day care homes shall be licensed as required by law and shall be operated according to all applicable state and local regulations; 
6.  No more than one large family day care home shall be permitted within three hundred linear feet of any other such home. The director of community development may permit more than one such home within three hundred linear feet of any other such home if the applicant demonstrates one of the following: 
a.  That any existing large family day care home within three hundred linear feet is at capacity, 
b.  That the need exists for a particular or unique service not provided by any existing large family day care home within three hundred linear feet of a proposed large family day care home; 
7.  One on-site parking space for each permanent non-resident employee during business hours is required; 
8.  Prior to commencing operation of a large family day care facility the building division shall conduct an inspection of the premises on which the large family day care is to be operated to ensure that there is no unpermitted building, electrical, and mechanical improvements to the property. The property owner shall obtain and final all required building permits for all unpermitted construction on the premises prior to commencing the on-site operation of a large family day care home; 
9.  The director of community development or their designee shall issue a residential zoning compliance letter prior to the operation of the large family day care facility, once the operator has demonstrated compliance with all municipal code provisions pertaining to large family day care facilities. 
L.  Cottage Food Operation. A "cottage food operation," as that term is defined in California Health & Safety Code 113758(a), as may be amended from time to time, is permitted provided that: 
1.  Permit Required. An application for a permit to engage in a cottage food operation shall be filed with the zoning administrator on a form prescribed by the city and shall include the following: 
a.  The name and address of the applicant. The applicant must be the "cottage food operator," as that term is defined in California Health & Safety Code 113758(b) as may be amended from time to time; 
b.  A statement of whether the applicant is the owner or a tenant of the property on which the use is proposed to be located; and if a tenant, the name and contact information for the property owner, landlord, or management company; as well as the signature of the property owner, landlord or management company consenting to the use; 
c.  The address or legal description of the property on which the cottage food operation is proposed to be located; 
d.  A copy of the permit issued by or the application submitted or to be submitted to the Los Angeles County Department of Public Health Environmental Health Division for the proposed use; 
e.  Identification of the name of each individual involved and/or employed in the proposed use and whether they are a family member or household member of the cottage food operator; 
f.  A statement of whether the proposed use will involve "direct sales" or "indirect sales" of cottage food products at the subject residence as those terms are defined in California Health and Safety Code 113758(b) as may be amended; 
g.  A description, explanation, and amount of projected impacts on traffic, including but not limited to the number of deliveries to be received or sent from the subject residence, frequency of loading of products for sale elsewhere, and anticipated consumer or third party retailer visits to the subject residence; 
h.  An accurate floor plan drawing(s) of the subject residence showing: 
(i)  Areas proposed to be registered and/or permitted by or areas shown on application submitted to the Los Angeles County Department of Public Health Environmental Health Division for cottage food preparation, packaging and related exclusive storage; 
(ii)  All doors and exits; 
(iii)  All vehicle parking spaces; 
(iv)  All delivery and/or loading areas; and, 
(v)  The location(s) of streets, property lines, uses, structures, driveways, pedestrian walks. 
i.  Any additional information, plans, or drawings the zoning administrator may require to determine whether the proposed use will comply with all of the applicable provisions of this Subsection (L). The zoning administrator may authorize omission of any or all of the plans and drawings required by this section if they are not necessary. 
j.  An Application Processing Fee for a cottage food operation permit as established by Resolution of the City Council. The applicant has the right to request a fee verification for any fee paid pursuant to this chapter. 
2.  Action of zoning administrator. After submittal of a complete application and fee as required by this section the zoning administrator shall approve, approve in modified form, or deny the application in compliance with the authority and requirements set forth in California Government Code § 51035, as may be amended from time to time. The zoning administrator shall grant the permit if the proposed cottage food operation, as applied for or as modified, complies with the standards set forth in this section. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the zoning administrator, in his discretion may condition approval of the use upon the cottage food operations compliance with any additional reasonable standards related to spacing and concentration, traffic control, or noise which the zoning administrator, in his sole discretion, deems necessary to mitigate the impact of the proposed use on the surrounding residential neighborhood. Any action of the zoning administrator may be appealed to the planning commission pursuant to Section 18.58.050. 
3.  Standards. Cottage food operations must meet the following requirements: 
a.  Spacing and Concentration. No cottage food operation shall be approved if the site of the proposed use is located within three hundred feet of the property line of another cottage food operation; and, 
b.  Traffic Control. 
(i)  Parking. 
(a)  On-site parking for the residential unit in which the cottage food operation is located shall be maintained free and clear and available for parking and/or deliveries at all times to the extent such parking is necessary to mitigate the cottage food operations impact upon the traffic circulation; and, 
(b)  The cottage food operation shall not result in any appreciable increase in traffic, pedestrian or vehicular. 
(2)  Deliveries and Loading. The cottage food operator shall only allow vehicular delivery or loading related to the cottage food operation between the hours of eight a.m. and seven p.m., Monday through Saturday. 
(3)  The cottage food operator shall not allow any vehicle making a delivery, being loaded, or being used by consumers or third party retailers in relation to the cottage food operation to block or impede the public right-of-way, a vehicular drive aisle, encroach into any required on-site parking space, or idle at any time. 
(4)  Sales at the Subject Residence. Cottage food operations engaging in sales to consumers or third party retailers at the residence containing the cottage food operation shall also be subject to the following traffic control standards: 
(a)  Visitation to the residence containing the cottage food operation for the purpose of direct or indirect sales is limited to the hours of eight a.m. to five p.m., Monday through Saturday. 
(b)  Visitors shall not be allowed to queue outside of the residence containing the cottage food operation at any time, either on foot or in vehicles. 
(c)  There shall be no outdoor sales at any time at the residence containing the cottage food operation. 
c.  Noise Control. Cottage food operations shall not create noise levels in excess of those allowed in the applicable residential areas in the noise element of the general plan or in excess of those allowed in residential property pursuant to Chapter 8.32 of the Whittier Municipal Code. 
d.  Zoning Standards. The cottage food operation shall conform to all applicable federal, state, and municipal laws and regulations applicable to the residential area in which the cottage food operation is located, including but not limited to setbacks, signage, etc. 
4.  Permit Revocable. A permit to operate a cottage food operation obtained under this section is revocable at any time by the final approving authority if the business is found to be in non-compliance with any condition of approval or applicable local or state law or regulation governing cottage food operations. 
5.  Appeals. Any final action of the zoning administrator made under this section may be appealed pursuant to Chapter 18.58 of the Whittier Municipal Code. 
6.  Penalty. Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be enforced pursuant to Chapter 1.08 and Chapter 1.09 of the Whittier Municipal Code. 
M.  Parking of Commercial Vehicles. It shall be unlawful to park or store any commercial vehicle, of an unladen gross vehicle weight in excess of fourteen thousand pounds, tow trucks, trailers, or other related equipment within residential zones within the city. A limit of one commercial vehicle fourteen thousand pounds or less is allowed per residential lot or residence, whichever is less, within residential zones. The provisions of this subparagraph do not apply to passenger vehicles, pickup trucks, passenger or cargo vans, recreational vehicles or utility trailers. For additional definitions and restrictions, refer to Chapter 10.40 of the Whittier Municipal Code. 
N.  The provisions of this section shall not apply to any vehicle owned by the city or a public utility or licensed contractor while necessary in use in the construction, installation or repair of any public utility, or to any commercial vehicle actually being used for the pickup or for the delivery of goods, wares and merchandise, or for the delivery of materials to be used in the repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of any building. 
(Ord. 2887 §§ 1, 2, 2007; Ord. 2864 § 3, 2005; Ord. 2824 §§ 1, 3—6, 8—18 (part), 2003; Ord. 2619 § 1 (part), 1994; Ord. 2539 § 3, 1991; Ord. 2345 § 1, 1985; Ord. 2318 § 1(b), 1983; prior code § 9121) 
(Ord. No. 2938, § 1, 10-27-09; Ord. No. 2950, § 1, 2-23-10; Ord. No. 2998, §§ 1, 2, 4-23-13; Ord. No. 3018, § 2 , 3-25-14; Ord. No. 3068 , §§ 3, 4, 6-13-17)  
18.10.030 - Limitations on use. 
The regulations set out in this section shall be limitations on, and be applicable to, all uses on R-zoned lots. 
A.  Dismantling or Storage of Vehicles. The dismantling or storage of vehicles is prohibited. 
1.  Definitions. The following words, for the purpose of this section, shall be defined as follows: 
a.  "Disabled vehicle" means a vehicle which is not operable, by reason of the removal of or damage to integral component parts. 
b.  "Disassemble" means the same as dismantle. 
c.  "Dismantle" means the removal or stripping of one or more component parts from a vehicle. 
d.  "Park" means the standing of a motor vehicle, other than for the purpose of loading or unloading merchandise or passengers. 
e.  "Repair" means the work necessary to restore a vehicle to a usable condition. 
f.  "Store" means to keep or locate for future use. 
g.  "Vehicle" means and includes motorcycle, motor-driven cycle, motor truck, passenger vehicle, station wagon, truck tractor and vehicle, as these phrases are defined in the State Vehicle Code, and all similar types of vehicles. 
2.  Parking of Vehicles. No person shall park any vehicle or any component thereof, for any purpose, in any front or side yard area on any R-zoned lot, except in a permitted driveway or in a parking facility. 
3.  Repair, Dismantling or Storage of Vehicles. No person shall assemble, repair, dismantle or store any vehicle on any part of an R-zoned lot, other than as provided in this section, unless such work is done: 
a.  Within an enclosed building; or 
b.  In an area which is completely enclosed by view-obscuring walls not less than six feet in height, or by the exterior walls of a building or buildings, or combination thereof. 
4.  Exception. The prohibition imposed by subsection (A)(3) of this section shall not apply to the occasional and incidental repair of vehicles owned or leased by the person in possession of the lot on which such takes place, provided that a disabled vehicle which is being repaired or assembled shall not be stored except as provided in subsection (A)(3) of this section for a period longer than seven consecutive days within any thirty-day period. 
B.  Storage of Boats and/or Trailers. No person shall store or park any boat or trailer in any required front or side yard area on any R-zoned lot. 
C.  Location of Buildings. Location of buildings or structures on any R-zoned lots shall conform to the following: 
1.  No building or structure may be located on any portion of a required yard area, except as expressly provided in this section; and 
2.  The distance between buildings shall not be less than ten feet. In the R-1 zone, the distance between a second dwelling and a main building located on the same lot, if the entrance of the second dwelling faces the rear of the main building, shall be twenty feet; and 
3.  Detached non-dwelling accessory buildings, not including accessory living areas, when located entirely in the rear one-third of the lot, may be constructed as follows: 
a.  On interior lots, to each side lot line and to the rear lot line, 
b.  On corner lots, to the interior side line and the rear line, 
c.  On reversed corner lots, to the interior side lot line only, 
d.  On any lot served by an alley, no such building shall be located within five feet of the rear lot line, nor within five feet of one side lot line, 
e.  Except, along property lines abutting a less restrictive zone, notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs 3a through 3c of this subsection, on R-E-zoned lots, non-dwelling accessory buildings in the rear one-third of the lot shall not be placed closer than five feet to a side lot line, nor closer than ten feet to a rear lot line. 
4.  Dwelling units constructed above garages shall observe all yard requirements; 
5.  An accessory living area may be located on any portion of a lot where a main building can be placed; 
6.  Nonconforming Yards. Additions to main dwellings with nonconforming setbacks may be permitted only as follows: 
a.  The length of the addition shall be limited to seventy-five percent of the length of the existing encroachment dwelling wall, 
b.  Additions to main dwellings, resulting in the attachment to nondwelling accessory structure having existing nonconforming yards, only in compliance with the following: 
i.  A minimum side yard of five feet must be maintained on one side of the structure, 
ii.  The architectural changes necessary to meet the building code must be found consistent with the architectural character of the existing residence. 
D.  Walls, Fences and Retaining Walls. Walls, fences or retaining walls may be built on any part of a lot provided that the structure, within the front yard, street side yard, interior side yard and rear yard, complies with the provisions listed below, including Table 18.10.030(D) and Section 18.64.050. 
Table 18.10.030(D) 
Wall, Fences and Retaining Walls in Residential Zones 
Structure 	Maximum Height 	Setback (i.e. from property line, from another wall, etc.) 
Front Yard Setback 
Lots 60 Feet Wide or Less: Non-view Obscuring Fence 	36 inches 	No setback from property line. 
Lots 60—100 Feet Wide: Non-view Obscuring Fence 	42 inches 	No setback from property line. 
Lots 100 Feet Wide or Larger: Non-view Obscuring Fence 	5 feet 6 inches 	No setback from property line. 
Retaining Wall 	36 inches 	No setback from property line. 
Lot Above Street Grade: Singular and Additional Retaining Walls 	42 inches 	Set back 4 feet from the retaining wall below. 
Lot Above Street Grade: Non-view Obscuring Fence above a Retaining Wall 	Varies. See above for maximum fence height based on lot width and Section 18.10.030.(D)(2)(b) 	Setback 4 feet from the retaining wall below. 
Lot Below Street Grade: Retaining Wall 	6 feet is the maximum height within four feet of the front property line, if not visible from the street. All subsequent retaining walls within the front yard may not exceed 42-inches high. 	4-foot setback from the front property line, with a minimum 36-inch high, non-view obscuring, safety fence placed on top. All subsequent retaining walls within the front yard shall be setback from each other a minimum of four feet. 
Street Side, Side Yard Setback 
Fence, Wall or Retaining Wall 	36 inches 	No setback from property the line. 
Standard Corner Lot: Fence or Retaining Wall 	6 feet 	4-foot setback from the property line. 
Reversed Corner Lot: Fence or Wall 	6 feet 	5-foot setback from the property line. 
Adjacent to a Driveway: Fence or Wall 	42 inches 	5-foot cut-off for vision clearance where the driveway intersects the property line (refer to Figure 6). 
Adjacent to an Alley: Fence or Wall 	42 inches 	5-foot cut-off for vision clearance where the driveway intersects the property line (refer to Figure 6). 
Freestanding Perimeter Wall at Street Grade that is Adjacent to a Collector or Arterial Street 	8 feet 	No setback from property line. Requires design review approval by the Director of Community Development. 
Interior Side Yard Setback 
Fence, Wall or Retaining Wall 	6 feet, except as provided for under Section 18.10.030(D)(5) 	No setback from property line. 
Fence or Wall set above a Retaining Wall on the same parcel 	N/A 	4-foot setback from the wall below. 
Swimming Pool Enclosed: Non-view Obscuring Fence 	6 feet 	No setback from property line. 
Adjacent to a Driveway: Non-view Obscuring Fence above a Retaining Wall 	6 feet 	No setback from property line. 
Adjacent Perimeter Walls Constructed on Different Parcels 	N/A 	No setback required between walls on different parcels that abut a common property line. 
Freestanding Perimeter Wall at Street Grade that is Adjacent to a Collector or Arterial Street 	8 feet 	No setback from property line. Requires design review approval by the Director of Community Development. 
Rear Yard Setback 
Fence, Wall or Retaining Wall 	6 feet, except as provided for under Section 18.10.030(D)(4) 	No setback from property line. 
Fence or Wall set above a Retaining Wall on the same parcel 	N/A 	4-foot setback from the wall below. 
Swimming Pool Enclosure: Non-view Obscuring Fence 	6 feet 	No setback from property line. 
Adjacent to a Driveway: Non-view Obscuring Fence above a Retaining Wall 	6 feet 	No setback from property line. 
Adjacent to Commercial or Manufacturing Zone/Use: Fence, Wall or Retaining Wall 	8 feet 	No setback from property line. 
Adjacent Perimeter Walls Constructed on Different Parcels 	N/A 	No setback required between walls on different parcels that abut a common property line. 
Freestanding Perimeter Wall at Street Grade that is Adjacent to a Collector or Arterial Street 	8 feet 	No setback from property line. Requires design review approval by the Director of Community Development. 
Adjacent to Greenway Trail: Fence, Wall or Retaining Wall 	8 feet. When the grade of the residential property line at any location abutting the Greenway Trail is a minimum of one-foot lower that the highest finished grade of the Trail, the total height of any fence, wall or retaining wall adjacent to the Greenway Trail may be proportionately increased in height, above eight feet, to compensate for every one-foot of grade difference, up to two feet, for a maximum height of 10 feet, as measured perpendicularly to the Greenway Trail's finished grade adjacent to the common property line. All new or modified perimeter walls/fences constructed, immediately adjacent (facing) to the Greenway Trail, shall be constructed of decorative concrete block or as a stucco block wall and shall be earth tone in color with the decorative portion of the wall facing the Greenway Trail. Such walls/fencing (when over eight feet in height) may include a combination two-foot, high (maximum) wall extension consisting of a decorative material such as painted or stained wood, a framed solid or lattice material consisting of wood, vinyl or any other durable material deemed aesthetically acceptable to the Director of Community Development. All such walls/fencing shall require an engineered design prior to the issuance of building permits. In addition, all private fencing immediately abutting the Greenway Trail shall be maintained entirely by the property owner, including the removal of any graffiti on the perimeter wall/fencing facing the Greenway Trail. 	
 
1.  Development Review Required. Walls, fences and retaining walls in residential zone front or street side, side yards require submittal of a development review application, in conformance with Chapter 18.56, and the information submitted shall be subject to Section 18.56.030(1 and 10). Any other fence or wall that requires a variance, including a minor variance, shall also be subject to development review. These fences, walls and retaining wall within the front yard setback, street side, side yard setback shall be consistent with the city council approved fence palette. Fence or wall design exceptions to the approved fence palette shall be reviewed and approved by the design review board. 
2.  Front Yard Setback. The front yard setback is provided under "front yards" in the underlying zone classification as described in Sections 18.64.120, 18.64.140, 18.64.160, 18.64.180, 18.64.200, 18.64.220. 
a.  Non-View Obscuring Walls or Fences in Front Yard Setback. Except for permitted retaining walls, all other walls and fences in the front yard setback shall be non-view obscuring. 
b.  Maximum Fence Height. The maximum height of a non-view obscuring fence in the front yard setback of residential properties sixty feet or less in width is thirty-six inches. The maximum height of a non-view obscuring fence in the front yard setback of residential properties on lots sixty feet to one hundred feet in width is forty-two inches. The maximum height of a non-view obscuring fence in the front yard setback of residential properties on lots one hundred and one feet or larger is five feet six inches. 
c.  Fences Between Driveways. Non-view obscuring fences should not be permitted between the driveways, when adjacent driveways within the front yard are less than ten feet in width for a single-family residence, or less than twelve feet in width for two units, or less than eighteen feet in width for three or more units, or less than fifteen feet in width when the driveway is over one hundred feet in length, or construction of a fence would create a nonconforming driveway width. 
d.  Retaining Wall. 
i.  Lot Above Street Grade. 
(A)  Maximum Height. The maximum height of a retaining wall on an above grade lot is forty-two inches within the front yard setback; however, retaining walls over three feet in height within the front yard setback shall be set back from the right-of-way line a minimum of four feet and the setback space appropriately landscaped. 
(B)  Additional Retaining Walls. If more than one retaining wall is necessary within the required front yard setback, then additional retaining walls (up to forty-two inches) may be constructed above the lower retaining wall when set back a minimum of four feet from the preceding (lower) retaining wall, with appropriate landscaping planted between each retaining wall (see Figure 1). 
(C)  Fence Set Above a Retaining Wall. A non-view obscuring fence (as permitted under Section 18.10.030(D)(2)(b)) may be built above a retaining wall on an above street grade lot, if the fence is setback four feet from the lower retaining wall and that setback is appropriately landscaped (see Figure No. 1). 
Figure 1. Front Yard Fence Height on Above Street Grade Lots 
  
ii.  Lot Below Street Grade 
(A)  Maximum Height. Retaining walls, or crib type retaining wall systems, within the front yard setback on below street grade lots may be constructed up to six feet in height when not visible from the street, and setback a minimum of four feet from the front property line with a (non-view obscuring) safety fence at a minimum height determined by the California Building Code constructed on top of the retaining wall. In no case shall the overall height of the combination fence and retaining wall exceed eight feet high, as measured from the lowest contiguous finished grade of the wall. Likewise, the non-view obscuring fence on top of the retaining wall may not exceed the maximum height permitted within the front yard setback, as specified under Section 18.10.030(D)(2)(b). The non-view obscuring fence shall be measured from the highest finished grade it is contiguous to, to the top of the fence (see Figure 2). 
(B)  Fence or Wall. The maximum height of a fence or wall along the street side, side yard right-of-way line is forty-two inches. 
Figure 2. Front Yard Combination Walls/Fence Heights on Below Street Grade Lots 
  
3.  Street Side, Side Yard Setback. The street side, side yard setback is provided under "Side Yards" in the underlying zone classification as described in Sections 18.64.120, 18.64.140, 18.64.160, 18.64.180, 18.64.200, [and] 18.64.220. 
Figure 3. Illustration of Various Lot Configurations 
  
Figure 4. Standard Corner Lot 
Standard Corner Lot. A six-foot fence or wall, within the street side, side yard setback on standard corner (see Figure 4) lots may be built if a landscaped setback consisting of a minimum of four feet in width between the right-of-way and the wall is maintained along the entire length of the wall (see Figure 4). 
  
Figure 5. Reversed Corner Lots 
Reversed Corner Lots. A six-foot fence or wall within the street side, side yard setback on a reversed corner (see Figure 5) lot may be constructed, if such fence or wall is set back at least five feet from the right-of-way and the five-foot setback is appropriately landscaped. 
  
Figure 6. Driveway Cut-off Vision Clearance 
Driveway View Clearance. No fence, wall, retaining wall, other structure, or landscaping shall exceed forty-two inches in height within the cut-off area along the driveway and the street right-of-way line. The cut-off area is a triangular area beginning at the intersection of a driveway and the street right-of-way (Point 1), five feet from that point along the street right-of-way (Point 2) and the other point five feet up the driveway (Point 3) (see Figure 6). 
Alley View Clearance. No fence, wall, retaining wall, landscaping or other structure shall exceed forty-two inches in height within the cut-off area along the driveway and the alley. The cut-off area is a triangular area beginning at the intersection of a driveway and the alley, five from that point along the alley (see Figure 6). 
  
b.  Retaining Wall. 
i.  Maximum Height. 
ii.  Lot Above Street Grade. The maximum height of a retaining wall within the street side, side yard on standard corner lots or reversed corner lots is forty-two inches. 
iii.  Lot Below Grade. Retaining walls in the street side, side yard, setback may be constructed up to six feet in height when not visible from the street. 
iv.  Number of Retaining Walls. Additional retaining walls are permitted in the street side, side yard setback on standard and reversed corner lots. If additional retaining walls are necessary in the street side, side yard setback, then additional retaining walls may be constructed above the retaining wall below it, if it is set back a minimum of four feet from the lower retaining wall, with appropriate landscaping in between each retaining wall. 
v.  Fence or Wall Set Above a Retaining Wall. 
(A)  Lot Above Street Grade. A fence or wall in the street side, side yard, setback above a retaining wall may be up to forty-two inches in height, if the fence or wall is setback four feet from the wall below and the setback is appropriately landscaped. 
(B)  Lot Below Street Grade Combination Wall. Any combination of a retaining wall with a perimeter fence on top within the street side, side yard, setback on below street grade lots may be constructed if setback four feet from the street side property line and the overall combination retaining wall and fence does not exceed eight feet high when measured from the lowest finished grade on the property on which the wall is built and no more than six feet high, as measured from the highest finished grade for the perimeter fencing on top of the retaining wall. (see Figure 7) 
Figure 7. Combination Wall Below Adjacent Street Grade 
  
* If a swimming pool is located on the below grade property, refer to Building Code for safety fence minimum height requirement. 
4.  Interior Side Yards. 
a.  Wall, Fence and Retaining Wall. The maximum height of any freestanding wall, fence or retaining wall within the interior side yard setback is six feet, except as provided below for combination walls. In addition, no setback shall be required between walls on different lots that share a common property line. 
b.  Below Grade Combination Walls. When the finished grade of a lot is situated below the finished grade of a contiguous parcel at a higher elevation (and both lots share the same common interior property line), the property owner of the lot with the lower finished grade may construct a single retaining wall or combination retaining and perimeter wall/fence up to a maximum of eight-foot high adjacent to the property line (as measured from the lowest finished grade) if: 
i.  The area of work is located behind the required front yard setback; 
ii.  Any perimeter wall or fence located on top of the retaining wall does not exceed six feet high, as measured from the finished grade of the contiguous lot located at the higher finished grade (see Figure 8). 
Figure 8. Construction of Below Grade Combination Walls 
  
c.  Above Grade Combination Walls. When the finished grade of a lot is situated above the finished grade of a contiguous parcel at a lower elevation and both lots share the same common interior property line, the property owner of the lot with the higher finished grade may construct a maximum six-foot high retaining wall facing the adjoining property at the lower finished grade, as measured from the pad elevation of the lower adjoining property grade. However, the retaining wall shall be constructed with a decorative material consistent with the city-approved retaining wall palette or any other building material(s) deemed acceptable by the director of community development or other applicable approval authority. If desired, a maximum six-foot high perimeter wall or fence may also be constructed immediately behind the retaining wall (at the higher finished grade), without setbacks from the retaining wall (see Figure 9), subject to the other applicable provisions contained within this ordinance. 
d.  Where a perimeter wall/fence is within four feet of a property line where a proposed or existing retaining wall is also placed on the same property, and both walls/fences exceed a combined vertical height of eight feet from the lowest finished grade, the walls/fences shall require design review approval by the approval authority to mitigate any adverse impacts to the lower adjacent property owner related to aesthetics, massing and height. 
Figure 9. Construction of Above Grade Combination Walls 
  
* No separation/setback required between walls on separate parcels. However, if a freestanding perimeter wall/fence is within four feet of the property line that includes an intervening retaining wall built on the same parcel as the freestanding wall and the combined vertical height (face) of the retaining wall and freestanding fence on the same parcel is over eight feet in height as measured from the lowest finished grade or the adjacent parcel, design review approval is required and appropriate mitigation measures applied, as deemed necessary by the approval authority. 
e.  Fences and Walls between Driveways. When adjacent driveways are less than ten feet in width for a single-family residence, or less than twelve feet in width for two units, or less than eighteen feet in width for three or more units, or less than fifteen feet in width when the driveway is over one hundred feet in length or construction of a wall or fence would create a nonconforming driveway width, then fences and walls are not permitted between the driveways, except when located behind the back side of the house where a driveway can be expanded to a conforming width. A six-foot fence or wall between adjacent driveways is permitted, only if the area between each driveway and the interior property line is a minimum of three feet wide, from the front yard setback line to the back wall plane of the house, and those areas between the driveway and the interior property line are appropriately landscaped. 
5.  Rear Yard Setback. 
a.  Wall and Fence. 
i.  Maximum Height. The maximum height of a wall or fence in the rear yard setback is six feet, except as provided below for combination walls. 
ii.  Exception. The maximum height of a wall or fence in the rear yard setback is eight feet, when the adjacent property to the rear is a commercial zone, manufacturing zone, or the Greenway Trail. 
iii.  Minimum Height. Rear yard walls and fences along the Greenway Trail must be a minimum of six feet in height. 
iv.  Setbacks. No setback shall be required between walls on different lots that share a common property line. 
b.  Retaining Wall. 
i.  Maximum Height. The maximum height of a retaining wall within the rear yard setback is six feet, except as provided below for combination walls. 
ii.  Exception. The maximum height of a retaining wall in the rear yard setback is eight feet, when the adjacent property is a commercial zone, manufacturing zone, or the Greenway Trail. 
c.  Combination Walls. 
i.  Except as provided elsewhere within this chapter, above and below grade combination walls may be constructed in the rear yard setback as described above (in Section 18.10.030(D)(4)) for above and below grade combination walls located along interior side yards (see Figure 8 and 9). 
6.  Outside of Yard Setbacks. A fence, wall or retaining wall may be built outside of yard setbacks within the interior of a lot up to six feet in height. If greater than six feet, the approval of a minor conditional use permit shall be required. 
7.  Other. 
a.  Swimming pool fences. Where a fence above a retaining wall is required per Building Code in order to comply with a fence enclosure for a swimming pool, a non-view obscuring fence may be placed on top of the retaining wall at such a height as to comply with pool enclosure requirements, as long as, that portion of retaining wall and fence that exceeds six feet is non-view obscuring. 
b.  Prohibitions. Except as provided for under the City's Vacant Lot Ordinance, chain-link fences are not be permitted within the front or street side, side yards on any residentially zoned lot, provided that educational institutions, churches, and other similar non-profit uses, which have outdoor athletic facilities in such zones may be exempt from such prohibitions and from required height limits provided a conditional use permit is first obtained. The exemption pertains to those areas immediately around the outdoor athletic facility and does not include single-family or multi-family residences with outdoor athletic facilities. 
c.  Exceptions: 
i.  Fences, walls or retaining walls may vary from the sections listed above when a minor variance or variance has been granted in compliance with Sections 18.58.060(D) and 18.52.020, respectively. 
ii.  Landscape planters constructed in the front or street side, side yard up to eighteen inches in height are exempt from this section. 
iii.  When a residential parcel is contiguous to any arterial or collector street, the abutting rear and/or street side yard property line may have a wall constructed on it up to of six feet high. A maximum height of eight feet may be permitted if the wall is setback two feet from the property line and the setback space is appropriately landscaped and irrigated, subject to design review approval. Based on the lot grade and wall location, the approval authority shall consider the physical and visual impact of the wall along the street and its compatibility with the neighborhood. The street facing side of the wall shall to be constructed with a decorative material consistent with the city council approved fence palette or any other building material(s) deemed acceptable by the director of community development or other applicable approval authority. 
d.  Temporary fences constructed on vacant lots. Refer to Section 8.08.026 (Vacant lots) for applicable vacant lot fencing regulations. 
E.  Refuse Storage Areas. Each R-zoned lot shall be provided with facilities for the storage of refuse containers, as follows: 
1.  Location. A refuse storage area shall be placed on the same lot as the dwelling unit(s) it serves. Such area may be located on any portion of a lot where a building or accessory building may be placed; provided that, on properties served by an alley the refuse storage area shall be located within a distance not to exceed five feet of the right-of-way line of the alley. The director of public works or his/her designated representative, may waive the requirement for an on-site refuse storage area when a property is located in an automated refuse collection area and is served by off-site containers. 
2.  Size. Refuse storage areas shall comply with the following size requirements: 
a.  For R-E, H-R and R-1 lots: Refuse storage areas shall be of adequate size for the temporary storage of refuse originating on the lot. 
b.  For R-2, R-3 and R-4 lots: Refuse storage areas shall have a minimum area of thirty square feet, with minimum interior dimensions of five feet by six feet. The public works director or his/her designated representative, may require greater or lesser dimensions, where it is determined that such adjustments will increase the efficiency of solid waste disposal operations. 
3.  Design. Refuse storage areas shall be completely enclosed by a view-obscuring wall, not less than six feet in height. The enclosure shall include a closeable, view-obscuring gate, with a minimum five-foot wide unobstructed access point. On properties served by an alley, the gate shall be located adjacent to the alley to accommodate refuse collection. Such walled enclosure shall be finished to match the color and facade material of the building it serves and shall incorporate landscape screening when possible. 
4.  Maintenance. The property owner shall ensure that all refuse storage areas are regularly cleaned and maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. 
5.  Director. The public works director or his/her designated representative, shall approve the specific locations of refuse storage areas to ensure that they are conveniently adjacent to the units served, and placed to facilitate efficient collection of refuse. When located in an automated refuse collection area, the director of public works or his/her authorized representative, may allow or require the removal, modification or relocation of existing refuse storage areas that do not meet the minimum location, size, and/or design requirements necessary for automated service. 
F.  Use of Dwellings. No single-family dwelling nor any dwelling unit shall be used or occupied except by a family, and not to exceed: 
1.  Two domestic servants, employed as such in dwelling units; or 
2.  Two paying boarders; however boarding or rooming houses shall not be permitted in residential zones, except as may be permitted and provided for in Chapter 18.52 of this code. 
G.  Design Standards. In order to preserve the architectural integrity of the city's residential neighborhoods and the integrity of individual structures, prevent deterioration of older neighborhoods, ensure that residential design is based on the general architectural character of the neighborhood, and to accomplish the city's objectives of quality development; each residential development shall comply with the design standards set forth in this subsection, the community design ordinance and any applicable guidelines. 
1.  General. To accomplish the city's objective of quality development, each development project must be of a good project design and the following factors must be considered in the context of the neighborhood character: 
— Height 
— Mass 
— Architectural style 
— Setbacks 
— Site and setting 
— Rhythm of spacing 
— Density and intensity 
— Roof shapes 
— Bulk 
— Scale 
— Material 
— Landscaping 
— Proportion of openings 
— Location of parking 
— Porches and entryways 
— Accessory structures 
a.  The following standards shall apply to all residential development: 
i.  Exterior Siding. Each residential development and additions thereto shall have exterior sidings of wood, stucco, masonry, or other approved materials which are formed and finished to give the appearance of such materials, provided; 
(A)  Metal siding shall be prohibited; and 
(B)  New Construction. New residential developments shall have an architectural style and siding material which is appropriate to and compatible with the character of the structures on the street which make up the block within which such dwellings are proposed to be constructed. 
(C)  Accessory Structures. Exterior siding on accessory structures shall be the same as the siding used on the structure to which the accessory structure is related. 
(D)  Additions and Exterior Remodeling. Siding on additions and remodeling shall be the same as the siding material used on the structure proposed to be added to or remodeled, or a combination of materials appropriate to the architectural style of the building and the character of the neighborhood. 
(E)  Replacement of Existing Siding. If the existing siding is in need of replacement or the original material has been removed, replacement material shall have a similar appearance to the material used as original siding on structures of the same or similar architectural style of the building and the character of the neighborhood. 
(F)  Architectural treatments utilized on the front and street side elevations shall be continued on to interior property line side elevations. 
ii.  Roofing Material. Each residential development shall have a roof constructed of wood shake, shingle, asphalt composition, fiberglass shingle, crushed rock, tile or other approved materials appropriate to the architectural style of the building, provided: 
(A)  Metal roofing shall be prohibited, except that which is formed and finished to represent wood shake or tile, or architecturally integrated into the design of the building, and excepting metal patio covers, when located on the rear of the building and more than fifty feet from the street. 
(B)  New built-up composition roofs are prohibited unless screened from view of the public street by a parapet wall or other approved feature, and excepting additions to existing structures with built-up composition roofs. 
(C)  The roof on accessory structures shall have the same roof design and materials used on the structure to which the accessory structure is related. 
iii.  Eave Overhang. The roof of each residential development shall have an eave overhang appropriate to the architectural style of the buildings, or shall have a parapet extending above roof level a minimum of one foot, provided: 
(A)  Additions to existing buildings shall maintain the same eave overhang as the existing structure; and 
(B)  Detached accessory structures shall maintain the same overhang as the principal structure. 
iv.  Mechanical Equipment. All heating, ventilation and air-conditioning equipment, including but not limited to condensers, compressors, vents, ducts and conduits and water holding tanks associated with solar panels, shall comply with the following: 
(A)  All such equipment shall be completely enclosed and/or architecturally screened from view from adjacent properties and the public right-of-way. 
(B)  All such equipment shall be screened by an enclosure designed as an integral part of the building, which is consistent with the architecture of the building or by appropriate landscaping. 
(C)  Heating, ventilation and air-conditioning equipment shall not be located on the roof of a building, except in new developments wherein such equipment, if located on a roof, is recessed into the roof structure or placed behind parapet walls of adequate height to meet the requirement of subsection (G)(a)(iv)(B) of this section. 
v.  Utilities. Electrical service panels, conduits, transformers, gas meters, backflow prevention valves, fire sprinkler valves, water control valves and landscape irrigation equipment shall be screened, to the greatest extent possible, from view from streets or common areas consistent with the requirements of utility companies and the fire department, for access to the facilities for service and reading of the meters, provided: 
(A)  New construction must utilize flush mounted electrical service panels, set into the wall between the studs, painted to match the adjacent surface and located on side or rear walls, unless approved on the front as part of the overall design of the project and if the front is the only location where the meter can be located. 
(B)  Replacement of existing electrical service panels which utilize surface mounted panels attached to the outer surface of the wall, must be painted, including the conduit, to match the adjacent surface. 
2.  R-E and R-1 Zones. In addition to the standards set forth in subsection 1, above, each residential development in the R-E and R-1 zones shall comply with the following standards: 
a.  Minimum Floor Area. 
(1)  Minimum. Each single-family dwelling and foundational mobilehome, except second dwellings, shall have a gross floor area exclusive of garages, decks, patios and breezeways of not less than fifteen percent of the area of the lot area upon which it is or is proposed to be located or eleven hundred feet, whichever is greater, provided that no dwelling shall be required to have a floor area in excess of three thousand square feet; and 
(2)  Maximum. The total floor area of all enclosed useable space, including accessory buildings and enclosed patios, other than the area required, designed, and used for parking of vehicles, shall not exceed forty percent of the area of the lot upon which such buildings are or are proposed to be located; and 
b.  Minimum Width. Each single-family dwelling and foundational mobilehome, except second dwellings, shall have a minimum width of not less than sixty percent of the lot width, provided that no such building shall be required to have a width in excess of fifty-five feet. 
c.  Window Treatments. Window treatments which are architecturally compatible with the project shall be incorporated into the project design. Window treatments should include but not be limited to: architectural window trim, such as: lintels, sills, arches, molds, brackets, bay windows, recessed windows, mullions, and multi-paned windows. Exceptions may be given through the development review process, when the particular architectural style excludes the above requirements. Bare aluminum window casements are prohibited. Aluminum window casements must be either anodized or painted to complement the trim and colors of the structure. 
d.  Landscaping. Not less than sixty percent of the required front yard area shall be planted and maintained with plant material and appropriately irrigated; provided, that the planning director may waive this requirement in order to comply with minimum driveway requirements set forth in Section 18.48.070(D). 
3.  R-2, R-3 and R-4 Zones. In addition to the standards set forth in subsection 1, above, each residential development in the R-2, R-3 and R-4 zones shall comply with the following standards: 
a.  Window Treatments. Window treatments which are architecturally compatible with the project shall be incorporated into the project design. Window treatments should include but not be limited to: architectural window trim, such as: lintels, sills, arches, molds, brackets, bay windows, recessed windows, mullions, and multi-paned windows. Exceptions may be given through the development review process, when the particular architectural style excludes the above requirements. Bare aluminum window casements are prohibited. Aluminum window casements must be either anodized or painted to complement the trim and colors of the structure. 
b.  Entry Door Treatment. Entry doors can be simple or decorated but should balance the entryway to each unit. Doors should have panelled recesses and decorative trim treatment around the door. The entry to each unit shall incorporate a cover over the door to protect residents from inclement weather. Such covers must be integrated into the design of the building and not appear as add-ons. 
c.  Garage Door Treatment. Garage doors shall be decorative and designed to match and complement the principal structure. Garage doors shall be framed by the trim treatment utilized on the principal structure. If metal doors are used, they shall be painted to match, contrast or complement the exterior wall color. 
d.  Utilities. Electrical boxes, gas meters, landscape irrigation equipment, and other utilities visible from public or private streets or common areas shall be appropriately screened architecturally or with landscaping. 
e.  Pavement Treatment. Enriched or decorative pavement, including but not limited to: colored concrete, concrete brick, brick and appropriately located turf block, shall be incorporated into the overall design theme. Pavement treatment shall include, but not be limited to, driveways and walkways. Credit toward the landscaping requirements may be given for exceptional use of treated pavement. 
f.  Stairways. Stairway entrances, including the safety railing, shall be designed as an integral part of the building and designed to screen the view of the stair treads from the street. 
H.  Development Review. Prior to the issuance of a building permit for a residential development, a development review application shall be submitted, reviewed, and approved in accordance with Chapter 18.56 hereof. In the review of the applications for development review, the approving authority shall consider the following: 
1.  No development review application shall be approved for a residential development unless the approving authority, based upon the evidence presented, finds that the factors set forth in subsection (G)(1) of this section have been considered in the design of the project; and the improvements proposed will be compatible as to size, location on the lot, elevations and appearances with existing structures located upon lots within the immediate vicinity of the lot which is the subject of such application; and 
2.  The design of the residential development will be consistent with the purpose and intent of the provisions of this title, the general plan, and applicable city development guidelines. 
I.  Antennas and Flagpoles. Flagpoles and antennas, as permitted pursuant to Section 18.10.020(J), shall be permitted to be constructed and maintained only in compliance with the following: 
1.  Location. Except as expressly hereinafter permitted, no flagpole or antenna may be located in a required yard area nor in an area of a lot between a front lot line of that lot and a dwelling unit located thereon; a flagpole, not in excess of twenty-five feet in height, nor a dimension of more than four inches, may be located in a required front yard area; provided, that the same shall not be placed closer than ten feet of any lot line; and 
2.  Height. No flagpole or antenna shall have a height in excess of that permitted by the underlying zone classification for buildings and structures; and 
3.  Bulk. No antenna shall have a horizontal dimension in excess of twelve feet; and 
4.  Bracing. All flagpoles and antennas shall be self-supporting and shall have no external guys or braces. 
J.  Accessory Structures. Accessory structures shall be subject to the following: 
1.  Accessory structures with habitable space, as defined by the Uniform Building Code, or which have bathing facilities, are considered accessory living area and subject to the requirements of subsection (H) of this section; and 
2.  Accessory structures in excess of one story in height are prohibited unless a minor conditional use permit has first been approved therefor; and 
3.  The second floor area of a two-story accessory building shall not exceed seventy-five percent of the ground floor area of the accessory structure; and 
4.  The entry to accessory structures buildings other than structures designed exclusively as garages shall face the principal dwelling on the lot; and 
5.  Stairway access to the second floor shall be interior. 
(Ord. 2897 § 8, 2008; Ord. 2901 § 1, 2007; Ord. 2839 § 13, 2004: Ord. 2838 § 13, 2004: Ord. 2824 § 7 (part), 2003; Ord. 2792 § 2, 2001; Ord. 2765 § 2 (part), 2000; Ord. 2755 § 2 (part), 1999; Ord. 2746 § 2, 1999; Ord. 2738 § 4, 1998; Ord. 2712 § 1 (H), (I), (L)—(N), 1997; Ord. 2690 § 2, 1996; Ord. 2632 § 1(A), 1994; Ord. 2610 § 1(B—F), 1993; Ord. 2580 §§ 2, 3, 1992; Ord. 2577 § 33, 1992; Ord. 2518 § 2, 1990; Ord. 2441 § 1, 1988; Ord. 2416 § 2, 1987: Ord. 2392 § 2(a), 1986; Ord. 2345 § 2, 1985; Ord. 2337 § 1, 1984; Ord. 2318 § 1(c), 1983; prior code § 9122) 
(Ord. No. 2932, § 1, 8-11-09; Ord. No. 2967, § 1, 4-12-11; Ord. No. 3054 , § 2, 8-9-16)  
18.10.040 - Optional development standards. 
Optional development standards, when allowed in this chapter, are intended to provide better quality of design than could be achieved through the use of the basic development standards and design guidelines indicated in Sections 18.20.020, 18.20.030, 18.22.020, 18.22.030, 18.48.070(C), 18.48.070(D), 18.48.070(M) and 18.76.030(A) and Division VI. Optional standards allow the use of more creative design, while maintaining the quality of development and the character of the adjacent and surrounding neighborhood. This section is not to be construed as a substitute for the variance procedure detailed in Chapter 18.52. The following optional development standards may be employed: 
A.  A development review application may be approved, utilizing optional development standards, notwithstanding any provision of this title to the contrary, and to the exclusion of the zoning regulations applicable to the lot by reason of its underlying zone classification, provided: 
1.  That the approval is consistent with the public peace, health, safety and general welfare; and 
2.  That the development proposed is consistent with the city's general plan and any applicable specific plan relating to the areas included within such plan; and 
3.  That the development will be in substantial compliance with the purpose and intent of the zoning regulations; and 
4.  The approving body or zoning administrator shall make a specific finding as a condition of approval that the optional standards being approved shall increase the quality of the project by achieving greater than minimum standard requirements provided by this code. 
(Ord. 2518 § 3, 1990)  
18.10.050 - Minimum residential density. 
The provisions within the general plan pertaining to minimum density within the R-2, R-3, and R-4 residential zones may be waived or modified by the planning commission when it can be demonstrated that the minimum density requirements cannot be provided because of unusual circumstances associated with the property due to one or more of the following conditions: 
A.  The topography of the property cannot be altered in a practical manner to accommodate the minimum density requirement. 
B.  The minimum density cannot be physically developed on the project site without the approval of a variance because the existing property does not comply with the city's minimum required lot size, depth and/or width requirements. 
C.  The new construction would necessitate the removal or significant alteration of existing on-site structures and/or cannot be physically integrated onto the existing property without the approval of a variance or deviation from Health and Safety Codes. 
D.  The property is eligible for or listed on a local, state or national historic register or is a contributing resource within an historic district and the minimum density requirements would adversely impact the historic setting, structure(s) or feature(s) of the property in such a manner as to adversely diminish the site's historic significance or value. 
E.  The property has one or more significant easement(s) on the property that cannot be relocated, modified or abandoned and therefore reduces the functional building area on the property to develop residential dwelling units. 
(Ord. 2873 § 1, 2006)  
18.10.060 - Minimum dwelling unit square footage. 
Residential dwelling units located in any "R" (residential) referenced zoning classification or specific plan (unless identified otherwise within the development standards of an adopted specific plan) shall comply with the following standards: 
A.  All detached, single-family, dwelling units shall consist of a minimum of one thousand two hundred square feet. 
1.  The minimum required square footage shall not include porches, balconies/decks, garages, storage rooms or other such accessory structures or architectural features that are attached or detached from the dwelling unit. 
B.  All attached or semi-detached residential dwelling unit(s) located in an apartment, townhome, condominium or other multi-family residential or mixed-use development shall consist of the following minimum square footage: 
Minimum Dwelling Unit
Square Footage Schedule
Unit Type 	Minimum Size 
Senior Housing Unit 	  450 square feet 
Studio Unit 	   600 square feet 
1 Bedroom Unit 	  750 square feet 
2 Bedroom Unit 	1,000 square feet 
3 Bedroom Unit 	1,250 square feet 
4 Bedroom Unit 	1,500 square feet 
5 Bedroom Unit or Greater 	1,500 square feet plus an additional 250 square feet for each additional bedroom with more than four bedrooms within the same dwelling unit. 
 
1.  The minimum required dwelling square footage shall not include porches, balconies/decks, garages, storage rooms, or other such accessory structures or architectural features attached or detached from an individual dwelling unit. 
C.  Any accessory dwelling unit located in the R-E, and R-1 zone, including multi-family residentially zoned properties, shall be subject to the standards in Section 18.10.020 (I) - Accessory Dwelling Units. 
D.  No existing residential dwelling unit that was legally constructed prior to the enactment of this ordinance [Ordinance No. 2940] shall be deemed nonconforming solely because it fails to comply with the minimum dwelling unit square footage provisions contained in this chapter. If an existing residential dwelling is partially or totally destroyed by fire or other natural disaster, it may be reconstructed to its original square footage, even if it does not meet the minimum dwelling unit square footage provisions contained in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2940, § 1, 12-8-09; Ord. No. 3068 , § 5, 6-13-17)  
Chapter 18.11 - INCLUSIONARY HOUSING REQUIREMENTS 
 
18.11.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter establishes standards and procedures to encourage the development of housing that is affordable to a range of households with varying income levels. The purpose of this chapter is to encourage the development and availability of affordable housing by ensuring that the addition of affordable housing units to the city's housing stock is in proportion with the overall increase in new housing units. 
(Ord. 2910 § 1 (part), 2008)  
18.11.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
"Adjusted for household size appropriate for the unit" means a household of one person in the case of a studio unit, two persons in the case of a one-bedroom unit, three persons in the case of a two-bedroom unit, four persons in the case of a three-bedroom unit, and five persons in the case of a four-bedroom unit. 
"Affordable housing cost" means the total housing costs paid by a qualifying household, which shall not exceed the fraction of gross income specified, as follows, in accordance with Sections 50052.5 and 50053 of the Health and Safety Code: 
A.  Very Low-Income Households. Thirty percent of the income of a household earning fifty percent of the Los Angeles County median income adjusted for family size appropriate for the unit. 
B.  Low-Income Households. Thirty percent of the income of a household earning seventy percent of the Los Angeles County median income for for-sale units, and thirty percent of the income of a household earning sixty percent of the Los Angeles County median income for rental units, adjusted in either case for family size appropriate for the unit. 
C.  Moderate Income Households. Thirty-five percent of the income of a household earning one hundred ten percent of the Los Angeles County median income for for-sale units, and thirty percent of the income of a household earning one hundred ten percent of the Los Angeles County median income for rental units, adjusted in either case for family size appropriate for the unit. 
D.  In the event of a conflict between the fractions specified in this definition and those found in Sections 50052.5 and 50053 of the Health and Safety Code, the fractions specified by state law shall control. 
"Developer" means any association, corporation, firm, joint venture, partnership, person, or any entity or combination of entities, which seeks city approval for all or part of a residential project. 
"Director" means the director of the city of Whittier department of community development or his or her designee. 
"Inclusionary unit" means a dwelling unit that will be offered for sale or rent to low or moderate-income households, at an affordable housing cost, in compliance with this chapter. 
"Low-income households" means "lower income households" as that term is defined by Section 50079.5 of the Health and Safety Code. 
"Low-income units, moderate-income units, and very low-income units" means inclusionary units restricted to occupancy by low, moderate, or very low-income households, respectively, at an affordable housing cost. 
"Market rate units" means dwelling units in a residential project that are not inclusionary units. 
"Moderate-income households" means "persons and families of low or moderate income" as that term is defined by Section 50093 of the Health and Safety Code. 
"Regulations" means the regulations adopted by the city council in compliance with Section 18.11.030 for the implementation and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. 
"Regulatory agreement" means an agreement entered into between the Whittier redevelopment agency and a developer by which the developer covenants to keep certain housing units at an affordable housing cost for a specified period of time. 
"Residential project" means either a project for which a tentative map is required by Section 17.04.070 of the Whittier Municipal Code, or any development project that includes apartments. 
"Total housing costs" means the total monthly or annual recurring expenses required of a household to obtain shelter. For a rental unit, total housing costs shall include the monthly rent payment and utilities. For an ownership unit, total housing costs shall include the mortgage payment (principal and interest), homeowners' association dues, mortgage insurance, taxes, utilities, and any other related assessments. 
"Very low-income households" means "very low income households" as that term is defined by Section 50105 of the Health and Safety Code. 
(Ord. 2910 § 1 (part), 2008)  
18.11.030 - Additional regulations. 
The council may by resolution establish additional regulations for the implementation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2910 § 1 (part), 2008)  
18.11.040 - Inclusionary unit requirements. 
The requirements of this chapter shall apply to any residential project that is comprised of or will result in seven or more dwelling units. For these purposes, any combination of two or more apartment houses shall be considered a single residential project if such apartment houses: (i) will be under the control and management of the same owner, operator, management company, or licensee, or any affiliate of any of them; (ii) are issued certificates of occupancy within one-year of each other; and (iii) are located within five hundred feet of each other. 
A.  Units for Sale. If the residential project consists of units for sale, then a minimum of fifteen-percent of the total number of units in the project shall be sold to moderate-income households. 
B.  Rental Units. If the residential project consists of rental units, then either: 
1.  A minimum of twelve percent of the units shall be rented to moderate-income households and three percent of the units rented to low-income households; or 
2.  A minimum of seven and one-half percent of the units shall be rented to very-low income households. 
C.  Allowable Credits. The inclusionary unit requirements of this section may be reduced as follows: 
1.  Very Low-Income Units in Lieu of Low-Income Units. If very low-income units are provided in lieu of the required low-income units, then the project shall receive a credit of one and one-half affordable units for each unit actually provided. 
2.  Very Low-Income Units in Lieu of Moderate-Income Units. If very low-income units are provided in lieu of required moderate-income units, then the project shall receive a credit of two units for each unit actually provided. 
3.  Low-Income Units in Lieu of Moderate-Income Units. If low-income units are provided in lieu of required moderate-income units, then the project shall receive a credit of one and one-half units for each unit actually provided. 
D.  Rounding of Quantities in Calculations. In calculating the required number of inclusionary units, fractional units of 0.75 or above shall be rounded-up to a whole unit if the residential project consists of less than twenty units; and fractional units of 0.50 or above shall be rounded-up to a whole unit if the project consists of twenty-one units or more. 
E.  Displacement of Existing Inclusionary Units. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any project subject to this chapter that results in the displacement of very low, low, and/or moderate income household(s) shall be required to provide on-site inclusionary units as required by this section. 
F.  The requirements of this chapter shall apply to all developers and their agents, successors-in-interest, and assigns proposing a residential project within the scope of subsection A of this section. All inclusionary units required by this chapter shall be sold or rented in compliance with this chapter and the city's regulations for the implementation of this chapter. 
G.  Exempt Projects. The following are exempt from the requirements of this chapter: 
1.  Residential project for which a development application has been deemed complete on or before the effective date of this chapter; 
2.  Residential projects subject to any development agreement that expressly provides for an exclusion to this chapter or provides for a different amount of inclusionary units from that specified by this chapter; and 
3.  Residential projects for which the Whittier redevelopment agency has executed a regulatory agreement, provided that the regulatory agreement is effective at the time the residential project would otherwise be required to comply with the requirements of this chapter, and there is no uncured breach of the regulatory agreement before issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the project. 
(Ord. 2910 § 1 (part), 2008)  
18.11.050 - Alternatives to units within project. 
The primary means of complying with the requirements of this chapter shall be the provision of on-site inclusionary units in accordance with Section 18.11.040. A developer may only satisfy the requirements of this chapter by means of an alternative to on-site inclusionary units in accordance with the requirements and procedures set forth in this section. 
A.  Off-site Units. Upon application by the developer and at the discretion of the city council, a developer may satisfy the inclusionary unit requirements for a project, in whole or in part, by any combination of the following: 
1.  Constructing or substantially rehabilitating the required number of units at an off-site location within the city. For purposes of providing off-site units, "substantially rehabilitating" means rehabilitating a dwelling unit that has substantial building and/or other code violations, and has been vacant for at least ninety days, such that the unit is returned to the city's housing supply as decent, safe, and sanitary housing, and the cost of the work exceeds twenty-five percent of the market value of the unit after rehabilitation. 
2.  Purchasing affordable housing covenants for units in existing multifamily projects within the city. All such units shall be: (i) reasonably dispersed throughout the multifamily project; (ii) located in an area or areas of the city, as approved by the director; (iii) proportional in the number of bedrooms and location to the market rate units included in the developer's residential project; and (iv) comparable to the market rate units included in the residential project in terms of design, materials, finished quality, and appearance. 
B.  In Lieu Fee. Upon application by the developer and at the discretion of the city council, the developer may satisfy the inclusionary unit requirements for the project, in whole or in part, by payment of a fee in lieu of constructing some or all of the required units. The city council may grant such an application if substantial evidence supports a finding that the cost of providing inclusionary units on-site would substantially exceed the amount of the applicable in-lieu fee. 
1.  Calculation of Fee. The amount of the fees allowed by this section shall be calculated in accordance with the methodology set forth in the regulations adopted for the implementation of this chapter. 
2.  Timing of Payment. The developer shall pay any in-lieu fees allowed by this section in full before issuance of a building permit for any portion of the residential project, including any nonresidential portions of a mixed-use development. 
3.  Housing Trust Fund. Fees collected in compliance with this section shall be deposited in the affordable housing trust fund. 
(Ord. 2910 § 1 (part), 2008)  
18.11.060 - Housing plan and housing agreement required. 
A.  Submittal and Execution. The developer shall comply with the following requirements at the times and in compliance with the standards and procedures in the city's regulations for the implementation of this chapter: 
1.  Inclusionary Housing Plan. The developer shall submit an inclusionary housing plan, in a form specified by the director, detailing how the provisions of this chapter will be implemented for the proposed residential project. If the inclusionary housing plan includes alternatives to on-site units, then the inclusionary housing plan shall be subject to the review and approval of the city council. All other inclusionary housing plans shall be subject to the approval of the director, subject to appeal to the city council. Any such appeal shall be filed within fifteen days of the director's decision. 
2.  Housing Agreement. The developer shall execute and cause to be recorded an inclusionary housing agreement. The inclusionary housing agreement shall be a legally binding agreement between the developer and the city, in a form and substance satisfactory to the director and the city attorney, and containing those provisions necessary to ensure that the requirements of this chapter are satisfied, whether through the provision of inclusionary units or through an approved alternative method. 
B.  Discretionary Approvals. No discretionary approval shall be issued for a residential project subject to this chapter until the developer has submitted an inclusionary housing plan. 
C.  Issuance of Building Permit. No building permit shall be issued for a residential project subject to this chapter unless the director has approved the inclusionary housing plan, and any required inclusionary housing agreement has been recorded. 
D.  Issuance of Certificate of Occupancy. A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued for a residential project subject to this chapter unless the approved inclusionary housing plan has been fully implemented. 
(Ord. 2910 § 1 (part), 2008)  
18.11.070 - Standards. 
A.  Location within project, relationship to noninclusionary units. All inclusionary units shall be: 
1.  Reasonably dispersed throughout the residential project; 
2.  Proportional, in number of bedrooms, and location, to the market rate units; 
3.  Comparable to the market rate units included in the residential project in terms of design, materials, finished quality, and appearance; and 
4.  Permitted the same access to project amenities and recreational facilities, as are market rate units. 
B.  Timing of Construction. All inclusionary units in a residential project shall be constructed concurrent with, or before the construction of the market rate units. If the city approves a phased project, a proportional share of the required inclusionary units shall be provided within each phase of the residential project. 
C.  Units for Sale. 
1.  Time Limit for Inclusionary Restrictions. A unit for sale shall be restricted to the target income level group at the applicable affordable housing cost for a minimum of forty-five years. 
2.  Certification of Purchasers. The developer and all subsequent owners of an inclusionary unit offered for sale shall certify, on a form provided by the city, the income of the purchaser. 
3.  Resale Price Control. In order to maintain the availability of inclusionary units required by this chapter, the resale price of an owner occupied inclusionary unit shall be limited to the lesser of the fair market value of the unit as established by a licensed real estate agent based upon three comparable properties or the restricted resale price. For these purposes, the restricted resale price shall be the greater of either the applicable affordable housing cost or an amount equal to the sum of: 
a.  The purchase price; 
b.  An amount equal to ten percent of any increase in the applicable affordable housing cost since the previous sale of the unit; 
c.  The adjusted amount of any capital improvements for which a building permit has been issued by the city of Whittier and a certification of occupancy or similar final certification has been filed, or other improvements which adds assessed value to the unit; 
d.  Any applicable transaction fee charged by a real estate professional; and 
e.  If the occupant has allowed the unit to deteriorate due to deferred maintenance, the restricted retail price shall be discounted in an amount equal to the costs necessary to bring the unit into conformity with Title 15 of the Whittier Municipal Code. 
4.  Inheritance of Inclusionary Units. Upon the death of an owner of an owner-occupied inclusionary unit, title in the property may transfer to the surviving joint tenant without respect to the income-eligibility of the household. Upon the death of a sole owner or of all owners of an inclusionary unit and the inheritance of the property by one or more nonincome eligible children or stepchildren of the deceased, the property shall be sold to an income eligible household within one year of the time when the deceased's estate is settled. Inheritance of an inclusionary unit by any other nonincome eligible person or persons shall require the sale of the property to an income eligible person as soon as is feasible, but not more than one hundred eighty days after the deceased's estate is settled. 
5.  Forfeiture. If an inclusionary unit for sale is sold for an amount in excess of the resale price controls required by this section, the buyer and the seller shall be jointly and severally liable to the city for the entire purchase price of the unit. Recovered funds shall be deposited into the affordable housing trust funds. Notwithstanding the foregoing, it shall be within the discretion of the city manager to allow the buyer and seller one hundred eighty days to cure any violation of the resale price controls. 
D.  Rental Units. 
1.  Time Limit for Inclusionary Restrictions. A rental unit shall remain restricted to the target income level group at the applicable affordable housing cost for fifty-five years. 
2.  Certification of Renters. The owner of any rental inclusionary units shall certify to the director, on a form provided by the city, the income of the tenant at the time of the initial rental and annually thereafter. 
3.  Forfeiture. Any lessor who leases an inclusionary unit in violation of this chapter shall be required to forfeit to the city all money so obtained. Recovered funds shall be deposited into the affordable housing trust fund. 
E.  The director may require the execution and recording of whatever documents are necessary or helpful to ensure enforcement of this section; including but not limited to: promissory notes, deeds of trust, resale restrictions, rights of first refusal, options to purchase, and/or other documents, which shall be recorded against all inclusionary units. 
F.  General Prohibitions. 
1.  No person shall sell or rent an inclusionary unit at a price or rent in excess of the applicable affordable housing cost placed on the unit in accordance with this chapter. 
2.  No person shall sell or rent an inclusionary unit to a person or persons that do not meet the income restrictions placed on the unit in accordance with this chapter. 
3.  No person shall provide false or materially incomplete information to the city or to a seller or lessor of an inclusionary unit to obtain occupancy of housing for which that person is not eligible. 
G.  Principal Residency Requirement. 
1.  The owner or lessee of an inclusionary unit shall reside in the unit for at least ten out of every twelve months unless actively serving in the United States military. Notwithstanding this requirement, an owner or lessee may live elsewhere for a period up to six months every five years on account of hardships; including, but not limited to, medical reasons, the need to assist family member in crisis or medical need, and relocation for employment purposes. 
2.  No owner or lessee of an inclusionary unit shall lease or sublease, as applicable, an inclusionary unit without the prior permission of the director. 
(Ord. 2910 § 1 (part), 2008)  
18.11.080 - Takings determination. 
A.  Determination of a taking of property without just compensation. In accordance with the procedures provided by this section, a developer may request a determination as to whether the requirements of this chapter, taken together with density bonuses and any concessions or other incentives available under Chapter 18.66, would constitute a taking of property without just compensation under the California or Federal Constitutions. 
1.  If an inclusionary housing plan is subject to the approval of the director, the developer may request the director to make a takings determination within fifteen days of the decision by the director to approve or disapprove the inclusionary housing plan. The developer may appeal the director's takings determination to the city council within fifteen calendar days after the date of the decision in compliance with Section 17.02.080. 
2.  If an inclusionary housing plan is subject to the approval of the city council, the developer may request the city council to make a takings determination at the time it acts to approve or disapprove the inclusionary housing plan. 
B.  Presumption of Facts. In making the taking recommendation or determination, the director or city council, as appropriate, shall presume each of the following facts: 
1.  Application of the inclusionary housing requirement to the residential project; and 
2.  Application and utilization of all density bonuses and incentives available under state and local law; and 
3.  Utilization of the most cost-efficient product type for the inclusionary units that would meet the standards of this chapter; and 
4.  The reasonable availability of external funding. 
C.  Modifications to Reduce Obligations. If it is determined that the application of the provisions of this chapter would be a taking, the inclusionary housing plan shall be modified to reduce the obligations in the inclusionary housing component to the extent, and only to the extent necessary, to avoid a taking. If it is determined that no taking would occur though application of this chapter to the residential project, the requirements of this chapter shall remain applicable. 
(Ord. 2910 § 1 (part), 2008)  
18.11.090 - Enforcement. 
A.  Any violation of this chapter constitutes a misdemeanor. 
B.  Forfeiture of Funds. Any individual who sells or rents an inclusionary unit in violation of this chapter shall be required to forfeit all money so obtained. Recovered funds shall be deposited into the city's affordable housing trust fund. 
C.  Legal Actions. The city may institute any appropriate legal actions or proceedings necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter, including actions: 
1.  To disapprove, revoke, or suspend any permit, including a building permit, certificate of occupancy, or discretionary approval; and 
2.  For injunctive relief or damages. 
D.  Recovery of Costs. In any action to enforce this chapter, or an inclusionary housing agreement recorded hereunder, the city shall be entitled to recover its reasonable attorney's fees and costs. 
(Ord. 2910 § 1 (part), 2008)  
18.11.100 - Affordable housing trust fund. 
There is hereby established a separate fund of the city, to be known as the "Affordable Housing Trust Fund." All monies collected in compliance with Sections 18.11.050(B) (In-lieu fee), 18.11.070(C)(5), 18.11.070(D)(3) (Forfeiture), or 18.11.090 (Enforcement), above, shall be deposited in the affordable housing trust fund. 
(Ord. 2910 § 1 (part), 2008)  
18.11.110 - Administrative fees. 
The council may by resolution establish reasonable fees and deposits for the administration of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2910 § 1 (part), 2008)  
Chapter 18.12 - R-E SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ESTATE ZONE 
 
18.12.010 - Purpose. 
In order to provide for the development of single-family residential estate areas, and to maintain the integrity of existing single-family residential estate areas within the city, the regulations set out in this chapter shall be applicable to all uses of properties classified in zone R-E. 
(Prior code § 9125)  
18.12.020 - Permitted uses. 
No person shall use, nor shall any property owner permit the use of, any property classified in the R-E zone for any principal or accessory use, other than the following: 
A.  Principal Uses. 
1.  One single-family dwelling; 
2.  Those uses expressly permitted pursuant to Section 18.52.030; 
3.  Residential care facilities, as defined in Section 18.06.369 of this code, serving six or fewer persons. 
B.  Accessory Uses. Those accessory uses expressly permitted pursuant to the provisions of this title. 
(Ord. 2897 § 9, 2008)  
18.12.030 - Development standards. 
All uses of property in the R-E zone shall comply with the following development standards: 
A.  Minimum Lot Area. No lot classified in the R-E zone shall be created after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section having a minimum lot area of less than fifteen thousand square feet. 
B.  Minimum Yard Area. Each lot in the R-E zone shall have and maintain front, side and rear yards conforming to the following requirements: 
1.  Front Yards. Each lot in the R-E zone shall maintain a front yard not less than twenty-five feet in depth. 
2.  Side Yards. Each lot in the R-E zone shall maintain the following side yards: 
a.  Interior lots shall maintain side yards adjacent to each side lot line not less than ten feet in width each. 
b.  Each corner lot shall maintain the following side yard requirements: 
i.  On the side lot line which abuts another lot, the side yard shall be not less than ten feet in width, and 
ii.  On the street side, the side yard shall be not less than twenty-five feet in width. 
3.  Rear Yard. Each lot in zone R-E shall maintain a rear yard of not less than ten feet in depth. 
C.  Minimum Lot Width. No interior lot classified in zone R-E shall be created after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section having a minimum lot width of not less than seventy-five feet. Each corner lot created after such effective date shall have a minimum lot width of not less than eighty-five feet. 
D.  Maximum Height Limits. No building or structure located on a lot classified in zone R-E shall have a height in excess of thirty feet. 
E.  Building Bulk. Buildings, including necessary accessory buildings, may cover not to exceed forty percent of the lot area of any lot in an R-E zone. 
(Prior code § 9127)  
Chapter 18.14 - H-R HILLSIDE RESIDENTIAL ZONE 
 
18.14.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the city council in enacting the provisions of this chapter is to provide for a safe method of limited development of hillside areas within the city, as described in this chapter, in a manner which will preserve, to the greatest extent possible, existing environment of the area, including natural terrain features consistent with the general plan. The primary purpose of this chapter is to preserve for future generations the unique heritage of open space, and a natural environment in hillside areas within the city and its sphere of influence. Further, in that regard, should any conflict arise in the application of various provisions of the city's zoning regulations for any hillside area or areas, the planning commission and city council shall give preference to the need to vigorously protect the natural environment of the hillside against change. 
(Prior code § 9165)  
18.14.020 - Applicability. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to those properties designated in this chapter as being included within a "hillside area." For the purposes of this chapter, the phrase "hillside area" means and refers to all real property as is shown on those certain maps attached to the ordinance codified in this section, incorporated herein by reference and entitled, "Hillside and Biological Sensitivity Areas — city of Whittier Zoning Regulations, Division G, Part 4, Chapter 1, Article IX, Whittier Municipal Code, October 23, 1979." The zoning map shall be amended to show the properties which have been classified in the hillside area by adding the zoning designation, on each such property, of "HR." 
(Prior code § 9166)  
18.14.030 - Permitted uses. 
No person shall use, nor shall any property owner permit, the use of any lot classified in zone H-R for any use other than the following: 
A.  Principal Uses. 
1.  One single-family dwelling; 
2.  Recreational facilities for the exclusive use of the residents of a development, designated as such on an approved plan; 
3.  Those uses allowed in zone R-E for which a conditional use permit is required, pursuant to Section 18.52.030; and 
4.  Residential care facilities, as defined in Section 18.06.369 of this code, serving six or fewer persons. 
B.  Accessory Uses. Those accessory uses expressly permitted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 18.10 of this code. 
(Ord. 2897 § 10, 2008)  
18.14.040 - Development plan—Required. 
No building permit shall be issued for any building or structure proposed to be located on any real property classified in the H-R zone unless and until a hillside development plan (in this chapter, "plan"), therefor is first approved in the time and manner set forth in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 9168)  
18.14.050 - Development plan—Compliance. 
Where a plan is approved, no building or structure shall be constructed, erected, located or maintained upon any lot to which such plan applies, unless such building or structure is in compliance with the approved plan. No building permit shall be issued for any building or structure to be located upon any lot as to which such plan applies unless and until the director finds the same to be consistent and compatible with the applicable approved plan. 
(Prior code § 9169)  
18.14.060 - Development plan—Application. 
Where a plan is required pursuant to this chapter, an application for approval of such a plan shall contain the following: 
A.  A map or maps showing the following: 
1.  All known public and private easements adjacent to or on the property which is the subject of the plan; and 
2.  Location of all dumps, fills, sumps, oil, gas and water wells; and 
3.  Proposed size of each lot, including all lot lines as proposed; and 
4.  Approximate size and location of proposed building pads and driveways, including approximate grades of driveways; and 
5.  Cut-and-fill slopes, banks and terraces, and topographic detail to include whole ridges and whole canyons, even if on adjacent properties, including approximate finished elevations of building pads, driveways, property lines and slopes; and 
6.  All existing and proposed drainage systems; and 
7.  Existing landmarks and natural terrain features, and those existing landmarks and natural terrain features which are proposed to be retained; and 
8.  A schematic landscaping plan, including location, type and size of street trees, terraces, parking areas and public areas; and 
9.  All existing and proposed roadways, public or private; and 
10.  All proposed retaining walls and protective fences, including location, height and proposed material; and 
11.  Sight distances (horizontal and vertical) at all streets and driveways; and 
12.  Location of known fault lines; and 
13.  Topographic maps, at a scale of one inch equals one hundred feet or less, shall include contour intervals of not more than five feet, and any trees in excess of three inches in diameter, measured three feet above natural grade. The maps shall show topography before and after proposed grading; the maps shall include, when so required by the director, natural contours in existence before any grading was accomplished. The maps required under this chapter shall be prepared and certified to by a person properly licensed to do land surveying. The maps required by this section, after review and approval by the city, shall be used to determine the density permitted pursuant to subsection C of Section 18.14.080. Such maps shall also be utilized for the purpose of applying the provisions of subsection D of Section 18.14.080; 
B.  A statement containing the following data: 
1.  The type of house for which pads are designed (split-level, slab or cantilever); and 
2.  Dwelling-unit density proposed; and 
3.  Proposed covenants, conditions and restrictions; and 
4.  Available utilities; and 
5.  Architectural style of houses; and 
6.  With the approval of the director, compliance with subdivisions 1 and 2 of this subsection may be deferred until applications for a building permit are made; 
C.  A soils and geologic report prepared by a registered soils engineer and/or registered geologist in the state including any known groundwater conditions (dump site, oil-well site, natural ground, etc.; 
D.  Scale models, showing existing and proposed contours, together with representative buildings. 
(Prior code § 9169.1)  
18.14.070 - Development standards—Applicability. 
The provisions of this title shall apply to all uses, buildings and structures located or constructed in any H-R zone, except as expressly provided to the contrary in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 9169.2)  
18.14.080 - Development standards—Compliance. 
All uses of property within the H-R zone shall comply with the following development standards: 
A.  Compliance with Plan. Each use, building and/or structure shall be constructed, located and thereafter maintained in compliance with the approved plan; and 
B.  Compliance with Regulations. Each use, building and/or structure shall be constructed, located and thereafter maintained in compliance with the regulations set forth in this title, including but not limited to Chapter 18.10; and 
C.  Density Regulations. Property classified in zone H-R may have and maintain not to exceed the number of dwelling units permitted by the following formula. However, under no circumstances may the yield per net acre exceed three units: 
Yield per Net Acre (see also Appendix A of this chapter, "Slope Density Chart"). 
Y = 4.03 - 0.06857 × S) 
"Y" is the maximum number of residential dwelling units per net acre. 
"S" is the average slope of the parcel in percent as established in Section 18.14.080D7. 
"4.03" is where Line A intersects the ordinate line in Appendix A. 
".06857" is the slope of Line A in Appendix A. 
The above formula is based on the natural average percentage of slope for the various parcels as shown on the map referenced in Section 18.14.020. 
D.  Grading. No person shall permit or allow any grading, as that phrase is defined in subdivision 1 of this subsection, upon any property classified in zone H-R, except in compliance with the following: 
1.  For the purposes of this chapter, "grading" means any excavating or filling or combination thereof involving the removal, movement or relocation of dirt by hydraulic or mechanical means, except for that necessary for landscaping or maintenance of yards, unless such work changes the finished contours in a manner which would cause surface water to flow onto adjacent public or private properties. A grading plan therefor has been lawfully issued pursuant to Section 18.14.150 of this chapter; and 
2.  All graded slopes are contoured and blended to harmonize with natural slopes; and 
3.  Each building and structure is designed to fit, as closely as possible, the natural landform, through the use of split-level house designs and other similar techniques; and 
4.  The maximum vertical height of cuts or fills, exposed or retained by walls, from toe to top, shall not exceed twenty feet, except this provision shall not apply to slopes created by grading for streets, as specifically approved on a plan. However, the intent of minimizing manmade slopes shall be the guiding factor in creating streets; and 
5.  The maximum steepness of cuts and fills shall not exceed 2:1; and 
6.  Building sites shall not be pregraded until specific house-site plans and elevations have been approved for each individual site; and 
7.  Average Slope. 
a.  If the "average slope" of a property, as defined in this chapter, is between one percent and fifty percent, the following schedule shall be utilized to determine the maximum percentages of the ground surfaces of the site that may be graded as approved as part of the plan. All sloping areas of the site which are fifty percent or greater shall not be graded except to correct previous grading, landslide or unstable soil areas, and therefore shall not be included for the purpose of applying the following slope averaging formula to establish which areas may be graded. In no event may the area of a slope which was fifty percent or greater, on the date the application was submitted, be built upon even if these areas have had corrective grading which results in slopes less than fifty percent, except that the city council may allow grading for streets in such an area, but only if it finds that such streets are necessary for primary access to a developable area. 
Slope Average Formula 
Where the average percent of the natural slope (exclusive of slopes fifty percent or greater) of the land is: 	The maximum percent of the site which may be graded (this includes grading for streets) is: 
1.0% to 14.9% 	80% 
15.0 to 17.4 	70 
17.5 to 19.9 	66 
20.0 to 22.4 	60 
22.5 to 24.9 	55 
25.0 to 27.4 	50 
27.5 to 29.9 	45 
30.0 to 32.4 	40 
32.5 to 34.9 	35 
35.0 to 37.4 	30 
37.5 to 39.9 	25 
40.0 to 42.4 	20 
42.5 to 44.9 	15 
45.0 to 47.4 	10 
47.5 to 49.9 	5 
50.0 and over 	(No grading except as provided expressly in this chapter) 
 
b.  The "average slope" of a parcel of land or any portion thereof shall be computed by applying the following formula to the natural slope of the land, before any grading is commenced. For the purpose of establishing density yield for any given parcel as referenced in subsection C of this section, the formula comprising Appendix A, entitled Slope Density Chart, shall be applied to the entire parcel being considered for development. For the purpose of determining which areas of the site may be graded, the following formula shall be applied only to those portions of the site with less than a fifty-percent slope. 
S = 0.00229 IL 
A 
Where: 	S 	= 	Average percent slope 
	I 	= 	Contour interval, in feet 
	L 	= 	Summation of length of all contours, in fee 
	A 	= 	Area of land being considered, in acres 
 
c.  "Natural slope" means areas which have not been previously significantly graded, or where there is no landslide activity. 
E.  Potential Hazard Areas. No building or structure shall be located on property which is within any area described on the map referred to in Section 18.14.020 as a "potential hazard area," unless a competent geologic report unequivocally shows that the proposed placement of the specific buildings and/or structures can be safely accomplished. 
F.  Natural Features. Each applicant submitting the plan shall specifically describe thereon all of the property proposed for development which is included within a "major ridge line," or within a "major flora and fauna area." The delineation shall be based upon the designation of such "major ridge lines" and/or "major flora and fauna areas," as referred to in the map referenced in Section 18.14.020. No building or structure shall be located, constructed or maintained on any property designated as the site of a "major ridge line," or a "major flora and fauna area" on an approved plan, except that streets, ways and emergency vehicular access routes may, if necessary for primary access to developable areas, be located thereon so long as the city council finds that the location of any such facilities will not cause biological damage to those areas, or any other area necessary to the continued survival of plant and animal population in those areas. 
1.  Those areas shown as "moderate sensitivity" on the map referred to in Section 18.14.020, labeled as "biological sensitivity," shall be given special consideration so as to retain these areas to the maximum extent possible. Consideration shall be given and findings made as to the relationship between all biological and wildlife corridor areas, major ridge lines, and the proposed development during approval of a plan. 
2.  Since it is required that even ridge lines not specified as major ridge lines in this subsection may be aesthetically important and warrant protection, specific development guidelines for all such ridge lines shall be formulated at the hillside-plan level of development based upon the specific ridge line and the type and extent of individual development. 
3.  With respect to hillside areas proposed for development in the future, and for which major ridge lines and major flora and fauna areas have not yet been designated, the planning commission and city council shall utilize criteria for making such designations which afford environmental protection to at least the same extent as that now provided in areas for which such designations are made in this subsection. 
G.  Fire Protection. Because all of the properties classified within the H-R zone are in areas designated as high fire-risk areas, the following fire protection measures shall be observed and maintained for each dwelling unit: 
1.  Each habitable structure shall be provided with fire-retardant roof covering consistent with the provisions of the city's building regulations; and 
2.  Around each habitable structure, there shall be an area cleared of native brush to a minimum twenty-foot radius from the structure. Such area shall be replanted with perennial grasses or other fire-resistant plants or ground cover and continually maintained, and shall be provided with automatic sprinkler systems; and 
3.  As determined by the fire chief, all brush shall be removed and cleared within twenty feet of each side of every roadway. This includes all flammable vegetation or other combustible growth. This provision shall not apply, however, to single specimen trees, ornamental shrubbery, and cultivated ground cover, such as grass, ivy, succulents, or other similar plants used as ground cover, provided they do not form a means of readily transmitting fire. 
H.  Erosion Control. To prevent damage by reason of erosion of land, the following standards shall be observed in all H-R zones: 
1.  All manufactured slopes shall be planted or otherwise protected from the effects of storm- runoff erosion, in a manner approved by the director of parks, within thirty days of the completion of the grading. Planting shall be designed to blend the slope in with the surrounding terrain and development; and 
2.  Permanent irrigation systems shall be provided to insure the proper maintenance of the planted areas; and 
3.  Each plan shall provide a suitable method for insuring compliance with landscaping and irrigation plans, which shall be approved as a part of such plan for all manufactured slopes and recreation areas. 
I.  Off-Street Parking. Each residential unit located within the H-R zone shall be provided, permanently, with two off-street parking spaces, constructed and maintained in accordance with the parking development standards set forth in Chapter 18.48. In addition, there shall be provided one additional off-street parking space per dwelling unit located within a minimum of one hundred fifty feet from the unit served thereby. 
(Prior code § 9169.3)  
18.14.090 - Application—Fees. 
Applications for plans shall be filed with the director, and shall consist of the following: 
A.  The material required pursuant to Section 18.14.060; and 
B.  Proof of ownership of property, or the written authorization from the owner permitting such filing; and 
C.  Such other matter as the applicant or director may deem appropriate and material to the proposal. A filing and processing fee shall be paid at the time of the filing of the application, in an amount as set by resolution of the council. 
(Prior code § 9169.4)  
18.14.100 - Application—Processing. 
Applications, when filed with the director, shall be submitted to the engineering, police, water, fire and building departments, and any other affected city, county or state departments for comments and recommendations. All such staff reports, including the planning department report, shall be submitted to the commission and city council for their consideration. 
(Prior code § 9169.5)  
18.14.110 - Application—Hearing—Approval or denial. 
A.  At least ten days in advance of the time set for consideration by the commission, the director shall give written notice of the time and place of such hearing to the applicant, and to all persons owning property within three hundred feet of the exterior boundaries of the property involved in the proposed plan. If the commission finds that the plan as submitted: 
1.  Is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter; and 
2.  Is consistent with the subdivision and zoning regulations and the general plan; and 
3.  Is compatible with present and future development of the property within the immediate vicinity; it shall recommend to the city council approval of the plan. The commission may also recommend conditions to be imposed upon such approval, if it deems the same appropriate. If the commission finds, as a result of its consideration of the plan, that the same does not comply with subdivisions A1, A2 or A3 of this section, it shall deny the plan. 
B.  In cases of denial, the commission's action shall be final and conclusive, unless the applicant appeals the same to the city council by filing a written letter of appeal with the city clerk-treasurer, together with a filing and processing fee in an amount set by council resolution, appealing such decision to the city council. Such an appeal shall be filed in the time and manner provided in Section 18.14.120. 
(Prior code § 9169.6)  
18.14.120 - Appeal procedures—Conditions. 
A.  Upon the receipt by the city clerk-treasurer of an appeal in the case of a denial, or a copy of the commission's resolution recommending approval of a plan, the city clerk-treasurer shall set the same for consideration by the council at its next most convenient meeting. The city clerk-treasurer shall give notice in accordance with Section 18.14.110 of the time and place set for hearing thereof by the council. At such time and place the council shall consider the commission's files and all applicable staff reports, and any relevant evidence offered by any person, and determine whether the commission's action should be approved, modified or disapproved. The action of the council shall be based upon Section 18.14.110. 
B.  The council may, in the case of approval of a plan, condition the same in such manner as it deems necessary to insure compliance with the purpose and intent of Chapters 18.10 through 18.22. 
(Prior code § 9169.7)  
18.14.130 - Hearings—Participation by interested persons. 
Hearings on plans before the commission and council shall be conducted so that all interested persons are given a reasonable opportunity to be heard in connection therewith. 
(Prior code § 9169.8)  
18.14.140 - Approved plan—Validity period. 
A.  Duration. A plan approved pursuant to the provisions of Chapters 18.10 through 18.22 shall be valid and in effect for a period of eighteen months after approval thereof of the council. Within said period of time, the proposed development shall be commenced in accordance with said period of time. 
B.  Extension by Director. The director, for good cause, may extend the period of time pursuant to this section, for a reasonable time not to exceed an additional eighteen-month period. 
(Prior code § 9169.9(1))  
18.14.150 - Lot, yard and open-space requirements. 
A.  Lot and Yard Areas. Each approved plan, as to each lot included therein, shall: 
1.  Establish a specific lot area; and 
2.  Establish a specific building site; and 
3.  Establish a specific building height for each building and structure. 
B.  Approved Plans. Each approved plan, as to each lot included therein, may establish such required side, front and/or rear yard areas as may be reasonably required. 
C.  Open Space Ownership and Maintenance. The use and maintenance of those areas covered by a plan which are to remain as undeveloped open spaces, or which are to be used for recreational purposes, shall be governed by appropriate provisions of covenants, conditions and restrictions approved by the city. 
(Prior code § 9169(2)(3))  
18.14.160 - Phased developments. 
As a part of plan approval, the applicant may request that the property be planned and/or developed in increments of not less than one hundred acres. If the council finds that the public interest so requires, it may approve such phased planning and/or development, provided that the plan shall show, as to the entire ownership, a conceptual urban design plan showing proposed major arterial and secondary streets, storm drains, sewer trunklines and such other features as may be required by the director. 
(Prior code § 9169.9(4))  
18.14.170 - Repeal and amendment conditions. 
There shall be no modification of, amendment to, or repeal of any provision or provisions contained in this chapter, except by a vote of the people of the city. 
(Prior code § 9169.10) 
   
Chapter 18.16 - R-1 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE 
Sections: 
 
18.16.010 - Purpose. 
In order to provide for the development of single-family residential areas and to maintain the integrity of existing single-family residential areas within the city, the regulations set forth in this chapter shall be applicable to all uses of properties classified in zone R-1. 
(Prior code § 9130)  
18.16.020 - Permitted uses. 
No person shall use, nor shall any property owner permit the use of, any property classified in the R-1 zone for any principal or accessory use other than the following: 
A.  Principal Uses. 
1.  One single-family dwelling; 
2.  Those uses expressly permitted pursuant to Section 18.52.030; 
3.  Foundational mobilehomes; 
4.  Small family day care homes for eight or fewer children; 
5.  Residential care facilities, as defined in Section 18.06.369 of this code, serving six or fewer persons. 
B.  Accessory Uses. Those accessory uses expressly permitted pursuant to the provisions of this title. 
(Ord. 2897 § 11, 2008)  
18.16.030 - Development standards. 
All uses of property in the R-1 zone shall comply with the following development standards: 
A.  Minimum Lot Area. 
1.  Each lot in the R-1 zone created after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section shall have a minimum lot area of not less than seven thousand square feet, or an area equal to the minimum lot area as described in Section 18.08.050. 
2.  Each lot for which an application for a second dwelling unit is submitted, shall have a minimum lot area not less than the sum of the lot area in subsection A(1) above. 
B.  Minimum Yard Areas. Each lot in the R-1 zone shall have front, side and rear yards conforming to the following requirements: 
1.  Front Yards. Each lot in the R-1 zone shall maintain a front yard of not less than twenty feet in depth, except that the front yard area for a key lot shall be not less than fifteen feet. 
2.  Side Yards. Each lot in the R-1 zone shall maintain the following side yards: 
a.  Interior Lots. Interior lots shall maintain side yards adjacent to each side lot line not less than five feet in width each. 
b.  Corner Lots. Each corner lot shall maintain the following side yard requirements: 
i.  On the side lot line which abuts another lot, the side yard shall be not less than five feet in width, and 
ii.  On the street side, the side yard shall be not less than ten feet in width, 
iii.  Second Dwellings. A second dwelling which has its entrance facing a side property line shall maintain a side yard of not less than ten feet. 
3.  Rear Yards. Each lot in zone R-1 shall maintain a rear yard of not less than five feet in depth. 
C.  Minimum Lot Width. Each interior lot created after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section shall have a lot width of not less than sixty feet. Each corner lot created after such effective date shall have a minimum lot width of not less than sixty-five feet. 
D.  Maximum Heights Limits. No building or structure located on a lot in zone R-1 shall have a height in excess of thirty-five feet; provided, that chimneys and similar architectural features may project above the highest point a maximum of two feet; and provided further, that where existing neighborhoods are predominantly single story in character, the approving authority may limit the height, area and/or placement of second story additions or may prohibit them in order to preserve the architectural integrity of the neighborhood. 
E.  Building Bulk. Buildings, including accessory buildings, may cover not to exceed forty percent of the lot area of any lot in an R-1 zone. 
F.  Exterior Lighting. All exterior lighting operated or maintained in conjunction with any activity or for any purpose on any R-1 zoned lot shall be arranged so as to reflect light away from adjacent property. 
(Ord. 2616 § 2, 1994; Ord. 2610 § 1 (G, H(1)), 1993; Ord. 2318 § 1(d), 1983; prior code § 9132) 
(Ord. No. 2938, § 2, 10-27-09)  
Chapter 18.18 - R-2 LIGHT MULTIPLE RESIDENTIAL ZONE 
 
18.18.010 - Purpose. 
In order to provide for the development of light multiple residential areas and to maintain the integrity of existing light multiple residential areas within the city, the regulations set out in this chapter shall be applicable to all properties classified in zone R-2. 
(Prior code § 9140)  
18.18.020 - Permitted uses. 
No person shall use, nor shall any property owner permit, the use of an R-2-zoned lot for any principal or accessory use other than the following: 
A.  Principal Uses. 
1.  Dwelling units, the number of which shall be one dwelling unit for each three thousand square feet of total lot area; 
2.  Those uses expressly permitted pursuant to Section 18.52.030, for which a conditional use permit is required; 
3.  Those uses permitted in the R-1 zone, except foundational mobilehomes; 
B.  Accessory Uses. Those accessory uses expressly permitted pursuant to the provisions of this title. 
(Ord. 2518 § 4, 1990; prior code § 9141)  
18.18.030 - Development standards. 
All uses of properties in the R-2 zone shall comply with the following development standards: 
A.  Minimum Lot Area. Each lot classified in zone R-2 created after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section shall have a minimum lot area of not less than seven thousand feet. 
B.  Minimum Yard Areas. Each lot in the R-2 zone shall have front, side and rear yards conforming to the following requirements: 
1.  Front Yards. Each lot in the R-2 zone shall maintain a front yard of not less than twenty feet in depth, except that the front yard area for a key lot shall be not less than fifteen feet. 
2.  Side Yards. Each lot in the R-2 zone shall maintain the following side yards: 
a.  Interior Lots. Interior lots shall maintain side yards adjacent to each side lot line not less than five feet in width each. 
b.  Corner Lots. Each corner lot shall maintain the following side yard requirements: 
i.  On the side lot line which abuts another lot, the side yard shall be not less than five feet in width, and 
ii.  On the street side, the required side yard shall be not less than ten feet in width. 
c.  Units Fronting on Side Yards. If the front of one or more dwelling units faces a side yard area, that portion of such side yard area and the front door of the rearmost unit facing on the side yard area shall be of a width not less than ten feet; provided, that any floor above the ground floor may encroach in excess of five feet into such side yard area, if a vertical clearance of not less than ten feet is observed from the ground level of such yard area. 
3.  Rear Yards. Each lot in zone R-2 shall maintain a rear yard of not less than five feet in depth. 
C.  Minimum Lot Width. Each interior lot in zone R-2 created after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section shall have a minimum lot width of not less than sixty feet. Each corner lot created after such effective date shall have a minimum lot width of not less than sixty-five feet. 
D.  Maximum Height Limits. No building or structure located on a lot in zone R-2 shall have a height in excess of thirty-five feet; provided, that chimneys and similar architectural features may project above the highest point a maximum of two feet; and provided further, that where existing neighborhoods are predominantly single story in character, the approving authority may limit the height, area and/or placement of second story additions or may prohibited them in order to preserve the architectural integrity of the neighborhood. 
E.  Open Space. Each lot in a development in the R-2 zone shall have and maintain at least three hundred fifty square feet of open space per unit, provided: 
1.  Private Open Space. Each unit in a development in the R-2 zone shall have and maintain at least two hundred fifty square feet of private usable open space dedicated for the exclusive use of each dwelling unit. Private open space shall be located and maintained immediately adjacent to the unit served, with direct access thereto, from a bedroom, living, dining or family room. 
2.  Location. Not less than one hundred square feet of the private open space for each unit shall be provided on the ground. 
3.  Minimum Dimensions. In order to assure the usability of open space, required open space shall have dimensions of not less than ten feet, except where such open space is contiguous to a required yard or private open space, such minimum dimension may be reduced to five feet. Open space located above the ground shall have minimum dimensions of not less than ten feet by eight feet. 
F.  Landscaping. 
1.  Whenever a driveway is located within a required side yard, and when dwelling units face the yard, a landscaped area at least five feet wide shall be maintained between such driveway and any building on the same lot containing such units. Required walkways may encroach not more than thirty inches into such landscaped area. 
2.  All open areas on R-2-zoned lots, except driveways, parking areas, walkways, utility areas, improved decks, patios, porches or play areas, shall be maintained with appropriate landscaping. 
G.  Drainage. All open areas shall be maintained so as to readily dispose of all storm-runoff water and all surface water. 
H.  Internal Walkways. 
1.  There shall be internal walkways allowing adequate pedestrian access to at least one adjacent public street, the off-street parking areas and buildings containing dwelling units. Such walkways shall be a minimum of thirty inches wide, and shall be improved with a hard, durable surfacing. 
2.  Driveways shall not be utilized in lieu of required internal walkways. 
I.  Outdoor Clothes-drying Yards or Areas. No outdoor clothes-drying area shall be allowed or maintained, unless enclosed with a six-foot-high, view-obscuring wall or fence. 
J.  Exterior Lighting. All exterior lighting operated or maintained in conjunction with any activity or purpose on any R-2-zoned lot shall be arranged so as to reflect the light away from any other adjacent property. 
K.  Fencing. A six-foot-high, view-obscuring fence or wall should be erected and maintained along each lot line of an R-2 zoned lot which separates the same from an R-E zoned or R-1 zoned lot, except within the required front yard area. 
(Ord. 2632 § 1 (B), 1994; Ord. 2610 § 1 (H(2), J), 1993; prior code § 9142)  
Chapter 18.20 - R-3 MEDIUM MULTIPLE RESIDENTIAL ZONE 
 
18.20.010 - Purpose. 
In order to provide for the development of medium multiple residential areas and to maintain the integrity of existing medium multiple residential areas within the city, the regulations set out in this chapter shall be applicable to all properties classified in zone R-3. 
(Prior code § 9150)  
18.20.020 - Permitted uses. 
No person shall use, nor shall any property owner permit the use of, an R-3-zoned lot for any principal or accessory use other than the following: 
A.  Principal Uses. 
1.  Dwelling units, the number of which shall be determined as follows: 
a.  On lots having seven thousand square feet or less of lot area, one dwelling unit for each two thousand fifty square feet of lot area, and 
b.  On lots having more than seven thousand square feet of lot area, one dwelling unit for each one thousand seven hundred fifty square feet of total lot area; 
2.  Those uses expressly permitted pursuant to Section 18.52.030, for which a conditional use permit is required; 
3.  Those uses permitted in the R-2 zone; 
B.  Accessory Uses. Those accessory uses permitted pursuant to the provisions of this title. 
(Ord. 2518 § 5 (part), 1990; prior code § 9151)  
18.20.030 - Development standards. 
All uses of properties in the R-3 zone shall comply with the following development standards: 
A.  Minimum Lot Area. No lot in the R-3 zone created after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section shall have a minimum lot area of less than seven thousand square feet. 
B.  Minimum Yard Areas. Each lot in the R-3 zone shall have front, side and rear yards conforming to the following requirements: 
1.  Front Yards. Each lot in the R-3 zone shall have a front yard of not less than the average of the front building setbacks on the existing buildings within the block where the buildings are located, but shall not be less than fifteen feet in depth; provided, that on corner lots, the setback shall not result in a visual closure of the entrance to the block. The second floor shall have a differential setback from the first floor which will create a single-family character to the front of the structure. 
2.  Side Yards. In the R-3 zone, every lot shall have and maintain side yards adjacent to each side lot line the total of which shall equal not less than thirty percent of the lot width within the front fifty feet of the lot, provided: 
a.  Interior Lot Lines. Side yards on interior lot lines shall be not less than ten percent of the lot width and not less than five feet in width. 
b.  Corner Lots. On the street side, the required side yard shall be not less than ten feet in width. 
c.  Covered Unenclosed Porches. Covered unenclosed porches may encroach five feet into required side yards of ten feet or more in width. 
3.  Rear Yards. Every lot in the R-3 zone shall have a rear yard of not less than five feet. 
C.  Minimum Lot Width. The minimum lot width for R-3-zoned lots created after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be seventy feet. 
D.  Maximum Height Limits. No building or structure located on a lot in zone R-3 shall have a height in excess of thirty-five feet; provided, that chimneys and similar architectural features may project above the highest point a maximum of two feet; and provided further, that where existing neighborhoods are predominantly single story in character, the approving authority may limit the height, area and/or placement of second story additions or may prohibit them in order to preserve the architectural integrity of the neighborhood. 
E.  Open Space. 
1.  Private Open Space. Each unit in a development in the R-3 zone shall have and maintain at least one hundred fifty square feet of private usable open space dedicated for the exclusive use of each dwelling unit. Private open space shall be located and maintained immediately adjacent to the unit served, with direct access thereto, from a bedroom, living, dining or family room. 
2.  Common Open Space. Each lot in a development in the R-3 zone shall have and maintain at least two hundred square feet of common open space per unit, located within a reasonable proximity of most of the units. 
a.  For projects of less than ten units, the common open space shall include a landscaped area with amenities such as barbecues, fire pit, children's play area or family picnic area. 
b.  For projects of ten units or more, a minimum of two of the following recreational facilities shall be provided within the common open space: 
a.  Landscaped area with amenities such as a barbecue or a fire pit; 
b.  Children's play area; 
c.  Family picnic area; 
d.  Swimming pool or spa with cabana or patio cover; 
e.  Recreation room with facilities. 
3.  Minimum Dimensions. In order to assure the usability of open space, required open space shall have minimum dimensions as follows: 
a.  Private open space shall have dimensions of not less than five feet by eight feet. 
b.  Common open space shall have dimensions of not less than ten feet, except where such open space is contiguous to a required yard or private open space, such minimum dimension may be reduced to five feet. 
c.  Not less than one-half of the total required common open space shall be a contiguous area located on the ground. 
F.  Landscaping. 
1.  Whenever a driveway is located within a required side yard, and when the entry to such dwelling units is from said yard, a landscaped area at least five feet wide shall be maintained between such a driveway, and any building on the same lot containing such units. Required walkways may encroach not more than thirty-six inches into such landscaped area. The landscaped area may be reduced to a minimum of two feet and located adjacent to the building when a walkway is located adjacent to a driveway. The walkway shall be differentiated from the driveway by the use of decorative pavement and shall be separated by a concrete curb not less than four inches in height. 
2.  All open areas on R-3 zoned lots including areas between garages, except driveways, parking areas, walkways, utility areas, improved decks, patios, porches or play areas shall be maintained with plant material and appropriately irrigated to city landscape guidelines and standards. All plant material shall be maintained in a healthy and thriving condition, clear of weeds and debris. Plans shall meet all city requirements for submittal, including but not limited to the city landscape guidelines. The city shall maintain the option to require plans to be prepared by a landscape professional, including but not limited to a landscape contractor, landscape architect or landscape designer. 
3.  Landscaping shall be planted at the minimum of one tree for each one thousand five hundred square feet of net lot area with a minimum of twenty percent of the trees at a twenty-four-inch box size; fifty percent of the trees at a fifteen gallon size; and thirty percent at a five gallon size. The approving authority of the development review shall have the authority to reduce these quantities, when substantial amounts of specimen size trees are planted. A credit of two trees may be given for each existing specimen sized tree preserved. 
G.  Drainage. All open areas shall be maintained so as to readily dispose of all storm-runoff water and all surface water. 
H.  Internal Walkways. 
1.  There shall be internal walkways allowing adequate pedestrian access to at least one adjacent public street, the off-street parking areas and buildings containing dwelling units. Such walkways shall be a minimum of thirty-six inches wide and shall be improved with a hard, durable surfacing. 
2.  Driveways shall not be utilized in lieu of required internal walkways. 
I.  Laundry Facilities—Outdoor Clothes-drying Yards or Areas. No outdoor clothes-drying areas shall be allowed or maintained. Accommodations for washers and dryers shall be made within the units or on the site of the development. For three units or less, a minimum of one clothes washer and one clothes dryer shall be provided. For more than three units, two clothes washers and two clothes dryers shall be provided for each eight units. 
J.  Exterior Lighting. All exterior lighting operated or maintained in conjunction with any activity or purpose on any R-3-zoned lot shall be arranged so as to reflect the light away from any other adjacent property. 
K.  Fencing. 
1.  A six-foot high wall shall be erected and maintained in and along each interior lot line of an R-3 (or R-4) zoned lot, except within the required front yard area. 
2.  Within the required front yard fences shall be constructed of nonview-obscuring material. If columns are used to support the fence, they may not exceed forty-two inches in height and may be no wider than eighteen inches and no closer than eight feet, center-to-center and may include a masonry base of not more than twenty-four inches in height. 
L.  Storage. A minimum of two hundred fifty cubic feet of lockable, enclosed storage per unit shall be provided in the garage or carport area; substitutions for the location of the storage may be granted by the approving authority at the time of development review. 
M.  Recreation Vehicle Parking. The parking of boats, trailers, campers and recreation vehicles, other than passenger van conversions, is prohibited except in areas specifically designed for such parking, not including any required parking spaces, driveways or turnaround areas; provided, that such areas shall be fully screened from view of the public street or from an R-E, R-1 or R-2-zoned lot. 
(Ord. 2632 § 1 (C), 1994; Ord. 2610 § 1 (H(3), I, K), 1993; Ord. 2518 § 5 (part), 1990; prior code § 9152)  
Chapter 18.22 - R-4 HEAVY MULTIPLE RESIDENTIAL ZONE 
 
18.22.010 - Purpose. 
In order to provide for the development of heavy multiple residential areas and to maintain the integrity of existing heavy multiple residential areas within the city, the regulations set out in this chapter shall be applicable to all properties classified in zone R-4. 
(Prior code § 9160)  
18.22.020 - Permitted uses. 
No person shall use, nor shall any property owner permit the use of, an R-4-zoned lot for any principal or accessory use other than the following: 
A.  Principal Uses. 
1.  Dwelling units, the number of which shall be determined as follows: 
a.  On lots having seven thousand square feet or less of lot area, one dwelling unit for each two thousand fifty square feet of lot area. If optional development standards are incorporated into the design of the project, the density for the lot may be computed on the basis of one dwelling unit for each one thousand six hundred fifty square feet of lot area. 
b.  On lots having more than seven thousand but less than twenty thousand square feet of lot area, one dwelling unit for each one thousand four hundred square feet of total lot area. If optional development standards are incorporated into the design of the project, the density for the lot may be computed on the basis of one dwelling unit for each one thousand two hundred fifty square feet of lot area; and 
c.  On lots having twenty thousand square feet or more of lot area, one dwelling unit for each one thousand two hundred fifty square feet of total lot area; 
2.  Those uses expressly permitted pursuant to Section 18.52.030 for which a conditional use permit is required; and 
3.  Those uses permitted in the R-3 zone. 
B.  Accessory Uses. Accessory uses are permitted pursuant to the provisions of this title. 
(Ord. 2518 § 6 (part), 1990; prior code § 9161)  
18.22.030 - Development standards. 
All uses of property in the R-4 zone shall comply with the following development standards: 
A.  Minimum Lot Area. No lot in the R-4 zone shall be created after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section having a minimum lot area of less than twenty-one thousand square feet. 
B.  Minimum Yard Areas. 
1.  Front Yards. Each lot in the R-4 zone shall have a front yard setback of not less than the average of the front building setbacks on the existing buildings within the block where the buildings are located, but shall not be less than fifteen feet in depth; provided, that on corner lots, the setback shall not result in a visual closure of the entrance to the block. The second floor shall have a differential setback from the first floor which will create a single-family character to the front of the structure. 
2.  Side Yards. In the R-4 zone, every lot shall have and maintain side yards adjacent to each side lot line the total of which shall equal not less than thirty percent of the lot width within the front fifty feet of the lot, provided: 
a.  Interior Lot Lines. Side yards on interior lot lines shall be not less than ten percent of the lot width and not less than five feet in width. 
b.  Corner Lots. On the street side, the required side yard shall be not less than ten feet in width. 
c.  Covered Unenclosed Porches. Covered unenclosed porches may encroach five feet into required side yards of ten feet or more in width. 
3.  Rear Yards. Every lot in the R-4 zone shall have a rear yard of not less than five feet in depth. 
C.  Minimum Lot Width. The minimum lot width for all R-4-zoned lots created after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section shall be seventy feet. 
D.  Maximum Height Limits. No building or structure located on a lot in zone R-4 shall have a height in excess of thirty-five feet; provided, that chimneys and similar architectural feature may project above the highest point a maximum of two feet; and provided further, that where existing neighborhoods are predominantly single story in character, the approving authority may limit the height, area and/or placement of second story additions or may prohibit them in order to preserve the architectural integrity of the neighborhood. 
E.  Open Space. 
1.  Private Open Space. Each unit in a development in the R-4 zone shall have and maintain at least one hundred fifty square feet of private usable open space dedicated for the exclusive use of each dwelling unit. Private open space shall be located and maintained immediately adjacent to the unit served, with direct access thereto, from a bedroom, living, dining or family room. 
2.  Common Open Space. Each lot in a development in the R-4 zone shall have and maintain at least two hundred square feet of common open space per unit, located within reasonable proximity of most of the units. 
a.  For projects of less than ten units, the common open space shall include a landscaped area with amenities such as barbecues, fire pit, children's play area or family picnic area. 
b.  For projects of ten units or more, a minimum of two of the following recreational facilities shall be provided within the common open space: 
i.  Landscaped area with amenities such as barbecues, fire pit; 
ii.  Children's play area; 
iii.  Family picnic area; 
iv.  Swimming pool or spa with cabana or patio cover; 
v.  Recreation room with facilities. 
F.  Landscaping. 
1.  Whenever a driveway is located within a required side yard, and when the entry to such dwelling units is from said yard, a landscaped area at least five feet wide shall be maintained between such a driveway, and any building on the same lot containing such units. Required walkways may encroach not more than thirty-six inches into such landscaped area. The landscaped area may be reduced to a minimum of two feet and located adjacent to the building when a walkway is located adjacent to a driveway. The walkway shall be differentiated from the driveway by the use of decorative pavement and shall be separated by a concrete curb not less than four inches in height. 
2.  All open areas on R-4-zoned lots including areas between garages, except driveways, parking areas, walkways, utility areas, improved decks, patios, porches or play areas shall be maintained with plant material and appropriately irrigated to city landscape guidelines and standards. All plant material shall be maintained in a healthy and thriving condition, clear of weeds and debris. Plans shall meet all city requirements for submittal, including but not limited to city landscape guidelines. The city shall maintain the option to require plans to be prepared by a landscape professional, including but not limited to a landscape contractor, landscape architect or landscape designer. 
3.  Landscaping shall be planted at the minimum of one tree for each one thousand five hundred square feet of net lot area with a minimum of twenty percent of the trees at a twenty-four-inch box size; fifty percent of the trees at a fifteen gallon size; and thirty percent at a five gallon size. The approving authority of the development review shall have the authority to reduce these quantities, when substantial amounts of specimen size trees are planted. A credit of two trees may be given for each existing specimen sized tree preserved. 
G.  Drainage. All open areas shall be maintained so as to readily dispose of all storm-runoff water and surface water. 
H.  Internal Walkways. 
1.  There shall be internal walkways allowing adequate pedestrian access to at least one adjacent public street, the off-street parking areas and buildings containing dwelling units. Such walkways shall be a minimum of thirty inches wide and shall be improved with a hard, durable surfacing. 
2.  Driveways shall not be utilized in lieu of required internal walkways. 
I.  Outdoor Clothes-drying Yards or Areas. No outdoor clothes-drying area shall be allowed or maintained. 
J.  Exterior Lighting. All exterior lighting operated or maintained in conjunction with any activity or purpose on any R-4-zoned lot shall be arranged so as to reflect the light away from any other adjacent property. 
K.  Fencing. 
1.  A six-foot-high wall shall be erected and maintained in and along each interior lot line of an R-3 (or R-4) zoned lot, except within the required front yard area. 
2.  Within the required front yard fences shall be constructed of nonview-obscuring material. If columns are used to support the fence, the may not exceed forty-two inches in height and may be no wider than eighteen inches and no closer than eight feet, center-to-center and may include a masonry base of not more than twenty-four inches in height. 
L.  Storage. A minimum of two hundred fifty cubic feet of lockable, enclosed storage per unit shall be provided in the garage or carport area; substitution for the location of the storage may be granted by the approving authority at the time of development review. 
M.  Recreation Vehicle Parking. The parking of boats, trailers, campers and recreation vehicles, other than passenger van conversions, is prohibited except in areas specifically designed for such parking, not including any required parking spaces, driveways or turnaround areas; provided, that such areas shall be fully screened from view of the public street or from an R-E, R-1 or R-2-zoned lot. 
(Ord. 2632 § 1 (D), 1994; amended during 2/94 supplement; Ord. 2610 § 1 (H(4), K), 1993; Ord. 2518 § 6 (part), 1990; prior code § 9162)  
18.22.040 - Optional development standards. 
Optional development standards are intended to provide better quality of design than could be achieved through the use of the basic development standards indicated in Section 18.22.030. Optional standards allow the use of more creative design, while maintaining the quality of development and the character of the adjacent and surrounding neighborhood. This section is not to be construed as a substitute for the variance procedure detailed in Chapter 18.52. The following optional development standards may be employed: 
A.  Front Yards. The front yard setback may be equal to an average of fifteen feet with a minimum of ten feet. For corner lots whose side yard is located on a major or minor arterial within the city, the minimum front yard setback shall not be reduced below that which is required by Section 18.22.030B.2.a, b and c. 
B.  Maximum Height Limits. The maximum height limit may be increased to forty feet, but no more than two stories, for architectural features of the proposed building(s) which are indicative of the design character of the immediate surrounding area and neighborhood. 
C.  Street Garage. Two of the required parking spaces may have access taken from the street if: 
1.  Parking spaces are located in a garage; 
2.  Driveway pavement is enriched or decorative; 
3.  Access is not taken from a circulation element road; 
4.  Garage doors are required. 
(Ord. 2518 § 6 (part), 1990)  
18.22.050 - Use of optional development standards. 
A.  A development review application may be approved, utilizing optional development standards, notwithstanding any provision of this title to the contrary, and to the exclusion of the zoning regulations applicable to the lot by reason of its underlying zone classification, provided: 
1.  That the approval is consistent with the public peace, health, safety and general welfare; and 
2.  That the development proposed is consistent with the city's general plan and any applicable specific plan relating to the areas included within such plan; and 
3.  That the development will be in substantial compliance with the purpose and intent of the zoning regulations; and 
4.  The approving body or zoning administrator shall make a specific finding as a condition of approval that the optional standards being approved shall increase the quality of the project by achieving greater than minimum standard requirements provided by the code. 
(Ord. 2518 § 6 (part), 1990)  
Chapter 18.24 - COMMERCIAL ZONES GENERALLY 
 
18.24.010 - Applicability. 
The regulations and development standards set forth in this chapter shall be applicable to, and shall control the installation and utilization of uses located on any C-zoned lot. 
(Prior code § 9170)  
18.24.020 - Accessory uses. 
On the site of an active construction project, the storage of building materials necessary for the construction of the approved project will be permitted as an accessory use. Upon completion of the approved project, the property owner shall have ten calendar days in which to remove all building materials associated with the construction of the approved project and to render the surrounding off-site area clean and free of all trash and debris that was associated with the construction of the approved project. 
(Ord. 2515 § 5, 1990)  
18.24.030 - Limitations on use. 
Every use permitted pursuant to Chapters 18.26 through 18.32 shall comply with the following: 
A.  Uses Within Buildings. All uses shall be conducted totally within a completely enclosed building, except: 
1.  For those uses which are customarily conducted in the open, determined as such, pursuant to Section 18.50.030, and/or 
2.  The outdoor storage of materials if the same is in an area enclosed by a view-obscuring fence or wall, not less than eight feet in height, having a closeable access gate, and/or 
3.  For those uses which are expressly permitted to be conducted in the open by the provisions of Chapters 18.24 through 18.32, and/or 
4.  Reverse vending machines and small recycling collection facilities. Each such facility shall be established only in conjunction with a permitted commercial principal use, and shall be constructed and maintained with durable waterproof and rustproof material; 
B.  Storage. Storage of materials shall be limited to accessory storage of such materials sold or utilized in the conduct of a principal use on the lot; 
C.  Sales and Display Areas. 
1.  Outdoor sale and display areas shall be completely enclosed by a view-obscuring wall of not less than eight feet in height, except the following specifically described outdoor sale or display areas: 
a.  Motor vehicle, trailer and boat sales, 
b.  Service stations, 
c.  Nursery plants and flower sales, 
d.  Similar sales and display areas, determined as such, pursuant to Section 18.50.030; 
2.  All permitted outdoor sales and display and storage areas shall be surfaced and maintained in the manner described in subsections E and G of Section 18.48.070; 
D.  Wholesale Sales, Processing of Materials and Manufacturing. Wholesale sales and the processing of materials exclusively for sale or use shall be allowed only as an accessory use to a permitted principal use on the premises. The manufacture of products shall not be a permitted accessory use except as expressly permitted by the provisions of Chapter 18.32. 
E.  Pool and Billiard Halls. Pool and billiard halls shall be established only in compliance with the following standards: 
1.  All persons wishing to establish a pool or billiard hall within the city must apply for and be granted a conditional use permit for said use, pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 18.52. 
2.  No pool or billiards hall may be located within one thousand feet of another pool or billiards hall nor within six hundred feet of an elementary, secondary or high school; nor within one hundred fifty feet of a lot in the residential zone. 
3.  A minimum separation of six feet shall be maintained between all pool tables and between pool tables and cocktail tables, counters, walls, partitions, immovable barriers or seating areas (excluding moveable stools). 
4.  Pool tables and dining areas shall be separated by a partition of not less than eight feet in height. 
5.  A security plan shall be submitted to the police department for approval at the time the conditional use permit application is submitted. 
6.  Each application for pool or billiard hall shall include a complete description of all aspects of the proposed operation, including but not limited to: hours of operation; number of employees on each shift; proposed interior and exterior improvements, including colors and material samples, interior and exterior architectural renderings; exterior lighting; and signs; in sufficient detail to provide a sense of the quality and character of the establishment. 
7.  Lighting of the exterior of the premises and the parking area shall comply with Section 18.48.070(H) of the zoning regulations. Such lighting shall maintain an illumination level on the ground of not less than 0.5 footcandles along walkways and in the open parking areas and driveways. 
8.  Any form of gambling is prohibited. 
9.  Professional tournaments shall be allowed only upon the approval of the chief of police. 
10.  The operator of a pool or billiard hall must maintain a valid cabaret dance permit pursuant to Chapter 5.24 of the Whittier Municipal Code at all times there is a dance floor within the premises. 
F.  Internet cafés shall be established only in compliance with the following standards: 
1.  All persons wishing to establish an internet cafe within the city must apply for and be granted a conditional use permit for said use. A conditional use permit will be granted for the establishment of an internet cafe if it is determined by the body hearing such an application that the use or activity of the internet cafe will be conducted in accordance with the applicable requirements specified in this section. 
2.  No internet café may be located within one thousand feet of another internet café nor within six hundred feet of an elementary, secondary or high school; nor within one hundred fifty feet of a lot in the residential zone. 
3.  Each application for an internet café shall include a complete description of all aspects of the proposed operation, including but not limited to: hours of operation, number of employees on each shift; proposed interior and exterior improvements, including colors and material samples, interior and exterior architectural renderings; exterior lighting; and signs; in sufficient detail to provide a sense of the quality and character of the establishment. 
4.  Maximum number of computer/devices with online capabilities in any internet café shall not exceed one machine for every fifty square feet of gross floor area. 
5.  All computer terminals/stations within the premises shall be visible and supervised by an adult attendant twenty-one years or older. Said attendant shall be present at all times when any computer stations are being operated and shall ensure that supervision of the patrons on the premises is adequate and no conduct is detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare. 
6.  No person under the age of eighteen years shall be permitted in an internet cafe before three p.m. when any of the following school districts are in session: the Whittier City School District, the South Whittier School District, Los Nietos School District, the East Whittier City School District, and the Fullerton Union High School District, are in nominal session or after ten p.m. on Sunday through Thursday, during normal school sessions. Notice of these hours of restriction for minors shall be posted at the entrance in lettering of at least two inches in size. 
7.  Internet cafes shall not operate between the hours of twelve midnight and six a.m. 
8.  All windows shall be kept clear of window decorations, tint, or curtains that would prevent the interior from being viewed by security or law enforcement personnel from outside the building. 
9.  Establishments with computer stations consisting of twenty-five percent or more of the floor area shall provide a waiting area with seating within the business. The number of chairs shall be determined at one seat for every five computer stations but not less than four. 
10.  External speakers shall be prohibited. 
11.  A security plan shall be submitted to the police department for approval at the time the conditional use permit application is submitted. The security plan shall include, but is not limited to the following: 
a.  Hours of operation. 
b.  Number of employees per shift. 
c.  Number of security personnel, which includes certification. 
d.  Internet cafes with gross floor areas of two thousand square feet or greater, shall provide a licensed uniformed security guard after six p.m. until business closing on Friday, Saturday, and Sunday evenings. Security guards will be responsible for crowd control both on the premises and adjoining parking areas. 
e.  The establishment shall maintain and operate a video surveillance system with recording capability during all business hours. The system shall cover the entire plot of the establishment including entire interior of the premises, exterior of the entrances to and exits from the establishment and the parking lot. The video surveillance system shall be capable of delineating, on playback of the system, the activity and physical features of persons or areas within the premises. Video surveillance tapes shall be kept a minimum of seventy-two hours. The business owner shall permit the city to inspect the video surveillance tapes during business hours. The video surveillance system shall be maintained in good working order. A sign shall be posted inside and at the entrances to the establishment indicating that the premises are under video surveillance. There shall be no video surveillance of images appearing on the customer's computer screens. 
f.  Burglary/alarm system. 
12.  A minimum of one bicycle rack space shall be provided for every three computer stations. Such bicycle parking shall not be located in the public right-of-way, required parking area, or any required walkways. Skateboard locker/storage within the premises shall also be provided. 
13.  Parking shall be provided at minimum, one parking space for every two hundred square feet of floor area, unless the Planning Commission determines otherwise. 
14.  The business owner shall post "No Loitering" signs in front of the business. 
15.  Any form of gambling is prohibited. 
16.  Consumption and/or the sale of alcohol shall be prohibited on the premises. 
17.  Professional tournaments shall be allowed only upon the approval of the chief of police. 
18.  Occupancy shall not exceed that required under the Uniform Building Code and Uniform Fire Code, and the maximum occupancy load shall be posted at the main entrance. 
19.  The business owner shall submit and receive approval of a fire exit plan from the city's fire department. The plan shall address all existing requirements of the Uniform Building Code and Uniform Fire Code. This includes, but is not limited to, providing exiting plans showing equipment location, aisle locations and dimensioned widths, and having approved exit doors and panic hardware. 
20.  The use of adult-oriented internet sites shall be prohibited unless the business has an adult business permit. If the use of adult-oriented internet sites are permitted because the owner obtained an adult business permit, no minors shall be admitted. 
21.  All owners and operators of an internet cafe business shall consent in writing, to the city of Whittier, that they understand and agree to operate their internet cafe business in strict compliance with the city's internet cafe ordinance at all times. 
(Ord. 2841 § 1, 2005; Ord. 2808 § 1 (part), 2002; Ord. 2787 § 21, 2001; Ord. 2628 § 2, 1994; Ord. 2423 § 7, 1987; prior code § 9171)  
18.24.040 - Development standards. 
Prior to the issuance of a building permit, a development review, in accordance with Chapter 18.56 shall be approved. In addition to the special development standards set forth in Chapters 18.24 through 18.32, compliance with the Community Design Ordinance is required, and the following development standards shall apply to each C-zoned lot, except as otherwise expressly provided in this chapter. 
A.  Optional design standards, when in accordance with Section 18.24.050, may be approved in lieu of the development standards indicated herein. 
B.  Yards. The following minimum yard areas shall be required on all C-zoned lots: 
1.  Front Yards. 
a.  All C-zoned lots fifty feet or less in width and/or one hundred forty feet or less in depth, shall have a front yard of not less than fifteen feet. All C-zoned lots with widths of greater than fifty feet and depths greater than one hundred forty feet shall have and maintain a front yard of a depth of not less than twenty feet. An additional five-foot setback is required for each story of the building above the second story except as permitted in subdivision (c) of this subsection; and 
b.  Front yards may be reduced to the average of the adjacent existing front yards, but in no case less than ten feet on C-zoned lots less than one hundred feet wide, located between existing buildings with front yard areas less than twenty feet in depth. For corner lots the adjacent front yard shall be averaged with a ten-foot front yard setback; and 
c.  On corner lots of eight thousand square feet or less in net area, the front yard shall be no less than fifteen feet and the street side yard no less than ten feet. 
2.  Side Yards. 
a.  Each C-zoned lot which has a side lot line abutting an R-zoned lot shall have and maintain a side yard not less than ten feet in width on the side adjoining such R-zoned lot; provided, that the width of such required side yard shall be increased by five feet for each thirty feet of building height or fraction thereof, over the first thirty feet of height of any building located on such lot; and 
b.  All C-zoned corner lots fifty feet or less in width and/or one hundred forty feet or less in depth, shall have a street side yard of not less than fifteen feet. All C-zoned corner lots with widths of greater than fifty feet and depths greater than one hundred forty feet shall have and maintain a street side yard of not less than twenty feet except as permitted in subdivision c of this subsection; and 
c.  Each C-zoned lot which has a side lot line abutting an alley shall have and maintain a side yard on the alley side of not less than five feet; and 
d.  Where permitted driveway on any C-zoned lot enters the wall of a building which is located in or abuts a required side yard, that portion of the wall shall be located not less than twenty-five feet from the street right-of-way line; 
e.  On corner lots of eight thousand square feet or less in net area, the front yard shall be no less than fifteen feet and the street side yard no less than ten feet. 
3.  Rear Yards. 
a.  Each C-zoned lot which has a rear lot line abutting an R-zoned lot, shall have and maintain a rear yard area not less than twenty-five feet in depth; and 
b.  Each C-zoned lot, which has a rear lot line abutting a public alley, shall have and maintain a rear yard not less than five feet in depth. 
4.  Covered Unenclosed Colonnades. Covered unenclosed colonnades, not over one story in height, may encroach into the required yard areas a distance of not more than five feet and an area of not more than twenty-five percent of the required yard. 
5.  Outdoor Dining Areas. Outdoor dining patios for restaurants may encroach into required yard areas, provided a minimum five-foot landscaped setback is maintained. Such outdoor dining area shall be enclosed by a fence or wall consistent with subsection F of this section. Such outdoor dining areas may be covered with a trellis or similar architectural element, provided the posts supporting such structure maintain a minimum setback of ten feet from the property line. The eave overhang of the cover must maintain a minimum setback of five feet from the property line. 
6.  Auto Display Areas. The outdoor display of vehicles for sale at automobile dealerships may encroach into the required yard area, provided an average setback of ten feet is maintained and a landscaped area not less than five feet in depth is maintained along the street right-of-way line. 
7.  Exceptions. The yards required in paragraphs 2 and 3 of this subsection, may be decreased to the minimum allowed under the Uniform Building Code when approved pursuant to Section 18.56.045(B) of this title, provided: 
a.  Such yards may only be approved when necessary to allow the construction of a sound attenuating structure or enclosure to protect adjacent property from stationary noise sources legally established, prior to the effective date of this paragraph, on the property from which such noise emanates. 
b.  Such structure or enclosure may only be approved when all reasonable efforts to reduce such noise at the source have been made, as determined by a qualified acoustical engineer after appropriate technical studies. 
c.  The maximum height of such a structure or enclosure shall not exceed the minimum necessary to achieve compliance with the city's noise ordinance, Chapter 8.32 of the Whittier Municipal Code as determined by a qualified acoustical engineer. 
d.  Such structure or enclosure shall be constructed of sound absorbing materials and designed to include architectural treatment appropriate to and compatible with the adjacent properties. 
C.  Buildings. 
1.  Height. No building or structure shall be located on any such lot in excess of forty feet in height; provided, that where such a lot has one or more common lot lines with a lot classified in any R zone, no building or structure on such lot located within fifty feet of such common lot line shall exceed the maximum height permitted for buildings or structures in such R zone. Height limits may be permitted up to a maximum of one hundred feet through the use of conditional use permits, specific plans, redevelopment project areas with approved owner participation agreements and/or disposition and development agreement, and/or planned developments when such developments are designed as part of a comprehensive plan in harmony and continuity with the total project, the surrounding community and the environment. 
2.  Building Bulk. Buildings, including accessory buildings, structures and uses, may cover all of the area of any such lot, except for required yard area. 
D.  Off-Street Parking. Each such lot shall have and maintain off-street parking facilities as required by Chapter 18.48. 
E.  Loading. Each such lot shall have and maintain such loading facilities as may be required by Section 18.48.060. 
F.  Walls and Fences. Except as provided in Section 18.64.050, a wall or fence may be constructed and maintained on any part of a lot, provided: 
1.  Each lot in any of the C zones which has a common side or rear lot line with any R-zoned property shall have and maintain a wall not less than six feet, nor more than eight feet in height, along all such side and rear lot lines. Any such required wall, which is adjacent to the side of a front yard area on the adjoining R-zoned property, shall conform to the height regulations applicable to front yard areas in such R-zoned property. 
2.  Within required front yards and street side yards on corner lots the maximum height of a wall or fence shall not exceed forty-two inches, except when approved as a part of a development project. 
3.  Within required front yards and street side yards on corner lots, fences constructed of chainlink or wire mesh type materials are prohibited, except those necessary for the protection of a site during demolition or construction of structures under valid permits or when approved as part of a development project. 
4.  The wall required in paragraph 1 of this subsection may be increased in height to a maximum of sixteen feet when approved pursuant to Section 18.56.045(C) of this title, provided: 
a.  Such walls may only be approved when necessary to protect adjacent property from stationary noise sources legally established, prior to the effective date of this paragraph, on the property from which such noise emanates, or to protect adjacent property from unavoidable nuisance noise resulting from permitted uses of the commercial property. 
b.  Such walls may only be approved when all reasonable efforts to reduce such noise at the source have been made, as determined by a qualified acoustical engineer after appropriate technical studies. 
c.  The maximum height of such a wall shall not exceed the minimum necessary to achieve compliance with the city's noise ordinance, Chapter 8.32 of the Whittier Municipal Code as determined by a qualified acoustical engineer. 
d.  Such walls shall be constructed of sound absorbing materials and designed to include architectural treatment appropriate to and compatible with the adjacent properties. 
G.  Refuse Storage Areas. Each C-zoned lot shall be provided with facilities for the storage of refuse containers, as follows: 
1.  Location. A refuse storage area shall be placed on the same lot as the use it serves. Such area may be located on any portion of a lot where a building or accessory building may be placed; provided that, on properties served by an alley the refuse storage area shall be located within a distance not to exceed five feet of the right-of-way line of the alley. The director of public works or his/her designated representative, may waive the requirement for an on-site refuse storage area when a property is located in an automated refuse collection area and is served by off-site containers. 
2.  Size. Refuse storage areas shall have a minimum area of thirty square feet, with minimum interior dimensions of five feet by six feet. Depending on the proposed use and anticipated generation of refuse, the public works director or his/her designated representative, may require greater or lesser dimensions to increase the efficiency of solid waste disposal operations. 
3.  Design. Refuse storage areas shall be completely enclosed by a view-obscuring wall, not less than six feet in height. The enclosure shall include a closeable, view-obscuring gate, with a minimum five-foot wide unobstructed access point. On properties served by an alley, the gate shall be located adjacent to the alley to accommodate refuse collection. The walled enclosure shall be designed so that the contents thereof are not visible from any public street or adjacent property. Such walled enclosure shall be finished to match the color and facade material of the building it serves and shall incorporate landscape screening when possible. 
4.  Compactors. A roll-off trash compactor unit and enclosure may be required, as determined necessary by the director of public works or his/her designated representative, for any use anticipated to generate a large amount of refuse. 
5.  Maintenance. The property owner shall ensure that all refuse storage areas are regularly cleaned and maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. 
6.  Director. The public works director, or his/her designated representative, shall approve the specific locations of refuse storage areas to ensure convenient vehicular access for pickup and disposal. When located in an automated refuse collection area, the director of public works or his/her designated representative, may allow or require the removal or relocation of existing refuse storage areas that do not meet the minimum location, size and/or design requirements necessary for automated service. 
H.  Compressors, Motors, Etc. Each use on such a lot which utilizes compressors, air conditioning units or other machinery including, but not limited to, vents, ducts and conduits, but excluding window-mounted or wall-mounted air conditioners (hereafter in this code, "equipment"), which equipment is located outside of the exterior walls of any building, shall comply with the following: 
1.  All such equipment shall be enclosed within a permanent, noncombustible enclosure which shall be subject to the approval of the director of building and safety, to insure that the same will not be observable, or emit noise to a degree which interferes with the peaceful use and enjoyment of adjacent lots. 
2.  All such equipment shall be maintained so as to prevent a collection of litter and filth and to avoid the emission of unnecessary noise, dust or fumes. 
I.  Lighting. All outdoor lighting shall be located and shielded so as to prevent the spill of light onto adjacent lots. 
J.  Landscaping. 
1.  Yard Areas. All required front yard and street side yard setbacks shall be landscaped and appropriately irrigated to city commercial landscape guidelines and standards. All plant material shall be maintained in a healthy and thriving condition, clear of weeds and debris. Plans shall meet all city requirements for submittal, including but not limited to the city landscape guidelines. The city shall maintain the option to require plans to be prepared by a landscape professional, including but not limited to a landscape contractor, landscape architect or landscape designer. 
2.  Total lot area: Not less than ten percent of the gross lot area of each C-zoned lot shall be landscaped and maintained as such. 
K.  Noise. Reverse vending machines and small recycling collection facilities shall not exceed the noise levels imposed by Section 8.32.060 of this code. 
L.  Reverse Vending Machines and Small/Large Collection Facilities. Reverse vending machines and small recycling collection facilities, as permitted pursuant to Section 18.30.020 and large recycling collection facilities, as conditionally permitted pursuant to Section 18.52.030, shall be constructed and maintained in compliance with Chapter 18.24 in addition to the following: 
1.  All facilities shall be clearly marked to identify the type of material to be deposited, operating instructions, and the identity and phone number of the operator or responsible person to call if the machine inoperative. 
2.  All facilities shall be maintained in a clean, litter-free condition on a daily basis. 
3.  Attended facilities shall operate only during the hours between nine a.m. and seven p.m. 
4.  Reverse vending machines and small/large recycling collection facilities shall be placed in such a way as to not create pedestrian or vehicular hazards. 
5.  Any small and/or large recycling collection facility shall be located at least one hundred fifty feet from any residential use. 
6.  Any small and/or large recycling collection facility shall be located within an architecturally compatible enclosed structure. Architectural features and landscaping shall also be required if deemed necessary by the review authority to ensure compatibility with the surrounding area where the recycling facility is located. 
7.  Any small and/or large recycling facility which is a non-conforming use on the date the ordinance codified in this section becomes effective shall be subject to an amortization period of five years commencing on the date the use becomes nonconforming. Any small and/or large facility which does not meet the standard of this section but which was legally established prior to the adoption of these standards may be maintained provided such facility is not expanded nor its nonconformance with these standards otherwise increased. Any small and/or large recycling facility which is destroyed or damaged to the extent of more than fifty percent of its total replacement value shall not be repaired, rebuilt, or reconstructed except in conformance with these standards. 
(Ord. 2787 §§ 9 and 21, 2001; Ord. 2765 § 2 (part), 2000; Ord. 2755 § 2 (part), 1999; Ord. 2738 § 2, 1998; Ord. 2658 § 2, 1995; Ord. 2632 § 1 (E), 1994; Ord. 2515 § 1, 1990; Ord. 2423 § 8, 1987; Ord. 2417 § 2, 1987; prior code § 9172) 
(Ord. No. 3103 , § 3, 6-11-19)  
18.24.050 - Optional development standards. 
Optional development standards are intended to provide better quality of design than could be achieved through the use of the basic development standards and design guidelines indicated in Sections 18.24.040, 18.34.050, 18.48.070(C), 18.48.070(D), 18.48.070(M), 18.76.030(A), and Division VI. Optional standards allow the use of more creative design, while maintaining the quality of development and the character of the adjacent and surrounding neighborhood. This section is not to be construed as a substitute for the variance procedure detailed in Chapter 18.52. The following optional development standards may be employed: 
A.  A development review application may be approved, utilizing optional development standards, notwithstanding any provision of this title to the contrary, and to the exclusion of the zoning regulations applicable to the lot by reason of its underlying zone classification, provided: 
1.  That the approval is consistent with the public peace, health, safety and general welfare; and 
2.  That the development proposed is consistent with the city's general plan and any applicable specific plan relating to the areas included within such plan; and 
3.  That the development will be in substantial compliance with the purpose and intent of the zoning regulations; and 
4.  The approving body or zoning administrator shall make a specific finding as a condition of approval that the optional standards being approved shall increase the quality of the project by achieving greater than minimum standard requirements provided by the code. 
B.  Optional development standards relative to yard requirements shall be limited to the following: 
1.  Front Yards. The front yard setback may be equal to an average of fifteen feet with a minimum of ten feet. For corner lots whose side yard is located on a major or minor arterial within the city, the minimum front yard setback shall not be reduced below that which is required by Section 18.24.040(B)(1)(a). 
2.  Side Yards. The side yard setback may be reduced five feet. For corner lots whose side yard is located on a major or minor arterial within the city, the minimum side yard setback shall not be reduced below that which is required by Section 18.24.040(B)(2)(b). 
(Ord 2786 Exh. A (part), 2001; Ord. 2515 § 10, 1990)  
Chapter 18.26 - C-O COMMERCIAL-OFFICE ZONE 
 
18.26.010 - Purpose. 
In order to provide for the development of light commercial professional areas within the city, zone C-O, entitled "Commercial-Office," is created. 
(Prior code § 9180)  
18.26.020 - Permitted uses. 
No person shall use, or permit the use of, any property zoned C-O, except for the following principal and accessory uses: 
A.  Principal Uses. 
1.  Any use permitted in the R-4 zone provided that any building which has fifty percent or more of the floor area located above the first floor devoted to residential purposes shall be considered a residential use and shall comply with the provisions of Chapters 18.10 and 18.22, to the exclusion of regulations contained in Chapter 18.24; 
2.  Those uses which are expressly permitted pursuant to Section 18.52.030, for which a conditional use permit is required; 
3.  The following uses: 
— Ambulance services, including the sale and rental of sickroom supplies and equipment 
— Artist studios 
— Bank, savings and loan, or similar financial institution 
— Barbershops and beauty shops 
— Coffee shops, cafe or restaurant facility, only if the same is located within a building housing an office-complex, which building has a gross floor area of at least ten thousand square feet. Such restaurant facility shall not occupy an area which exceeds twenty-five percent of the total ground or first floor of the building in which located 
— Communication equipment buildings 
— Dental offices and clinics 
— Employment agencies 
— Laboratories, medical and dental 
— Manufacturer's agent, provided no stock in trade or inventory other than samples shall be permitted 
— Medical offices and clinics 
— Offices, business and professional 
— Optician, dispensing 
— Parking lots and parking structures 
— Prescription pharmacies, limited to the sale of medicinal and pharmaceutical supplies 
— Private clubs 
— Recording studios 
— Schools, business and professional 
— Studios, including but not limited to art, dance, martial arts, music, photography 
— Telephone repeater stations 
— Tourist information centers 
— Any use which is found, pursuant to Section 18.50.030, to be similar to and compatible with the uses listed in this section; 
B.  Accessory Uses. Those uses which are directly related, but clearly subordinate to a permitted principal use. 
(Ord. 2740 § 2, 1998; Ord. 2553 § 6, 1991; prior code § 9181)  
18.26.030 - Development standards. 
Buildings, structures and uses located on lots classified in the C-O zone shall be developed and maintained in accordance with the regulations contained in Chapter 18.24. 
(Prior code § 9182)  
Chapter 18.28 - C-1 LIGHT COMMERCIAL ZONE 
Sections: 
 
18.28.010 - Purpose. 
In order to provide for the development of light commercial areas and to maintain the integrity of existing light commercial areas within the city, zone C-1, entitled "Light Commercial," is created. 
(Prior code § 9190)  
18.28.020 - Permitted uses. 
A.  Principal Uses. 
1.  Any use permitted in the C-O zone except: 
— Ambulance services 
— Communications buildings 
— Commercial parking lots and structures 
— Residential facilities (former drug abusers) 
— Schools, business and professional 
2.  Those uses which are expressly permitted pursuant to Section 18.52.030, for which a conditional user permit is required; 
3.  The following uses: 
— Antique shops (not including antique malls) 
— Art galleries 
— Bakery shops 
— Bicycle sales and service 
— Bookstores with less than three thousand square feet of gross floor area 
— Candy stores 
— Clothing stores 
— Delicatessens 
— Dry cleaning or laundry, retail only (no on-site cleaning) 
— Florist shops 
— Food markets with less than three thousand square feet of gross floor area (not including convenience markets) 
— Food, prepared for consumption off-site (food-to-go) 
— Furniture stores with less than three thousand square feet of gross floor area 
— Gift shops 
— Hardware stores with less than three thousand square feet of gross floor area 
— Hobby supply shops 
— Ice cream shops 
— Interior decorating studios 
— Jewelry stores 
— Locksmith shops 
— Music stores with less than three thousand square feet of gross floor area 
— News stands 
— Notions or novelty stores 
— Orthopedic supply and sales 
— Plant shops or nurseries 
— Photographic equipment and supply stores 
— Restaurants and cafes with less than three thousand square feet of gross floor area and no alcohol service, dancing or entertainment 
— Shoe repair shops 
— Shoe stores 
— Sporting goods stores with less than three thousand square feet of gross floor area 
— Stationery stores 
— Tailor shops 
— Telecommuting center (computer/internet access) 
— Toy shops with less than three thousand square feet of gross floor area 
— Video rental store with less than three thousand square feet of gross floor area 
— Watch repair shops 
— Any use which is found, pursuant to Section 18.50.030, to be similar to and compatible with the uses listed above; 
B.  Accessory Uses. Those uses which are directly related, but clearly subordinate to a permitted use. 
(Ord. 2740 § 3, 1998)  
18.28.030 - Development standards. 
Buildings, structures and uses located on lots classified in zone C-1 shall be developed and maintained in accordance with regulations contained in Chapter 18.24, and the following: 
A.  Height. No building or structure located on any C-1-zoned lot, which lot has a common lot line with an R-zoned property, shall exceed the height limit for buildings and structures as permitted in the R zone; and 
B.  Outside Storage. All storage of materials, except temporary storage of refuse, shall be within an enclosed building. 
(Prior code § 9192)  
Chapter 18.30 - C-2 GENERAL COMMERCIAL ZONE 
Sections: 
 
18.30.010 - Purpose. 
In order to provide for the development of general commercial areas and to maintain the integrity of existing general commercial areas within the city, zone C-2, entitled "General Commercial," is created. 
(Prior code § 9200)  
18.30.020 - Permitted uses. 
No person shall use or permit the use of any property zoned C-2, except for the following principal and accessory uses: 
A.  Principal Uses. 
1.  Any use permitted in the C-1 zone, except that residences may only be established within that portion of a building located above the ground floor over commercial uses. Such dwelling units shall observe the same yard requirements as applicable to the C-2 zone; 
2.  Those uses which are expressly permitted pursuant to Section 18.52.030, for which a conditional use permit is required; 
3.  The following uses: 
— Ambulance services 
— Appliance sales and service, household 
— Art supply stores 
— Automobile rental agencies 
— Automobile sales (new) agencies 
— Automobile supply stores (not including installation) 
— Bookbinderies 
— Bookstores 
— Ceramics and pottery shops 
— Cleaning and dyeing establishments 
— Communication equipment buildings 
— Computer sales and service 
— Costume rental and sales shops 
— Department stores 
— Dry goods stores 
— Food markets (not including convenience markets) 
— Fortunetelling 
— Furniture stores 
— Hardware stores 
— Health centers/fitness clubs 
— Ice vending machines 
— Interior decorating shops 
— Lawnmower, edger sales and service 
— Leather goods stores 
— Lighting fixtures 
— Mail-order houses, with floor samples only, but not including warehousing or other direct sales 
— Music stores 
— Newspaper publishers 
— Paint and wallpaper stores 
— Parking lots and parking structures 
— Pawn shops 
— Pet shops, including tropical fish 
— Pet supply and grooming 
— Photoengraving 
— Power-tool sales and service 
— Print shops 
— Plumbing shops 
— Radio and television stores 
— Radio and television broadcasting studios 
— Recycling, small collection facility, unless prohibited pursuant to Section 66787.6 of the Government Code 
— Reverse vending machines, unless prohibited pursuant to Section 66787.6 of the Government Code 
— Residential facility (former drug abusers) 
— Restaurants and cafes (including dancing and entertainment) 
— Rubber stamp stores 
— Schools, business and professional 
— Secondhand stores 
— Sickroom supplies, rental and sales 
— Sign painting and repairing 
— Sporting goods stores 
— Swimming pool supply sales 
— Tile sales, ornamental, but not including a kiln or manufacture of same 
— Tobacco shops 
— Toy shops 
— Any use which is found, pursuant to Section 18.50.030, to be similar to and compatible with the uses listed in this section; 
B.  Accessory Uses. Those uses which are directly related, but clearly subordinate to permitted principal uses. 
(Ord. 2740 § 4, 1998; Ord. 2712 § 1 (G), 1997; Ord. 2553 § 8, 1991; Ord. 2423 § 9, 1987; Ord. 2382 § 1, 1986; Ord. 2371 § 2, 1986; prior code § 9201)  
18.30.030 - Development standards. 
Buildings, structures and uses located on lots classified in zone C-2 shall be developed and maintained in accordance with the regulations contained in Chapter 18.24. 
(Prior code § 9202)  
Chapter 18.32 - C-3 COMMERCIAL- MANUFACTURING ZONE 
Sections: 
 
18.32.010 - Purpose. 
In order to provide for the development of heavy commercial, wholesale and limited manufacturing areas, and to maintain the integrity of existing heavy commercial and limited manufacturing areas within the city, zone C-3, entitled "Commercial-manufacturing," is created. 
(Prior code § 9210)  
18.32.020 - Permitted uses. 
No person shall use nor permit the use of any property zoned C-3, except for the following principal and accessory uses: 
A.  Principal Uses. 
1.  Any use permitted in the C-2 zone, not including dwelling units, except as expressly provided in this chapter, 
2.  Those uses which are expressly permitted pursuant to Section 18.52.030, for which a conditional use permit is required, 
3.  The following uses: 
a.  A dwelling unit on the same lot on which a use is located when such dwelling is used exclusively by a caretaker/owner or superintendent of such use and his family. Such dwelling shall be developed in compliance with the yard requirements of the R-4 zone 
b.  Assembly of electrical appliances, electronic instruments and devices, radios and phonographs, including processing of parts 
c.  Auction houses or stores 
e.  Cabinet shops or carpenter shops 
f.  Ceramic products, manufacturing of, including figurines, using only previously pulverized clay, and kilns fired only by electricity or low-pressure gas 
g.  Cleaning and dyeing plant 
h.  Frozen-food lockers, including custom cutting and packing thereof 
i.  Glass studios, stained, art or precision 
j.  Hospital, small animal 
k.  Industrial supply house 
l.  Kennels 
m.  Laboratories, pharmaceutical, research, testing, experimental or motion picture 
n.  Laundries 
o.  Nurseries or greenhouses for commercial production and sale of plants or flowers 
p.  Plastics, the molding of plastics, including manufacturing of products thereof 
q.  Precision optics, manufacture or assembly of 
r.  Scientific instruments and equipment, manufacture or assembly of, including precision machine shop as a part thereof 
s.  Tire recapping and retreading 
t.  Any use which is found, pursuant to Section 18.50.030, to be similar to and compatible with the uses listed above; 
B.  Accessory Uses. Those uses which are directly related, but clearly subordinate to a permitted use. 
(Ord. 2553 § 9, 1991; Prior code § 9211)  
18.32.030 - Development standards. 
Buildings, structures and uses located on lots classified in zone C-3 shall be developed and maintained in accordance with the regulations contained in Chapter 18.24. 
(Prior code § 9212)  
Chapter 18.34 - M MANUFACTURING ZONE 
Sections: 
 
18.34.010 - Purpose. 
In order to provide for the development of manufacturing areas and to maintain the integrity of existing manufacturing areas within the city, the regulations set out in this chapter shall be applicable to all properties classified in zone M. 
(Prior code § 9220)  
18.34.020 - Permitted uses. 
No person shall use, or permit the use of any lot zoned M, except for the following principal and accessory uses: 
A.  Principal Uses. 
1.  Any use permitted in the C-3 zone, except for the following: 
a.  Churches, temples and other places of religious worship, 
b.  Educational institutions, 
c.  Facilities for the care, treatment or rehabilitation of convalescent persons, children, aged persons, alcoholics, drug addicts, the wounded or mentally infirm, 
d.  Hotels; 
2.  Those uses which are expressly permitted pursuant to Section 18.52.030, for which a conditional use permit is required; 
3.  The following uses: 
— Automobile assembly plants, body and fender repair 
— Bakeries 
— Bottling plants 
— Building material sales 
— Contractors' equipment yards, storage, sales or service 
— Cleaning and dyeing establishments, wholesale and retail 
— Emergency shelters (See Section 18.34.060 for provisions 
— Engraving, machine-metal engraving 
— Fabricating, or other process used in bending or shaping metal 
— Feed and fuel sales 
— Flour mills 
— Gases. Storage of the following gases is permitted, provided that the same is conducted in accordance with the provisions of all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, this code: acetylene, butane and oxygen 
— Ice and cold-storage plants 
— Knitting mills 
— Laundries 
— Lumberyards 
— Machine shops 
— Machine storage yards 
— Manufacturing, compounding, assembling, processing, packaging or treatment which creates any of the following products: 
— Batteries 
— Beds and bedsprings 
— Brushes 
— Candles 
— Canvas 
— Casein, the manufacture of casein products, excepting glue 
— Cigars 
— Cigarettes 
— Clocks 
— Coffins 
— Cosmetics 
— Cutlery 
— Drugs 
— Dry goods 
— Electric or neon signs 
— Engines, internal combustion or steam, which shall not include foundries 
— Food products, except lards, pickles, sauerkraut or vinegar 
— Furs 
— Furniture 
— Gloves 
— Hearing equipment 
— Ink 
— Mattresses 
— Motors, electric 
— Moving and storage 
— Musical instruments 
— Phonograph records 
— Prefabricated buildings 
— Rugs 
— Shoes 
— Soap, cold-mix only 
— Statuary 
— Store and other commercial fixtures 
— Toys 
— Type, printers 
— Venetian blinds 
— Wearing apparel and garments 
— Manufacturing, compounding, assembly, packaging or treatment of articles or merchandise from any of the following materials: 
— Bone products 
— Cellophane 
— Cork 
— Corrugated cardboard 
— Feathers 
— Fiber, including fiberglass 
— Glass 
— Hair 
— Horn 
— Iron, not including foundries 
— Metal, products of precious metals: steel and brass stamp, including hand and machine engraving, metal fabricating, spinning and storage 
— Paper, not including the manufacture of paper itself 
— Plastics and synthetics 
— Pottery 
— Recycling, small collection facility, unless prohibited pursuant to Section 66787.6 of the Government Code 
— Reverse vending machines, unless prohibited pursuant to Section 66787.6 of the Government Code 
— Rope 
— Rubber, fabrication of products made from finished rubber 
— Textiles 
— Wire 
— Wood, including a planing mill 
— Yarn 
— Paints, paint-mixing, providing a boiling process is not employed, no tank farm is permitted and above-surface thinner storage is limited to two hundred gallons 
— Poultry and rabbit slaughter 
— Public utility service yards and pumping plants 
— Sheet-metal shop 
— Solid-fuel operation 
— Tile, wall and floor, and related small tile products 
— Tinsmiths 
— Tire rebuilding, recapping and retreading 
— Trade schools 
— Truck-washing and cleaning 
— Welding shops 
— Wine storage and manufacture 
— Any similar enterprises or businesses which the commission finds, by clarification of ambiguity, are similar to and compatible with the uses enumerated in this section. 
(Ord. 2553 § 10, 1991; Ord. 2423 § 10, 1987; Ord. 2375 § 1(c), 1986; prior code § 9221) 
(Ord. No. 2948, § 1, 2-23-10)  
18.34.030 - Accessory uses. 
On the site of an active construction project, the storage of building materials necessary for the construction of the approved project will be permitted as an accessory use. Upon completion of the approved project, the property owner shall have ten calendar days in which to remove all building materials associated with the construction of the approved project and to render the surrounding off-site area clean and free of all trash and debris that was associated with the construction of the approved project. 
(Ord. 2515 § 6, 1990)  
18.34.040 - Limitations on permitted uses. 
Every use permitted in the M zone shall comply with the following: 
A.  Uses in Buildings. All uses shall be conducted totally within a completely enclosed building, except for those uses which are customarily conducted in the open, as determined pursuant to Section 18.50.060. 
B.  Outdoor Storage. No outdoor storage shall be allowed unless the same is enclosed within a view-obscuring wall not less than eight feet in height, having a closable access gate. 
C.  Sales, Display and Storage Areas and Surfacing. Outdoor sales, display and storage areas, when permitted, shall be surfaced and improved in accordance with subsections E and H of Section 18.48.070. 
D.  Discharge of Material. No person shall permit or allow the discharge of, across the boundaries of the lot whereon the use is located, toxic, noxious or odorous matter in such concentrations as may be detrimental to the public health, safety, comfort or welfare, or cause injury or damage to or unreasonably interfere with the use of adjacent lots. 
E.  Burning Operations. The manufacture of materials, goods or products which includes, as a part of such process, burning, ranging from free or active to intense burning, as determined by the fire chief, shall not be allowed unless enclosed within a building and such buildings are set back at least forty feet from any lot line or, in lieu thereof, all such buildings or structures are protected throughout by an automatic sprinkler system of a type approved by the fire chief. 
F.  Public Nuisance. Any operation producing intense glare or heat shall be performed in such a manner so as not to create a public nuisance or hazard to the adjacent or abutting properties. 
(Prior code § 9222)  
18.34.050 - Development standards. 
Prior to the issuance of a building permit, a development review, in accordance with Chapter 18.56, shall be approved. 
The adopted manufactured design guidelines and the following development standards shall be applicable to each use, building or structure located in the M zone, except for developments within which more than fifty percent of the floor area of the structures are devoted to commercial uses, as listed in Sections 18.26.020, 18.28.020, 18.30.020 and 18.32.020, for which the commercial design guidelines shall be applicable; and, except as set forth in this title. 
A.  Lots. Lots created after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall conform to the following: 
1.  Area. The minimum required lot area of each lot in the M zone shall be seven thousand square feet. 
2.  Minimum Width. The minimum width of each lot in the M zone shall be sixty-five feet. 
B.  Yards. The following yard areas shall be required and observed on all M-zoned lots: 
1.  Front Yards. 
a.  All M-zoned lots fifty feet or less in width and/or one hundred forty feet or less in depth, shall have a front yard of not less than fifteen feet. All m-zoned lots with widths of greater than fifty feet and depths greater than one hundred forty feet shall have and maintain a front yard of a depth of not less than twenty feet. An additional five foot setback is required for each story of the building above the second story except as permitted in paragraph c of this subsection; and 
b.  Front yards may be reduced to the average of the adjacent existing front yards, but in not case less than ten feet on M-zoned lots less than one hundred feet wide, located between existing buildings with front yard areas less than twenty feet in depth. For corner lots the adjacent front yard shall be averaged with a ten foot front yard setback; and 
c.  On corner lots of eight thousand square feet or less in net area, the front yard shall be no less than fifteen feet and the street side yard no less than ten feet; and 
b.  Where a permitted driveway enters the front wall of a building, facing a street, located on an M-zoned lot, that portion of such front wall shall be located not less than twenty-five feet from the front lot line. 
2.  Side Yards. 
a.  Each lot classified in zone M which has a side lot line abutting any lot located in any of the R zones shall have and maintain a side yard area of not less than ten feet in width on the side adjoining such residentially zoned lot; and 
b.  Where a permitted driveway enters the side wall of a building, facing the street, located as an M-zoned lot, that portion of such side wall shall be located not less than twenty-five feet from the side lot line of the lot upon which located. 
c.  All M-zoned corner lots fifty feet or less in width and/or one hundred forty feet or less in depth shall have a street side yard of not less than fifteen feet. All M-zoned corner lots with widths of greater than fifty feet and depths grater than one hundred forty feet shall have and maintain a street side yard of not less than fifteen feet except as permitted in paragraph d of this subsection. 
d.  Each M-zoned lot which has a side lot line abutting an alley shall have and maintain a side yard on the alley side of not less than five feet. 
3.  Rear Yards. 
a.  Each lot in the M zone, the rear lot line of which separates the same from any lot located in an R zone, shall have and maintain a rear yard not less than twenty-five feet in depth; and 
b.  Each M-zoned lot, the rear lot line of which abuts public alley, shall have and maintain a rear yard not less than five feet in depth. 
4.  Exceptions. The yards required in paragraphs 2 and 3 of this subsection, may be decreased to the minimum allowed under the Uniform Building Code when approved pursuant to Section 18.56.045(B) of this title, provided: 
a.  Such yards may only be approved when necessary to allow the construction of a sound attenuating structure or enclosure to protect adjacent property from stationary noise sources legally established, prior to the effective date of this paragraph, on the property from which such noise emanates. 
b.  Such structure or enclosure may only be approved when all reasonable efforts to reduce such noise at the source have been made, as determined by a qualified acoustical engineer after appropriate technical studies. 
c.  The maximum height of such a structure or enclosure shall not exceed the minimum necessary to achieve compliance with the city's noise ordinance, Chapter 8.32 of the Whittier Municipal Code as determined by a qualified acoustical engineer. 
d.  Such structure or enclosure shall be constructed of sound absorbing materials and designed to include architectural treatment appropriate to and compatible with the adjacent properties. 
C.  Buildings. 
1.  Height. No building or structure in the M zone shall exceed a height of one hundred feet, provided that where a lot in the M zone has one or more common lot lines with a lot classified in any R zone, or is separated from such R-zoned property by an alley, no building or structure on such M-zoned lot, located within fifty feet of such R-zoned property, shall exceed the maximum height permitted for buildings or structures on such R-zoned lot. 
2.  Building Bulk. Buildings, including accessory buildings and structures, may cover all of the area of any lot in the M zone, except for required yard areas. 
D.  Off-street Parking. 
1.  Each lot in the M zone shall have and maintain off-street parking facilities, as may be required by Chapter 18.48. 
2.  Where any service-type vehicles are maintained in conjunction with any use located in the M zone, off-street parking spaces therefor shall be provided in addition to the off-street parking spaces required pursuant to Chapter 18.48. 
E.  Loading. Each lot classified in the M zone shall have and maintain such loading facilities as may be required by Section 18.48.060. 
F.  Walls and Fences. Any wall or fence over forty-two inches high shall maintain at least a five-foot front yard setback and a three-foot setback from all street side yard property line(s) of a corner or reverse corner lot. In addition, the following provisions shall apply: 
1.  Each lot in any of the M zones which has a common side or rear lot line with any R-zoned property, the Greenway Trail, or a railroad right-of-way shall have and maintain a view obscuring wall not less than six feet or more than twelve feet, in height along all such side and rear lot lines. Any such required wall which is adjacent to the side of a front yard area on the adjoining R-zoned property shall conform to the height regulations applicable to front yard areas in such R-zoned property. 
2.  When it can be demonstrated to the approval authority that a wall or fence over forty-two inches in height within the front yard setback and/or over six feet in height along an adjoining street side yard property line is appropriate for security and/or screening purposes, it may be constructed up to eight feet in height at least five feet from the front yard property line and three feet from an abutting street side yard property line with the approval of a minor conditional use permit. Walls and fences in excess of eight feet, but not greater than twelve feet in height (except as provided in Section 18.34.050(F)(5) for noise attenuation), may be approved with a conditional use permit subject to the same setback requirements. In addition, no pilaster, gate, or light fixture designed in conjunction with a wall or fence may exceed twelve inches above the maximum wall or fence height. 
3.  All new walls and fences shall be subject to the provisions contained within Section 18.98.040(l) (Manufacturing Design Guidelines) of the Whittier Municipal Code in addition to the following provisions: 
a.  Smooth-faced precision blocks may be used only when integrated within a wall design to create a decorative wall pattern or when plaster or stucco is to be applied to the blocks as a finishing material. 
b.  A decorative finishing wall course cap shall be applied to all new walls and pilasters. 
c.  Combination walls or fences may be constructed consisting of a variety of different building materials, subject to the review and approval of the approval authority. 
d.  All landscaping planted in front of any wall or fence shall be maintained in healthy condition at all times and supported with an operable irrigation system that complies with the city's water conservation ordinance. 
e.  All street-facing walls and fences shall be treated with an anti-graffiti laminate coating or any other anti-graffiti method deemed acceptable by the approval authority. Alternatively, healthy landscaping (i.e., vines) may be planted to provide sufficient coverage of the wall face, if deemed acceptable by the approval authority. 
f.  All fencing shall comply with Section 18.64.070 (Barbed wire, razor wire, concertina wire and similar material(s)) of the Whittier Municipal Code. 
4.  All new walls and fences shall be subject to the provisions contained within Section 18.64.050 (Open corner area on certain lots). These provisions shall also apply to all driveways too, as illustrated in Diagram "A". 
DIAGRAM "A" 
  
  
a.  Deviation(s) from Diagram "A", as well as from the design requirements noted within this section, may be approved by the director of community development and the city traffic engineer, if necessary, for the purpose of ensuring public safety. 
5.  The maximum wall and fence height described within paragraph 2 of this subsection may be increased in height to a maximum of sixteen feet for noise attenuation purposes when approved with a conditional use permit, provided: 
a.  Such walls may only be approved when necessary to protect adjacent property from stationary noise sources legally established, prior to the effective date of this paragraph, on the property from which such noise emanates, or to protect adjacent property from unavoidable nuisance noise resulting from permitted uses of the commercial property. 
b.  Such walls may only be approved when all reasonable efforts to reduce such noise at the source have been made, as determined by a qualified acoustical engineer after appropriate technical studies. 
c.  The maximum height of such a wall shall not exceed the minimum necessary to achieve compliance with the city's noise ordinance, Chapter 8.32 of the municipal code as determined by a qualified acoustical engineer. 
d.  Such walls shall be constructed of sound absorbing materials and designed to include architectural treatment appropriate to and compatible with the adjacent properties. 
G.  Refuse Storage Areas. 
1.  Each lot in the M zone shall be provided with facilities for the storage of refuse containers, as follows: 
a.  Location. A refuse storage area shall be placed on the same lot as the use it serves. Such area may be located on any portion of a lot where a building or accessory building may be placed; provided that, on properties served by an alley the refuse storage area shall be located within a distance not to exceed five feet of the right-of-way line of the alley. The director of public works or his/her designated representative, may waive the requirement for an on-site refuse storage area when a property is located in an automated refuse collection area and is served by off-site containers. 
b.  Size. Refuse storage areas shall have a minimum area of thirty square feet, with minimum interior dimensions of five feet by six feet. Depending on the proposed use and anticipated generation of refuse, the public works director or his/her designated representative, may require greater or lesser dimensions to increase the efficiency of solid waste disposal operations. 
c.  Design. Refuse storage areas shall be completely enclosed by a view-obscuring wall, not less than six feet in height. The enclosure shall include a closeable, view-obscuring gate, with a minimum five-foot wide unobstructed access point. On properties served by an alley, the gate shall be located adjacent to the alley to accommodate refuse collection. The walled enclosure shall be designed so that the contents thereof are not visible from any public street or adjacent property. Such walled enclosure shall be finished to match the color and facade material of the building it serves and shall incorporate landscape screening when possible. 
i.  Businesses that utilize a roll-off box are not required to provide a walled enclosure; provided that, the refuse storage area is located within an area that is not visible from the public street or from any adjacent residential or commercially zoned property. 
d.  Compactors. A roll-off trash compactor unit and enclosure may be required, as determined necessary by the director of public works or his/her designated representative, for any use anticipated to generate a large amount of refuse. 
e.  Maintenance. The property owner shall ensure that all refuse storage areas are regularly cleaned and maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. 
f.  Director. The public works director or his/her designated representative shall approve the specific location of refuse storage areas to ensure convenient vehicular access for pickup and disposal. When located in an automated refuse collection area, the director of public works or his/her designated representative, may allow or require the removal or relocation of existing refuse storage areas that do not meet the minimum location, size and/or design requirements necessary for automated service. 
H.  Lighting. All outdoor lighting located on a lot classified in zone M shall be so located and shielded as to prevent the spill of light onto adjacent lots. 
I.  Compressors, Motors, etc. 
1.  Each use on a lot which utilizes compressors, air-conditioning units or other machinery including but not limited to vents, ducts and conduits, but excluding window-mounted or wall-mounted air conditioners (hereafter, "equipment"), located outside of the exterior walls of any building, shall comply with the following: 
a.  All such equipment shall be enclosed within a permanent, noncombustible enclosure, which shall be subject to the approval of the director of building and safety to insure that the same will not be observable, or emit noise to a degree which interferes with the peaceful use and enjoyment of adjacent lots. 
b.  All such mechanical equipment shall be maintained in a clean and proper condition to prevent a collection of litter and filth and to avoid the emission of unnecessary noise, dust or fumes. 
2.  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this title, or this chapter, all existing uses, buildings and structures which do not conform with the provisions of this subsection as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section shall comply within twenty-four months after such effective date. 
J.  Landscaping and Yard Areas. All required front and street side yard setbacks shall be landscaped and appropriately irrigated to city commercial landscape guidelines and standards. All plant materials shall be maintained in a healthy and thriving condition, clear of weeds and debris. Plans shall meet all city requirements for submittal, including but not limited to the city landscape guidelines. The city shall maintain the option to require plans to be prepared by a landscape professional, including, but not limited to, a landscape contractor, landscape architect or landscape designer. 
(Ord. 2839 § 14, 2004: Ord. 2838 § 14, 2004: Ord. 2787 §§ 6, 7, 12, 19, 20 and Exh. A, (part), 2001; Ord 2786 § 6 (part), 2001; Ord. 2765 § 2 (part), 2000; Ord. 2755 § 2 (part), 1999; Ord. 2738 § 3, 1998; Ord. 2632 § 1 (F), 1994; Ord. 2515 § 2, 1990; Ord. 2411 § 3, 1987; Ord. 2304 § 1(b), 1983; prior code § 9223) 
(Ord. No. 2923, § 1, 3-24-09)  
18.34.060 - Emergency shelters. 
A.  "Emergency shelter" means housing with minimal supportive services for the homeless and occupancy limited to six months or less by a homeless person. 
B.  Provisions listed herein for emergency shelters shall not apply to cold weather and domestic violence shelters. 
C.  An emergency shelter is allowed by right in the "M" (Manufacturing) zone, provided that all of the requirements and development standards set forth below are satisfied. A conditional use permit shall only be required if an emergency shelter will not meet all of the provisions contained herein. 
D.  Location Requirements. Emergency shelters shall meet the following location requirements: 
(1)  Emergency shelters serving single adults or families shall be situated a minimum of five hundred feet from away any another emergency shelter as well as two hundred fifty feet away from a public park and public or private school (not including trade or technology schools), as measured from property line to property line. 
(2)  Emergency shelters shall be located within one-quarter-mile of a designated public transportation stop. 
E.  Development Standards. Emergency shelters shall meet the following development standards: 
(1)  Maximum Stay. No homeless person shall stay within an emergency shelter for more than six months from the date of their acceptance into the shelter. In addition, no homeless person shall be re-admitted to the same homeless shelter within five days of being discharged. 
(2)  Waiting Area. If the intake of homeless clients occurs on-site, an enclosed or screened waiting area shall be provided between the intake area and the public right-of-way. There shall be no queuing within the public right-of-way or within any parking lot. 
(3)  Hours of Operation. Each emergency shelter shall establish and maintain set hours of operation for client intake and discharge. These hours shall be clearly displayed at the entrance to the shelter at all times. In the event an emergency shelter client is socially disruptive, a threat to the safety of others or in violation of the emergency shelter facility rules during non-business hours of operation, the emergency shelter manager may proceed with discharging that client immediately. 
(4)  On-site Personnel. On-site personnel shall be provided during all hours of operation when clients are present. A designated area for on-site personnel shall be located near the main entry to the facility for the purpose of controlling admittance into the facility and providing security. 
(5)  Client Restrictions. The emergency shelter operator shall not intake any person as a client of the shelter that the operator knows is wanted by the police or knows has been convicted of committing any violent offense. The emergency shelter operator shall also conduct a background check on all prospective clients using the Megan's Law database and restrict client intake in accordance with state and local registered sex offender residency restrictions. 
(6)  Maximum Number of Beds. No more than a total of forty-five beds shall be provided on the entire property where the emergency shelter is located. Beds shall be provided for men and women in separate and secured areas. 
(7)  Personal Storage. A private storage area or closet shall be provided with each on-site bed. At no time shall any client of an emergency shelter be allowed to keep on-site any alcoholic beverages or store any type of illegal substances, drugs, and/or weapons of any kind. The manager of the emergency shelter shall conduct routine inspections of each on-site client's personal space to verify compliance and report to the Whittier police department any client that is found in possession of illegal substances, drugs, and/or weapons of any kind. 
(8)  Personal Space. A minimum of thirty square feet of personal space shall be allocated for each client bed. 
(9)  Restroom and Shower Facilities. A communal restroom facility with at least two toilets, one shower, and one sink shall be provided for every twenty clients residing at an emergency shelter. The emergency shelter manager shall be responsible for ensuring that all restroom and shower facilities comply with the city of Whittier's building code requirements. Separate and secured restroom and shower facilities shall be provided for men and women. 
(10)  Common Space. Interior and/or exterior common space for the on-site clients to congregate shall be provided on the property at a ratio of not less than fifteen square feet per occupant or a minimum overall area of four hundred square feet, whichever is greater. 
(11)  Telephones. Each emergency shelter shall provide telephone(s) for the use of the on-site clients. 
(12)  Food Service Areas. The emergency shelter operator shall be responsible for ensuring that any food service or on-site meal preparation areas comply with all applicable requirements of the city of Whittier and the Los Angeles County Health Department. 
(13)  Outdoor storage. Emergency shelters shall screen all outdoor storage areas from all public rights-of-way and on-site parking lots. The emergency shelter manager shall ensure that all outside storage areas be maintained in a neat, clean, and orderly manner at all times. 
(14)  Parking. Off-street parking shall be provided at the ratio of one on-site parking space for every eight adult beds, plus one additional space designated exclusively for the on-site manager. No client shall sleep or live within a motor vehicle on the property of an emergency shelter at any time. 
(15)  Bicycle Racks. Bicycle racks that allow for the secure storage of bicycles shall be provided. Bicycle racks shall accommodate at least one bicycle storage space for every eight adult beds. All bicycle racks are required to be on-site and located in an area that is not visible from the public right-of-way. 
(16)  Lighting. Each emergency shelter shall provide exterior lighting on pedestrian pathways and parking lot areas on the property for safety. Lighting shall be shielded and/or reflected away from all residential areas and public streets. All on-site lighting shall be subject to the review and approval of the Whittier police department prior to operation. 
(17)  Security. The emergency shelter operator shall be required to submit an on-site security plan to the community development department for review and approval by the director of community development and the Whittier chief of police. The emergency shelter operator shall be responsible for ensuring that the approved security plan is implemented at the emergency shelter at all times. 
(18)  Health and Safety. Each emergency shelter shall comply with all applicable local and state health and safety codes such as, but not limited to, the California Building Code, California Fire Code, California Health and Safety Code and applicable zoning standards for the development and use of the property on which the emergency shelter is located. 
(19)  Existing emergency shelters that were established by a conditional use permit with adopted conditions of approval for its operation shall continue to operate under those adopted conditions of approval and be supplemented by the provisions of this ordinance. Should any conflict(s) arise with any operational requirement, the operational requirement(s) in the adopted conditions of approval shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 2948, § 1, 2-23-10)  
Chapter 18.36 - P PARKING OVERLAY ZONE 
Sections: 
 
18.36.010 - Created. 
There is created as an overlay zone, the "Parking Overlay Zone." Property shall be classified in such zone only in the manner specified in Chapter 18.60. When so classified, the same shall be noted on the zoning map by the symbol "P" in parentheses following the existing zoning classification of such property. 
(Prior code § 9450)  
18.36.020 - Permitted uses. 
When any lot is classified in the parking overlay zone it may be used, in lieu of the uses permitted by its underlying zone classification, exclusively for off-street parking purposes if such off-street parking facilities serve a principal use which is located on a lot which is within one hundred feet of the outer boundaries of the lot classified in the parking overlay zone. The following regulations shall apply to the use of a lot so classified: 
A.  All off-street parking facilities shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 18.48. 
B.  All required yard areas, as imposed by the zoning regulations applicable to such lot by reason of its underlying zone classification, shall be observed. All such required yard areas shall be landscaped and permanently maintained as such, including, but not limited to, the installation and maintenance of a permanent irrigation system. 
(Prior code § 9451)  
18.36.030 - Access. 
No lot shall be classified in the parking overlay zone unless vehicular and/or pedestrian access thereto is limited or restricted by conveyance of such access rights to the city, or otherwise, to insure a safe traffic flow and to insure that the use of such lot for off-street parking purposes will not unreasonably increase vehicular or pedestrian traffic on abutting streets serving residential areas. 
(Prior code § 9452)  
Chapter 18.38 - T TRANSITIONAL ZONE 
Sections: 
 
18.38.010 - Created. 
There is created the T "Transitional" zone. Property classified in the T zone by the map adopted pursuant to Section 18.08.020 may be developed for any use which is permitted in any other zone, subject to the provisions of Section 18.38.040. 
(Prior code § 9502)  
18.38.020 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the provisions of this chapter is to provide for an interim transitional zone classification for certain properties for the reasons set forth in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 9500)  
18.38.030 - Findings. 
The city council finds, determines and declares as follows: 
A.  That the city's staff and planning commission have recommended that former zone classifications of P and R-2-P should be eliminated and abolished; 
B.  That the determination was made as a result of staff and commission studies made as a part of the commission's recommendation relating to the revision of the city's zoning regulations and zoning map; 
C.  That there are approximately two hundred ninety parcels which are classified in either P or R-2-P zones, as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter; 
D.  That the commission has initiated studies to determine the appropriate zone classification of each parcel so zoned; 
E.  That due to the number of parcels included with the zones, each study cannot be completed in less than four to six months; 
F.  That pending the completion and classification of such properties in appropriate zone designation, it is essential that the properties be placed in a transitional zone to permit the adoption of the new zoning regulations and map, which will allow the development of such properties on a parcel-by-parcel basis, upon application and receipt of a conditional use permit for any use sought to be placed on any of the certain parcels; 
G.  That many of the properties now zoned in either the "P" or "R-2-P" zones are, in fact, in a transitional state, and the classification and future use thereof will be determined in part by the classification placed on property immediately adjacent thereto, and other planning considerations; 
H.  That the only feasible way to permit development of the properties, pending the final review and study of the appropriate zone classification, is by means of the enactment of the provisions of this chapter requiring a conditional use permit for any development of the properties; 
I.  That by reason of the notice given, with reference to the planning commission hearing relating to revised zoning regulations and the zoning map, the properties now classified in zone P or zone R-2-P could, as a part of the review, be reclassified by adoption of a revised zoning map. The planning commission and council determined that separate reclassification proceedings were appropriate as to such properties, to insure that the views of the owners of such properties could be considered and evaluated; 
J.  That the public interest, convenience and necessity require enactment of the provisions of this chapter and its application to the properties referred to in this section. 
K.  In addition to the findings above set forth, the city council finds and determines that, with respect to properties which are located adjacent to railroad rights-of-way, because of the unique characteristics of such properties and the relationship of such properties to contiguous properties, traditional zoning does not function so as to allow the reasonable use of such properties consistent and compatible with adjacent properties. As to such properties, the T zone will provide a vehicle so as to permit proper and reasonable development of such properties. 
(Ord. 2390 § 1, 1986: prior code § 9501)  
18.38.040 - Applicability. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to each of those properties which are designated on the zoning map adopted by Section 18.08.020 by the letter "T." Any property classified in zone T may be developed for any use permitted in any of the zone classifications set forth in these regulations, provided that a conditional use permit therefor is first obtained. 
(Prior code § 9503)  
Chapter 18.41 - MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS 
Sections: 
 
18.41.010 - Deadline for compliance. 
Unless there is specific exemption found in this chapter, it is a violation for: 
A.  Any person to engage in the practice of massage therapy for compensation as defined by this chapter prior to the operative date that the California Massage Therapy Council ("CAMTC") first commences the issuance of CAMTC certificates, and any massage establishment to employ or retain such a person unless such person is a holder of a current and valid city issued permit to operate as a massage technician pursuant to the terms of this chapter. 
B.  Any person to engage in the practice of massage therapy as defined by this chapter on or after the operative date that the CAMTC first commences the issuance of the CAMTC certificates, and any massage establishment to employ or retain such a person, unless such person first obtains and continues to maintain in full force and effect a valid CAMTC certificate. 
C.  Any person who holds a current CAMTC certificate to engage in the practice of massage therapy for compensation as defined by this chapter twelve months after the expiration of Chapter 10.5 of Division 2 of the California Business and Professions Code, and for any massage establishment to employ or retain such a person unless such person is a holder of a current and valid city issued permit to operate as a massage technician pursuant to the terms of this chapter. 
D.  Any person, other than an employee of a permitted massage establishment, to engage in the practice of massage therapy for compensation as defined by this chapter unless they comply with the terms of this chapter as well as the business licensing requirements as set forth by Title 5 of the City's Municipal Code. This shall include all independent contractors. 
E.  Notwithstanding Paragraph B of this section, any person who holds a current and valid city issued massage technician permit as of the operative date that the CAMTC first commences the issuance of the CAMTC certificates, shall not be required to obtain a CAMTC certificate for so long as that person continues to maintain such permit in full force and effect pursuant to the terms of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2936, § 1, 10-27-09)  
18.41.020 - Findings and purpose. 
The city council finds and declares as follows: 
A.  The permit requirements and restrictions imposed by this chapter are reasonably necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city and are consistent with all applicable laws of the State of California. 
B.  The city is authorized, by virtue of the Constitution of the State of California, and Section 51031 of the California Government Code, to regulate massage establishments by imposing reasonable standards relative to the skill and experience of massage operators and massage technicians and imposing reasonable conditions on the operation of the massage establishment. 
C.  There is a significant risk of injury to massage clients by improperly trained and/or educated massage technicians and this chapter provides reasonable safeguards against injury and economic loss. 
D.  The courts have long recognized massage as a pervasively regulated activity. There is opportunity for acts of prostitution and other unlawful sexual activity to occur in massage establishments and the establishment of reasonable standards for issuance of permits and restrictions on operations would serve to reduce the risk of illegal activity. 
E.  The restrictions and requirements contained in this chapter are intended to reduce the burden of massage establishment regulation on the police department. 
F.  The regulations and restrictions contained in this chapter are intended to discourage massage establishments from degenerating into houses of prostitution and the means utilized in this chapter bear a reasonable and rational relationship to the goals sought to be achieved. 
(Ord. No. 2936, § 1, 10-27-09)  
18.41.030 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
A.  "Applicant" means any person who is required to file an application for a massage therapy license. 
B.  "Adult oriented merchandise" means sexually oriented implements or paraphernalia, such as, but not limited to: dildos, auto sucks, sexually-oriented vibrators, Ben Wa balls, inflatable orifices, anatomical balloons with orifices, simulated and battery operated vaginas, and similar sexually-oriented devices which are designed or marketed primarily for the stimulation of human genital organs or sado-masochistic activity. 
C.  "Chief of police" means the Chief of Police of the city of Whittier, or his designee. 
D.  "Child day care facility" means a facility which provides nonmedical care to children under eighteen years of age in need of personal services, supervision, or assistance essential for sustaining the activities of daily living or for the protection of the individual on less than a twenty-four-hour basis. Child day care facility includes day care centers and family day care homes. 
E.  "City" means the city of Whittier. 
F.  "City council" means the city council of the city of Whittier. 
G.  "City manager" means the city manager of the city of Whittier, or his designee. 
H.  "Compensation" means the payment, loan, advance, donation, contribution, deposit, exchange, or gift of money or anything of value. 
I.  "Conviction," or "convicted" means a guilty plea, guilty verdict or a conviction following a plea of nolo contendere. 
J.  "Customer area" means areas open to customers of the establishment or the general public. 
K.  "Director" means the director of community development for the city. 
L.  "Employee" means any and all persons, other than a massage therapist, massage practitioner, operator or manager, who renders any service, with or without compensation, for the owner, operator, manager or agent of either an owner, operator or manager of a massage establishment and who has no physical contact with customers or clients. For purposes of this chapter the term "employee" shall include independent contractors. 
M.  "Health department" means the Health Care Agency of the County of Los Angeles. 
N.  "Lobby" means one room or designed area, adjacent to the public entry, which is used for an entry and/or waiting room for customers or other persons authorized to enter the premises. 
O.  "Manager" means the person(s) designated by the operator of the massage establishment to act as the representative and agent of the operator in managing day-to-day operations with corresponding liabilities and responsibilities. Evidence of management includes, but is not limited to, evidence that the individual has the power to direct or hire and dismiss employees, control hours of operation, create policy or rules or purchase supplies. A manager may also be an owner. A manager must meet the standards and qualifications set forth hereinbelow to qualify as a manager. 
P.  "Massage, massage therapy, bodywork" means any method of treating the external parts of the human body for remedial, health, hygienic, relaxation or any other reason or purpose, whether by means of pressure on, friction against or stroking, kneading, tapping, pounding, vibrating, rubbing or any other manner of touching external parts of the human body with the hands, or with the aid of any mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliance, with or without supplementary aids such as rubbing alcohol, liniment, antiseptic, oil, powder, cream, ointment or other similar preparations commonly used in this type of business or trade. The terms massage, massage therapy, and bodywork shall be used interchangeably throughout this chapter. 
Q.  "Massage establishment" means any enterprise or establishment having a fixed place of business conducted within the city of Whittier, where any person, firm, association, partnership, corporation, or combination of individuals, engages in, conducts, carries on or permits to be conducted or carried on, for money or any other consideration, the administration to another person of a massage, bath or health treatment involving massages or baths including but not limited to fomentation, electric or magnetic treatments, alcohol rubs, or any other type of system for treatment or manipulation of the human body with or without any character of bath, such as Turkish, Russian, Swedish, Japanese, vapor, shower, electric tub, sponge, mineral, fomentation, or any other type of bath. 
R.  "Massage practitioner" means any person who legally possesses a current and valid CAMTC certificate pursuant to subdivision (b) of Section 4601 of the California Business and Profession Code, or subdivision (a) or (c) of Section 4604 of the California Business and Profession Code, and who is engaged in the practice of massage therapy for compensation. 
S.  "Massage room" means a cubicle, booth, room or enclosed or semi-enclosed area within a massage establishment where massage services are performed on patrons. 
T.  "Massage technician" means any person who holds a current and valid city issued permit that allows the person to administer to another person a massage, as defined herein, within a massage establishment for any form of consideration or in exchange for anything of value whatsoever. The terms "massage trainee," "masseur" or "masseuse" are included within this definition for purposes of this chapter. 
U.  "Massage therapist" means any person who legally possesses a current and valid CAMTC certificate pursuant to subdivision (c) of Section 4601 of the California Business and Profession Code and who is engaged in the practice of massage therapy for compensation. 
V.  "CAMTC certificate, massage certificate" means the certificate issued by the CAMTC to massage therapists pursuant to subdivision (c) of Section 4601 of the California Business and Profession Code, and to massage practitioners pursuant to subdivision (b) of Section 4601 of the California Business and Profession Code, or subdivision (a) or (c) of Section 4604 of the California Business and Profession Code. The terms CAMTC certificate and massage certificate are used interchangeably in this chapter. 
W.  "Operator" means all persons who supervises, manages, directs, organizes, controls or have an ownership interest in the massage establishment. An operator may also be a manager or an owner. 
X.  "Operator's permit" means the permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter required to operate and/or manage a massage establishment. 
Y.  "Out call massage" means a massage performed or administered for money or other consideration by a licensed massage technician at a location other than a licensed massage establishment. 
Z.  "Owner" means the individual(s) whose name appears on the city business license and includes any and all persons who have any ownership interest in a massage establishment. An owner may also be an operator or manager. 
AA.  "Person" means any natural person, individual, or corporation, partnership, association or other group or combination of individuals acting as an entity. 
BB.  "Police department" means the police department of the city of Whittier. 
CC.  "Recognized school of massage" means a facility that meets minimum standards for training and curriculum in massage and related subjects and that is approved by any of the following: 
a.  The Bureau for Private Postsecondary and Vocational Education pursuant to former Section 94739 of the Education Code prior to July 1, 2007, and as of the date on which an applicant met the requirements of paragraph (2) of subdivision (b) or subparagraph (A) of paragraph (2) of subdivision (c) of Section 4601. 
b.  The department of consumer affairs. 
c.  An institution accredited by the Accrediting Commission for Senior Colleges and Universities or the Accrediting Commission for Community and Junior Colleges of the Western Association of Schools and Colleges and that is one of the following: 
i.  A public institution. 
ii.  An institution incorporated and lawfully operating as a nonprofit public benefit corporation pursuant to Part 2 (commencing with Section 5110) of Division 2 of Title 1 of the Corporations Code, and that is not managed by any entity for profit. 
iii.  A for-profit institution. 
iv.  An institution that does not meet all of the criteria in subparagraph (B) that is incorporated and lawfully operating as a nonprofit public benefit corporation pursuant to Part 2 (commencing with Section 5110) of Division 2 of Title 1 of the Corporations Code, that has been in continuous operation since April 15, 1997, and that is not managed by any entity for profit. 
d.  A college or university of the state higher education system, as defined in Section 100850 of the Education Code. 
e.  A school of equal or greater training that is approved by the corresponding agency in another state or accredited by an agency recognized by the United States Department of Education. 
Recognized school of massage shall not include schools offering a correspondence course not requiring personal attendance. 
(Ord. No. 2936, § 1, 10-27-09)  
18.41.040 - Operator's permit required. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided, it shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct or carry on, or to permit the engagement in, conduct of or carrying on the business or operation of a massage establishment within the city without first obtaining an operator's permit pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and complying with all other applicable provisions of this Code, including but not limited to securing the necessary business licenses as required by Title 5 of this Code. 
B.  Massage establishments that utilize or employ only massage therapists and/or massage practitioners in good standing with the CAMTC, irrespective of the employee or independent contractor status of the massage therapist and massage practitioner, shall not be required to obtain a massage establishment operator's permit. 
(Ord. No. 2936, § 1, 10-27-09)  
18.41.050 - Exceptions. 
The requirements of this chapter shall not apply to the following individuals while engaged in performing the duties of their respective professions: 
A.  Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, physical therapists or osteopaths duly licensed to practice their respective professions in the State of California. The herein exemption only applies if the massage is performed by the aforementioned licensed professionals and/or by a staff member of said licensed professionals in the course of treatment prescribed by said professional and only when said professional is present on the premises. 
B.  Acupuncturists who are duly licensed to practice their respective profession in the State of California. The exemption herein only applies if the massage therapy is performed by the aforementioned licensed professional to the treated area. If a duly licensed acupuncturist wished to provide massage therapy by another individual/s said individual/s must obtain and possess a valid massage technician permit or a massage certificate and the office (acupuncturist/owner) must obtain a massage establishment permit from the city of Whittier in compliance all codes and the California Acupuncture Board. 
C.  A registered or licensed vocational nurse working on the premises of, and under the direct supervision of, a State licensed physician, surgeon, chiropractor or osteopath. Practical nurses or other persons that do not meet the requisite qualifications for a massage technician, or any other person not otherwise licensed by the State of California or the Massage Therapy Organization (California Business and Professions Code §§ 4600 et. seq.), whether or not employed by physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths, acupuncturists, or physical therapists, may not provide massage services or act as a massage technician. 
D.  Hospitals, nursing homes, sanatoriums, or other health care facilities duly licensed by the state of California. 
E.  Barbers, beauticians and manicurists who are duly licensed by the State of California while engaging in the practice within the scope of their respective licenses, except that this exemption applies solely for the massaging of the neck, face and/or scalp of the customer or client of said barber or beautician or in the case of a licensed manicurist, the massaging of the forearm, hands, calves and/or feet. 
F.  Accredited high schools, junior colleges, and colleges or universities whose coaches and trainers are acting within the scope of their employment. 
G.  Trainers of amateur, semi-professional or professional athletes or athletic teams. 
(Ord. No. 2936, § 1, 10-27-09)  
18.41.060 - Operator's permit—Application. 
A.  Any person desiring to obtain a permit to operate a massage establishment shall submit a written application under penalty of perjury on the required form to the chief of police and the community development department. The application shall be accompanied by a non-refundable filing fee established by separate resolution of the city council to help defray the cost of the investigation required by this chapter. 
B.  The application shall be completed and signed by the owner of the proposed massage establishment, if a sole proprietorship, or, if the applicant is a corporation or partnership, it shall designate one of its officers or general partners as its authorized representative. The authorized representative shall complete and sign all application forms required for an individual applicant under this chapter. 
C.  The application and fee required pursuant to this section shall be in addition to any other license, permit or fee required by any other chapter of this code or ordinance hereafter adopted. Only one application fee shall be charged regardless of the number of owners or operators designated in the application. 
D.  The application for a permit does not authorize the operation of a massage establishment unless and until such permit has been properly granted, nor does the possession of a valid massage establishment permit authorize the possessor to perform work for which a massage technician permit or a massage certificate is required. 
E.  The application for a massage establishment permit shall contain or be accompanied by the following information: 
1.  The type of ownership of the business, i.e., whether by individual, partnership, corporation or otherwise. 
a.  If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter together with the state and date of incorporation and the names and residence addresses of each of its current officers, directors and each stockholder holding more than five percent of the stock of that corporation. 
b.  If the applicant is a partnership, the application shall set forth the name and residence addresses of each of the partners, including limited partners. 
c.  If the applicant is a limited partnership, it shall furnish a copy of its certificate of limited partnership filed with the secretary of state. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporations shall apply. 
2.  The true full and precise name under which the massage establishment is to be conducted. 
3.  The present or proposed address where the massage establishment is to be conducted and all telephone numbers for the massage establishment. 
4.  A complete current list of the names and residence addresses of all proposed massage technicians, aides, trainees and other employees who are or will be employed in the massage establishment, if known. If not known at the time of submission of the application, the applicant shall provide the required information no later than ten calendar days prior to opening for business. 
5.  The name and residence addresses of the proposed operator or manager who will be principally in charge of the operation of the massage establishment. 
6.  A description of any other business operated on the same premises as the proposed massage establishment, or within the city or the state, which is owned or operated by the owner or operator. 
7.  The name and address of the owner and lessor of the real property upon or in which the proposed business is to be conducted. In the event the applicant is not the legal owner of the property, the application must be accompanied by a copy of the lease and a notarized affidavit from the owner of the property acknowledging that a massage establishment will be located on his/her property. 
8.  The complete business, occupation and employment history for eight years preceding the date of application, including, but not limited to, a massage establishment or similar type of business history and experience of the applicant; 
9.  The complete massage permit history; whether such person has ever had any similar type of permit or license issued by any agency, board, city, county, territory or state; the date of issuance of such a permit or license, whether the permit or license has been or was ever denied, revoked or suspended; if a vocational or professional license or permit has been or was ever denied, revoked or suspended; if the applicant has ever been required to surrender a permit or license as a result of pending criminal charges or in lieu of said permit or license being suspended or revoked and the reason therefor; 
10.  All criminal convictions, including pleas of nolo contendere, within the last ten years including those convictions dismissed or expunged pursuant to Penal Code Section 1203.4, but excluding minor traffic violations, and the date and place of each such conviction and reason therefor; 
11.  A complete set of fingerprints taken by the police department. The applicant shall be responsible for payment of any fingerprinting fee. 
12.  Two portrait photographs at least two inches by two inches in size taken within the last month. 
13.  Authorization for the city, its agents and employees to seek verification of the information contained in the application. 
14.  Such other identification and information as the chief of police may reasonably require in order to discover the truth of the matters herein specified and as required to be set forth in the application. 
15.  A statement in writing and dated by the person providing the information that he or she certifies under penalty of perjury that all information contained in the application is true and correct. 
16.  A certificate of compliance from any affected department or agency, including but not limited to, the city's community development department, building and safety division and the Los Angeles County Health Department must be submitted prior to the application's final approval. Any required inspection fees shall be the sole responsibility of the applicant. If the certificates of compliance are not received by the chief of police or his/her designee, within ninety calendar days of the date of filing of the application, said application shall be deemed void. If any land use permit or other entitlement for the use of the property as a massage establishment is required, such permit or use entitlement shall be obtained by the applicant prior to the massage establishment permit becoming effective. 
F.  Every owner and operator shall also provide the following personal information: 
1.  The full, true name and all aliases used; 
2.  Date and place of birth, California driver's license, California identification card, Social Security card and resident alien card, if applicable; 
3.  The current residence address and residence telephone number and all previous residential addresses for a minimum of eight years immediately preceding the present address of the applicant and the dates of residence for each address; 
4.  Acceptable written proof that the owner and/or operator is at least eighteen years of age; 
5.  Height, weight, gender and color of hair and eyes; 
G.  If, during the term of a permit, the permittee has any change in information submitted on the original or renewal application, the permittee shall notify the police department in writing of any such change within ten business days thereafter. 
H.  If an owner or operator also desires to act as a massage technician, he or she shall also satisfy the requirements for the respective permit set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2936, § 1, 10-27-09)  
18.41.070 - Operator's permit—Issuance or denial. 
A.  Upon receipt of a complete written application for a permit, the chief of police or his designee shall conduct an investigation to ascertain whether a permit should be issued as requested. The chief of police or his designee, shall, within ninety calendar days of receipt of an application, approve, conditionally approve or deny the application. The ninety-day period may be extended for up to thirty additional calendar days, if necessary, to complete the investigation. The chief of police at that time may issue such permit as requested, unless he/she makes any of the following findings: 
1.  The applicant, or any of the officers or directors of the corporation, a partner or any person directly engaged or employed in the massage establishment, has within eight years preceding the date of the application: 
a.  Been convicted of a violation of any provision of law pursuant to which a person is required to register under the provisions of Penal Code Section 290, or conduct in violation of California Penal Code Sections 266h, 266i, 314, 315, 316, 318, subsections (a), (b) or (d) of Penal Code Section 647, or convicted of an attempt to commit or conspiracy to commit any of the above mentioned offenses, or any other crime involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit, or moral turpitude or when the prosecution accepted a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to a charge of a violation of California Penal Code Sections 415, 602 or any lesser included or related offense, in satisfaction of, or as a substitute for, any of the previously listed crimes, or any crime committed while engaged in the ownership of a massage establishment or the practice of massage. 
b.  Been convicted of a violation of Health and Safety Code Section 11550 or any offense involving the illegal sale, distribution or possession of a controlled substance specified in Health and Safety Code Section 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057 or 11058. 
c.  Been convicted of any offense in any other state or U.S. territory, which is the equivalent of any of the abovementioned offenses. 
d.  Been subjected to a permanent injunction against the conducting or maintaining of a nuisance pursuant to Sections 11225 through 11235 of the California Penal Code, or any similar provisions of law in a jurisdiction outside the state of California. 
e.  Committed an act in another jurisdiction which, if committed in this state, would have been a violation of law and, which, if done by a permittee under this chapter, would be grounds for denial, suspension or revocation of the permit. 
f.  Has had a massage operator or massage technician permit or other similar license or permit denied, suspended or revoked for cause by the city, any state, local agency or other licensing authority, or has had to surrender a permit or license as a result of pending criminal charges or in lieu of said permit or license being suspended or revoked. 
3.  The owner and/or operator has made a false, misleading or fraudulent statement or omission of fact to the city in the permit application process. 
4.  The application does not contain all of the information required by Section 18.43.060. 
5.  The owner and/or operator is not at least eighteen years of age. 
6.  The massage establishment, as proposed, does not comply with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, health, zoning, fire, building and safety requirements and standards. 
7.  The applicant failed to obtain a certificate of compliance from the affected department or agency, including but not limited to, the city's community development department. 
8.  The required fee(s) has not been paid and/or all other requirements of this chapter have not been satisfied in the time specified if applicable. 
B.  If the application is denied for failure to comply with subsection (A)(2) or (3) of this section, the applicant may not reapply for a period of six months from the date the application was denied. 
C.  If the chief of police, upon completion of the investigation, determines that the applicant does not fulfill the requirements as set forth in this chapter, the chief of police shall deny said application by dated written notice to the applicant. The applicant shall have the right of appeal as set forth in Section 18.43.280. 
(Ord. No. 2936, § 1, 10-27-09)  
18.41.080 - Operating requirements—General conditions. 
All owners and operators shall comply with the following general conditions and any other conditions specified by the chief of police. 
A.  Except to the extent required, in writing, by a state-licensed medical practitioner, no massage technician, employee or contractor shall massage the genitals, gluteal fold, or anal area of any patron or the breasts of any female patron, nor shall any operator or manager of a massage establishment allow or permit such a massage to the above specified areas. A massage shall not be given and no patron shall be in the presence of a massage technician, contractor, operator, manager or other employee of a massage establishment unless the patron's genitals, gluteal fold, anus, and, if a female patron, the female patron's breasts, are fully covered by a non-transparent covering. 
B.  No person granted a permit pursuant to this chapter shall use any name or conduct business under any designation not specified in his or her permit. 
C.  All massage establishments required to be licensed under this chapter shall have a manager on the premises at all times the massage establishment is open. The operator of each massage establishment shall file a statement with the chief of police or his designee, designating the person or persons with power to act as a manager. The operator and/or on duty manager shall post, on a daily basis, the name and photograph (a minimum size of four inches by six inches) of each on-duty manager and each on-duty technician in a conspicuous public place in the lobby of the massage establishment. The operator, or the manager in the operator's absence, shall be responsible for ensuring compliance with this chapter. 
D.  The operator's permit shall be displayed in a conspicuous public place in the lobby of the massage establishment. 
E.  The hours of operation must be posted in the front window and clearly visible from the outside. 
F.  No massage establishment required to be licensed under this chapter shall open for business without having at least one massage technician who holds a current valid massage technician's permit for that specific massage establishment or a massage certificate. There shall be at least one massage technician who holds a current valid massage technician's permit or a massage certificate on the premises, and on duty, at all times when the establishment is open. 
G.  The operator and/or manager shall ensure that the massage technician permit and/or massage certificate for each on-duty massage technician is conspicuously displayed in a public place in the lobby and that each massage technician is wearing the identification required by Section 18.43.200(B) at all times when working in the massage establishment. Such identification shall be provided to a city official upon demand. 
H.  An operator and/or manager shall be responsible for the conduct of all employees and contractors while they are on the massage establishment premises. Any act or omission of any employee or independent contractor constituting a violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed the act or omission of the operator or manager for purposes of determining whether the operator's license shall be revoked, suspended, denied or renewed. 
I.  No operator and/or manager shall employ any person as a massage technician who does not have a valid massage technician permit issued pursuant to this chapter or a massage certificate in good standing. Every operator or manager shall report to the chief of police or his designee, any change of employees, whether by new or renewed employment, discharge or termination, on the form and in the manner required by the chief of police. The report shall contain the name of the employee and the date of hire or termination. The report shall be made within five calendar days of the date of hire or termination. The operator or manager shall deliver notice of the termination of any massage technician no longer employed by the operator or manager to the chief of police or his designee, within five calendar days of termination. 
J.  All employees, including massage technicians, shall, at all times while on the business premises, wear clean, nontransparent outer garments solidly covering the shoulders to four inches or less above the knees. Under no circumstances shall these garments permit the genitals, pubic area, abdomen, back, buttocks, breasts or chest to be exposed. Massage technicians shall maintain the massage technician permit badge or the massage certificate badge visibly on their person affixed to the right front of their required smock at all times during business hours. 
K.  The operator and/or manager shall maintain a register of all employees and contractors including any employees and contractors who is holding a current CAMTC certificate. The employee and contractor register shall be maintained on the premises for a minimum period of two years following an employee's termination. The operator and/or manager shall make the employee and contractor register immediately available for inspection upon demand of a representative of the police department at all reasonable times. The employee and contractor register shall include, but not be limited to the following information: 
1.  The name, nicknames and/or aliases used by an employee. 
2.  The employee or contractor's home address and relevant phone numbers (including but not limited to home, cellular and pager numbers). 
3.  The employee or contractor's age, date of birth, gender, height, weight, color of hair and eyes. 
4.  The employee or contractor's social security number. 
5.  The date of employment and termination, if any. 
6.  The duties of each employee and contractor. 
L.  No massage establishment shall operate as a school of massage, or use the same facilities as that of a school of massage. 
M.  At all times, the operator, manager and employees shall comply with all provisions of this chapter and any applicable provisions of this code. 
N.  Insurance. No person shall engage in, conduct or carry on the business of a massage establishment unless there is on file with the city's business license department, in full force and effect at all times, a policy of insurance issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the State of California evidencing that the permittee is insured under a liability insurance policy providing minimum coverage of one million dollars for injury or death to one person arising out of the operation of any massage establishment and the administration of a massage. 
O.  Workers' Compensation Insurance. No person shall engage in, conduct or carry on the business of a massage establishment unless there is on file with the city's business license department, in full force and effect at all times, an insurance certificate, or some other sufficient evidence of compliance, demonstrating that the permittee is in compliance with the workers' compensation insurance coverage requirements of the state of California. 
(Ord. No. 2936, § 1, 10-27-09)  
18.41.090 - Operating requirements—Facilities. 
All owners, operators and managers shall comply with the following operating requirement for facilities and any other conditions specified by the chief of police: 
A.  Structure. Massage establishments shall be carried on in a structure, which is located in a zoning district, which permits such use. When a massage establishment is newly constructed, three sets of plans shall be submitted to the city and the county health care agency for approval and shall be accompanied by the appropriate plan check fee. 
B.  Signs. Any signs shall be in conformance with the current sign ordinances of the city. Each operator and/or manager shall post and maintain, adjacent to the main entrance and the front of the business, a readable sign identifying the premises as a massage establishment. The sign, and the front of the business, shall not be illuminated by strobe or flashing lights. 
C.  Services List. Each operator and/or manager shall post and maintain a list of services available and the cost of such services in the lobby of the massage establishment in a conspicuous public place and in any other location on the premises as the operator and/or manager deems appropriate. No operator or manager shall permit, and no massage technician shall offer or perform, any service other than those posted. 
D.  Lighting. The interior of the business shall maintain adequate illumination to make the conduct of patrons and employees within the premises readily discernable. The actual lighting level shall be approved in advance by the police chief and maintained during all hours of operation. No strobe, flashing lights or dimmer switches shall be used. No colored lights shall be used nor shall any coverings be used which change the color of the primary light source. 
E.  Ventilation. The operator and/or manager shall provide in each massage room, minimum ventilation in accordance with the Section 1203.4 of the current California Building Code (CCR Title 24, Part 2, Volume 1 of 2) or successor provision or provisions and the applicable provisions of the current International Building Code as published by the International Code Council. 
F.  Toilet Facilities. A minimum of one toilet and one separate wash basin shall be provided for patrons in each massage establishment, which basin shall provide soap or detergent and hot and cold running water at all times and shall be located within close proximity to the massage rooms. A permanently installed soap dispenser, filled with soap, and a single service towel dispenser shall be provided at the restroom washbasin. Bar soaps shall not be used. A trash receptacle shall be provided in each toilet room. 
G.  Bathing, Dressing and Locker Facilities. A minimum of one shower and one dressing room containing a separate locker capable of being locked, shall be provided for patrons to be served at the massage establishment. The shower facility shall be equipped with soap or detergent and hot and cold running water at all times and shall be located within close proximity to the massage rooms. Bar soaps shall not be used. 
H.  Separate Rooms. If male and female patrons are to be treated simultaneously at the same massage establishment separate massage rooms, dressing, bathing and toilet facilities shall be provided for male and female patrons. Each separate facility or room shall be clearly marked as such. The requirements of this subsection will be met and "couples massages" are allowed in a single room if the massage establishment is operated as an accessory use within, and as part of spa services offered in an approved day spa facility, health club, athletic club, or gym. Couples massages are permitted within a single room subject to all the requirements of this chapter, including, but not limited to the provision of a separate massage table and massage technician for each patron. The separate massage tables used during the couples massage must remain separated as to allow free passage and movements of the massage technicians during the course of the treatment. Any room used for couples massage shall be large enough to comply with any applicable building and fire codes and to permit free passage and movements of the massage technicians. For the purpose of this subsection, accessory use shall mean a use which is not more than twenty-five percent of the floor area of the related health or athletic activities of the primary use. 
I.  Maintenance. Wet and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor rooms or cabinets, toilet rooms, shower and bath rooms, tanning booths, whirlpool baths and pools shall be thoroughly cleaned and disinfected with a disinfectant approved by the county health department, as needed, but at least once each day the premises are open. All facilities for the massage establishment must be in good repair and shall be thoroughly cleaned and sanitized at least on a daily basis when the business is in operation. All walls, floors and ceilings of each restroom and shower area shall be constructed with materials that are smooth and easily cleanable. No carpeting shall be installed in any of these specified areas. 
J.  Massage Tables. A massage table shall be provided in each massage room and all massages shall be performed on the massage table. No more than one patron may occupy a massage table at the same time. The tables should have a minimum height of eighteen inches. Two-inch thick foam pads with a maximum width of four feet may be used on a massage table and must be covered with durable, washable plastic or other waterproof material acceptable to the county health department. Beds, floor mattresses and waterbeds shall not be permitted on the premises. 
K.  Front Door. One front door that enters into the lobby and/or other waiting room shall be provided for customer use. All customers and any other persons other than employees shall be required to enter and exit through the front door of the establishment. 
(Ord. No. 2936, § 1, 10-27-09)  
18.41.100 - Operating requirements—Operations. 
All owners, operators and managers shall comply with the following operating requirements and any other conditions specified by the chief of police: 
A.  Equipment. Each operator and/or manager shall provide and maintain on the premises adequate equipment for disinfecting and sterilizing instruments used in massage. 
B.  Linen. Common use of towels or linen shall not be permitted. Towels and linen shall be laundered or changed promptly after each use. Separate enclosed cabinets shall be provided for the storage of clean and soiled linen and shall be plainly marked "clean linen" and "soiled linen" and shall have doors or covers. 
C.  Living Quarters Prohibited. No person or persons shall be allowed to reside, dwell, occupy or live inside the massage establishment at any time. Living quarters, if any, shall be completely separate from the massage establishment. No cooking or food preparation of any kind shall be prepared for sale or sold in the establishment unless an appropriate food vending permit is granted by the city and the County of Los Angeles and a full service kitchen is installed. Such a kitchen, if any, shall be for the sole use of employees, and shall be installed in an "employees only" area. The full service kitchen shall have a minimum of a sink with hot and cold running water, a refrigerator, a stove, and sufficient cabinets to store cooking utensils. 
D.  Alcoholic Beverages/Drugs. No person shall enter, be in or on, or remain in or on, any part of a massage establishment while in possession of, consuming, using or under the influence of, any alcoholic beverage or controlled substance. The operator and/or manager shall be responsible to ensure that no such person shall enter or remain upon the premises of the massage establishment. Service of alcoholic beverages shall not be permitted. 
E.  Adult Oriented Merchandise Prohibited. The use or possession of adult oriented merchandise in or on any part of a massage establishment is expressly prohibited. 
F.  Recordings. No building or part thereof where massage or massage services are being conducted shall be equipped with any electronic, mechanical or artificial device used, or capable of being used, for recording or videotaping, for monitoring the activities, conversation, or other sounds in the treatment room or room used by customers. 
G.  Coverings. Each massage establishment shall provide to all patrons clean, sanitary and opaque coverings of a minimum size of thirty inches by sixty inches, capable of covering the patrons' specified anatomical areas, including but not limited to the genital area, anus and female breasts. No common use of such coverings shall be permitted and re-use is specifically prohibited unless adequately cleaned prior to its re-use. 
H.  Records. Every operator and/or manager shall keep a record of the dates and hours of each treatment or service, the name and address of the patron, the name of technician administering such service and a description of the treatment or service rendered. A short medical history form shall be completed by the operator and/or manager to determine if the patron has any communicable diseases, areas of pain, high blood pressure or any physical condition which may be adversely affected by massage. These records shall be prepared prior to administering any massage or treatment and shall be retained for a period of twenty-four months after such treatment or service. These records shall be open to inspection upon demand only by officials charged with enforcement of this chapter or emergency personnel for emergency purposes and for no other purpose. The police department may periodically inspect the records to ensure compliance with this section. The information furnished or secured as a result of any such records shall be used only to ensure and enforce compliance with this chapter, or any other applicable state or federal laws and shall remain confidential. Any unauthorized disclosure or use of such information by any officer or employee of the city shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
I.  Hours of Operation. Massage operations shall be carried on or conducted, and the premises shall be open, only between the hours of seven a.m. and nine p.m. The operator and/or manager must advise the city, in writing, at the time of submission of the application for a massage establishment permit of the hours of operation within the times set forth above. The operator and/or manager shall notify the city, in writing, at least thirty calendar days prior to the date of the effective change, of any changes in the hours of operation. No person shall operate a massage establishment or administer a massage in any massage establishment between the hours of nine p.m. and seven a.m. A massage begun any time before nine p.m. must nevertheless terminate at nine p.m. All customers, patrons and visitors shall be excluded from the massage establishment during these hours and be advised of these hours. The hours of operation must be displayed in a conspicuous public place in the lobby within the massage establishment and in the front window clearly visible from the outside. 
J.  Advertising. No massage establishment shall place, publish or distribute or cause to be placed, published or distributed any advertising matter that depicts any portion of the human body that would reasonably suggest to prospective customers or clients that any service is available other than those services described in this chapter and posted on the premises as required by this chapter, nor shall any massage establishment employ language in the text of any advertising that would reasonably suggest to a prospective patron that any service is available other than those services described in this chapter and posted on the premises as required by this chapter. 
K.  Handicapped Areas. All massage establishments must comply with all state and federal laws and regulations for handicapped customers. 
L.  Compliance. Proof of compliance with all applicable provisions of this code shall be provided. 
M.  Doors. All exterior doors (except back or rear exterior doors used only for employee entrance to and exit from the massage establishment) shall remain unlocked during business hours. All interior doors, including but not limited to all doors leading to customer areas, the front reception, hallway or front exterior doors, shall not have any locking mechanisms. A door leading from the lobby area to customer areas, if any, shall not have any locking mechanism or be capable of being locked or blocked to prevent entry, in any manner. 
N.  Massage and Dressing Room Doors. All massage and dressing rooms shall be screened off by curtains, draw drapes, or in the alternative, swinging doors, so long as such doors are mounted at least eighteen inches from the floor and not less than ten inches from the top of the door frame. A full door may be used if it does not have a locking mechanism and contains a reverse peephole, allowing visual inspections from outside the room. No other type of door shall be used except those provided for in this section for massage and dressing room doors. No massage may be given within any massage room within a massage establishment, which is fitted with a door capable of being locked. 
O.  Access. No person(s) other than the owner, operator, operator's employees, holders of valid massage technician permits issued pursuant to this chapter and customers will be allowed beyond the front lobby, which lobby shall be located directly inside the front door entrance, during the hours of operation. Any other person(s) found beyond the first interior door leading to the inside of the business including, but not limited to, hallways, massage rooms, reception/business offices or lounge area will be in violation of this section. Entry doors to any room shall not be obstructed by any means. 
P.  Discrimination. No massage establishment may discriminate or exclude patrons on the basis of race, sex, religion, age or handicap. 
Q.  Notices. The chief of police shall require that the following notice be posted in the event that any employee of the massage establishment or any person who has been aided and abetted by an employee of the massage establishment has been found, after full hearing by administrative proceeding or by a state court, to have violated any of the offenses that would be grounds for denial under Section 18.43.070 or 18.43.180: 
NOTICE TO ALL PATRONS 
THIS MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT AND THE MASSAGE ROOMS DO NOT PROVIDE COMPLETE PRIVACY AND ARE SUBJECT TO INSPECTION BY THE WHITTIER POLICE DEPARTMENT WITHOUT PRIOR NOTICE. 
1.  The language for said notice set forth above shall be provided by the chief of police. Every owner, operator and/or manager required to post such notice shall be required to pay for the cost of any and all notices required by this section. 
2.  The notice shall be conspicuously posted in a location within the massage establishment that is easily visible to any person entering the premises and in each massage room. The notices shall be posted for twelve months following the violation of any of the offenses set forth above. 
(Ord. No. 2936, § 1, 10-27-09)  
18.41.110 - Inspections. 
A.  The police chief and the county health department, or their authorized representatives, shall have the right to enter the massage establishment at any time during business hours for the purpose of making reasonable unscheduled inspections to observe and enforce compliance with applicable regulations, laws, and provisions of this chapter. During an inspection, the police department may also verify the identity of all employees. 
B.  The city's community development department, fire department, police department and the county health department may, from time to time, make an inspection of each massage establishment for the purpose of determining that the provisions of this chapter, state law or other applicable laws or regulations are met. Criminal investigations may be conducted as directed by the chief of police. The police department may inspect the occupied massage rooms for the purpose of determining that the provisions of this chapter are met upon occurrence of any of the conditions described in Section 18.43.100(Q), which would require the posting of the "Notice To All Patrons". 
C.  Inspections of the massage establishment shall be conducted during business hours. 
D.  An operator, manager, their agents, servants or employees commits a punishable offense if he or she refuses to permit, delays or interferes with a lawful inspection of the premises by a representative of the police department at any time it is occupied or open for business. 
(Ord. No. 2936, § 1, 10-27-09)  
18.41.120 - Operator's permit—Non-assignability. 
No operator's permit may be sold, transferred or assigned by a permittee, or by operation of law, to any other person or persons. Any such sale, transfer or assignment, or attempted sale, transfer or assignment, shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such permit and such permit shall thereafter be null and void except as hereinafter set forth. 
(Ord. No. 2936, § 1, 10-27-09)  
18.41.130 - Operator's permit—Change in ownership of business. 
A.  If the permittee is a partnership and one or more of the partners should die, one or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner or partners without effecting a surrender or termination of such permit, and in such case, the permit, upon notification to the chief of police, shall be placed in the name of the surviving partners. One or more proposed partners in a partnership granted a permit hereunder may make application to the chief of police, together with the fee established by the city council therefor, to amend the original application providing all information as required for partners in the first instance and, upon approval thereof, the transfer of the interests of one or more partners to the proposed partner or partners may occur. 
B.  If the permit is issued to a corporation, stock may be sold, transferred, issued, or assigned to stockholders who have been named on the application. If any stock is sold, transferred, issued, or assigned to a person not listed on the application as a stockholder, the permit shall be deemed terminated and void; provided, however, the proposed transferee may submit to the chief of police, together with a fee established by the city council, an application to amend the original application providing all information as required for stockholders in the first instance, and, upon approval thereof, the transfer may then occur. 
(Ord. No. 2936, § 1, 10-27-09)  
18.41.140 - Operator's permit—Change of location or name. 
A.  Every operator and/or manager shall report immediately to the police department and the community development department any and all changes of name or designation under which the business is to be conducted, and all changes of address or telephone numbers of the massage establishment. A change of location of the massage establishment may be approved by the chief of police provided there is compliance with all applicable regulations of the city and the new location is zoned for such a use. 
B.  No permittee shall operate, conduct, manage, engage in, or carry on the business of a massage establishment under any name other than the person's name and the name of the massage establishment specified in the permit. 
C.  Any application for an extension or expansion of a building or other place of business of a massage establishment shall require inspection(s) and shall comply with the provisions and regulations of this chapter and all other city ordinances including but not limited to zoning ordinances and building, safety and occupancy standards. 
(Ord. No. 2936, § 1, 10-27-09)  
18.41.150 - Applicability to existing massage establishments. 
A.  Commencing on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, all permits for a massage establishment are to be issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all persons and businesses described herein whether the described activities were established before or after the effective date of this article, except that massage establishments legally in business prior to the effective date hereof shall have three months or until the expiration of their current business license, whichever is greater, to comply with the terms hereof. 
(Ord. No. 2936, § 1, 10-27-09)  
18.41.160 - Massage technician permit required. 
A.  No person shall perform or administer a massage, or advertise to provide massage services in the city, unless such person has in effect a valid massage technician permit issued pursuant to Section 18.43.180 of this chapter. Each massage technician permit holder shall be issued a photo identification badge and a massage technician permit by the city. The permit or certificate holder shall wear the identification badge on his or her person, at all times when working in the massage establishment and shall ensure that the massage technician permit or massage certificate is displayed in a conspicuous place in the lobby during business hours. Each permit holder shall immediately surrender to the chief of police any identification badge and massage technician permit issued by the city upon the suspension, revocation, or expiration of such permit. 
B.  Persons holding a valid CAMTC certificate while Chapter 10.5 of Division 2 of the California Business and Professions Code remains in full force and effect may provide massage services in the city without obtaining a massage technician permit issued by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2936, § 1, 10-27-09)  
18.41.170 - Massage technician permit—Application. 
A.  Any person desiring to obtain a massage technician permit shall file a written application under penalty of perjury on the required form with the chief of police. The application shall be accompanied by a non-refundable filing fee established by separate resolution of the city council to help defray the cost of the investigation required by this chapter. 
B.  The application and fee required pursuant to this section shall be in addition to any other license, permit or fee required by any other chapter of this code or ordinance hereafter adopted. 
C.  The application for a massage technician permit shall contain or be accompanied by the following information: 
1.  A statement of the exact location at which the applicant will be working as a massage technician, including the full street address and all telephone numbers associated with said location. 
2.  The applicant's complete business, occupation and employment history for eight years preceding the date of application, including, but not limited to, a massage technician license or similar type of business history and experience of the applicant. 
3.  The complete massage technician permit history of the applicant; whether such person has ever had any similar type of permit or license issued by any agency, board, city, county, territory or state; the date of issuance of such a permit or license, whether the permit or license has been or was ever denied, revoked or suspended; if a vocational or professional license or permit has been or was ever denied, revoked or suspended; if the applicant has ever surrendered a permit or license as a result of pending criminal charges or in lieu of said permit or license being suspended or revoked and the reason therefor. 
4.  All criminal convictions, including pleas of nolo contendere, within the last ten years including those dismissed or expunged pursuant to Penal Code Section 1203.4, but excluding minor traffic violations, and the date and place of each such conviction and reason therefor; 
5.  A complete set of fingerprints taken by the police department. The applicant shall be responsible for payment of any fingerprinting fee. 
6.  Three portrait photographs of the applicant at least two inches by two inches in size taken within the last month. 
7.  Such other information and identification as the chief of police or his designee may require in order to discover the truth of the matters herein specified and as required to be set forth in the application. 
8.  Authorization for the city, its agents and employees to seek verification of the information contained in the application. 
9.  A statement in writing, and dated, by the applicant that he or she certifies under penalty of perjury that all information contained in the application is true and correct. 
D.  Each applicant shall also provide the following personal information concerning the applicant: 
1.  The full, true name and all aliases used by the applicant. 
2.  Date and place of birth, California driver's license or California identification card, Social Security card and resident alien card, if applicable. 
3.  The current residence address and residence telephone number and all previous residential addresses for a minimum of eight years immediately preceding the present address of the applicant and the dates of residence for each address. 
4.  Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least eighteen years of age. 
5.  Height, weight, color of hair, eyes and gender. 
E.  If, during the term of a permit, a permit holder has any change in information submitted on the original or renewal application, the permit holder shall notify the police department of such change within ten business days thereafter, in writing. 
F.  In addition to the above information, each applicant must also furnish either: 
1.  An original or certified copy of a diploma or certificate and certified transcript of graduation from a recognized school of massage; or 
2.  Proof of passage of an independently prepared and administered national certification exam which has been recognized by objective standards to fairly evaluate professional levels of skill, safety and competence as determined by a qualified massage association; or 
3.  Proof of membership or the ability to obtain membership in a qualified massage association. 
G.  The applicant must also supply a course description, an outline of material covered, and a letter to the city from the school administrator verifying completion. 
H.  The applicant must also supply an original, valid state CPR certificate. 
I.  Any outside course of study submitted for approval shall meet the State of California's Office of Post-secondary Education's minimum requirements and be for completion of five hundred hours of on-premises training. 
(Ord. No. 2936, § 1, 10-27-09)  
18.41.180 - Massage technician permit—Issuance and denial. 
A.  Upon receipt of a complete written application for a permit, the chief of police or his designee shall conduct an investigation to ascertain whether a permit should be issued as requested. The chief of police or his designee, shall, within ninety calendar days of receipt of an application, approve, conditionally approve or deny the application. The ninety-day period may be extended for up to thirty additional calendar days, if necessary, to complete the investigation. The chief of police at that time may issue such permit as requested, unless he/she makes any of the following findings: 
1.  The applicant has not passed every section of the practical and written examination as required by this chapter. 
2.  The applicant has, within ten years preceding the date of the application, been convicted of any of the following: 
a.  A violation of any provision of law pursuant to which a person is required to register under the provisions of Penal Code Section 290, or conduct in violation of California Penal Code Sections 266h, 266i, 314, 315, 316, 318, subsections (a), (b) or (d) of Penal Code Section 647, or convicted of an attempt to commit or conspiracy to commit any of the above mentioned offenses, or any other crime involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit, moral turpitude or an act of violence or when the prosecution accepted a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to a charge of a violation of California Penal Code Sections 415, 602 or any lesser included or related offense, in satisfaction of, or as a substitute for, any of the previously listed crimes, or any crime committed while engaged in the ownership of a massage establishment or the practice of massage; 
b.  A violation of Health and Safety Code Section 11550 or any offense involving the illegal sale, distribution or possession of a controlled substance specified in Health and Safety Code Sections 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057 or 11058; or 
c.  Any offense in any other state, which is the equivalent of any of the above-mentioned offenses. 
3.  That the applicant has committed an act in another jurisdiction, which, if committed in this state, would have been a violation of law and, which, if done by a permittee under this chapter, would be grounds for denial, suspension or revocation of the permit. 
4.  That the applicant has engaged in conduct which would constitute grounds for suspension or revocation under Section 18.43.300 of this chapter. 
5.  The applicant has had a massage operator or massage technician permit or other similar license or permit denied, suspended or revoked for cause by the city, any state, local agency or other licensing authority, or has had to surrender a permit or license as a result of pending criminal charges or in lieu of said permit or license being suspended or revoked within eight years prior to the date of the application. 
6.  The applicant has knowingly made a false, misleading or fraudulent statement or omission of fact to the city in the permit application process. 
7.  The application does not contain the information required by Section 18.43.170. 
8.  The applicant is not at least eighteen years of age. 
9.  The applicant has not paid the required fee(s) and/or satisfied all other requirements of this chapter in the time specified. 
B.  If the application is denied for failure to comply with subsection (5) or (6) of this section, the applicant may not reapply for a period of six months from the date the application was denied. 
C.  If the chief of police, upon completion of the investigation, determines that the applicant does not fulfill the requirements as set forth in this chapter, the chief of police shall deny said application by dated written notice to the applicant. The applicant shall have the right of appeal as set forth in Section 18.43.280. 
(Ord. No. 2936, § 1, 10-27-09)  
18.41.200 - Massage technician permit/massage certificate—General conditions. 
All massage technicians shall comply with the following conditions and any other conditions specified by the chief of police on issuance of the massage technician's permit (the following conditions also apply to massage certificate holders): 
A.  Except to the extent required, in writing, by a state-licensed medical practitioner, no massage technician shall massage or allow a massage technician aide, or employee to massage the genitals, gluteal fold, or anal area of any patron or the breasts of any female patron. Nor shall any massage technician, massage technician aide or employee solicit or allow a patron to touch or massage in any manner the genitals, gluteal fold, or anal area of a massage technician, massage technician aide or employee, or the breasts of any female massage technician, massage technician aide or employee. A massage shall not be given and no patron shall be in the presence of a massage technician, massage technician aide, operator, manager or other employee of a massage establishment unless the patron's genitals, gluteal fold, anus, and, if a female patron, the female patron's breasts, are fully covered by a non-transparent covering. 
B.  The massage technician shall wear a photo identification card prepared and issued by the city at all times when present in the massage establishment. Such identification shall be provided to the chief of police upon demand. The identification card shall be worn on outer clothing with the photo side facing out. If a massage technician changes his or her business address, he or she shall, prior to such change, obtain from the chief of police a new photo identification card and advise the police department, in writing, of the new business address. 
C.  Massage technicians shall not perform any massage at any location other than the location specified on the permit. 
D.  While on duty, the massage technician shall not use any name or designation or conduct business under any other name or designation than the name specified in his or her permit and photo identification card. 
E.  Massage attendants, at all times while on the business premises, shall wear clean, nontransparent outer garments solidly covering the shoulders to four inches or less above the knees. Under no circumstances shall these garments permit the genitals, pubic area, buttocks or chest to be exposed. Massage technicians shall maintain the massage technician permit visibly on their person affixed to the right front of their required smock at all times during business hours. 
F.  A massage technician shall consent to, and shall not prevent, delay or interfere with an inspection of the massage establishment by the city's community development services, fire department, police department and the health department for the purpose of determining that the provisions of this chapter or other applicable laws or regulations are met. The massage technician shall consent to the inspection of the occupied massage rooms by the police department for the purpose of determining that the provisions of this chapter are met. 
(Ord. No. 2936, § 1, 10-27-09)  
18.41.210 - Massage technician permit—Non-assignability. 
No massage technician permit may be sold, transferred or assigned by a permittee, or any operation of law, to any other person or persons. Any such sale, transfer or assignment, or attempted sale, transfer or assignment, shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such permit and such permit shall thereafter be null and void. 
(Ord. No. 2936, § 1, 10-27-09)  
18.41.220 - Massage technician—Additional or change in location. 
In the event a massage technician currently licensed by the city seeks employment at a massage establishment in addition to or different from the establishment indicated on the original application, the permitee shall notify the city in writing within ten calendar days from the date the permittee is employed by the establishment where the permittee is to provide massage services. No additional fee shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 2936, § 1, 10-27-09)  
18.41.230 - Applicability to existing massage technicians. 
A.  Commencing on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, all permits for a massage technician are to be issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all persons and businesses described herein whether the described activities were established before or after the effective date of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2936, § 1, 10-27-09)  
18.41.240 - Permit term and renewal. 
A.  Permits for massage establishments, massage technicians shall be for a period of one year, unless sooner revoked as set forth in this chapter. 
B.  No permit granted herein shall confer any vested right to any person or business for more than the permit period. All massage operators and technicians subject to this chapter shall comply with the provisions of this chapter as they may be amended hereafter. 
C.  Applications for the renewal of a permit shall be filed with the chief of police at least sixty calendar days before the expiration of the then current permit to be renewed. Temporary permits will not be issued. Any permittee allowing his or her permit to lapse, or which permit expires during a suspension, shall be required to submit a new application and pay the corresponding original application fees. 
D.  Any person desiring to obtain a renewal of his/her respective permit shall file a written application under penalty of perjury on the required form with the chief of police, who shall conduct an investigation. The application shall be accompanied by a non-refundable filing fee established by separate resolution of the city council to help defray the cost of the investigation required by this chapter. An applicant shall be required to update the information contained in his/her original permit application and provide any new and/or additional information as may be reasonably required by the chief of police in order to determine whether said permit should be renewed. 
E.  A massage technician permittee shall also be required to submit with his or her renewal application proof of completion of at least thirty hours of continuing education courses in massage from a recognized school of massage. Failure to provide this documentation shall be grounds for non-renewal of the massage technician's permit. 
F.  The chief of police shall have sixty calendar days to investigate the renewal application and shall render a decision within said sixty calendar days, but no later than the date of expiration of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 2936, § 1, 10-27-09)  
18.41.250 - Suspension, revocation, denial and appeal. 
A.  Violation and Noncompliance. Failure of a permittee to comply with any requirement imposed by this chapter or any other conditions imposed pursuant to the permit shall be grounds for non-renewal, suspension or revocation of the permit. 
B.  Suspension, Non-Renewal or Revocation of Operator's Permit. The chief of police may suspend, revoke or refuse to renew an operator's permit if any of the following conditions exist: 
1.  A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, or if an operator or manager has been convicted of any law specified in Section 18.43.070(A). 
2.  The chief of police makes any of the findings necessary to deny a permit under Section 18.43.070. 
3.  If there have been three or more violations of the provisions of this chapter within a twelve-month period which demonstrate that the operator and/or manager is unable to operate or manage the massage establishment in a law abiding manner. 
C.  Suspension, Non-Renewal or Revocation of Massage Technician Permit. The chief of police may suspend, revoke or refuse to renew a massage technician permit if any of the following conditions exists: 
1.  A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, or if a massage technician has been convicted of any law specified in Section 18.43.070(A); or 
2.  The chief of police makes any of the findings necessary to deny a permit under Section 18.43.180. 
(Ord. No. 2936, § 1, 10-27-09)  
18.41.260 - Notice. 
When the chief of police concludes that grounds for denial, suspension, revocation or refusal to renew a permit exist, the chief of police shall serve the applicant or permit holder, either personally or by certified mail addressed to the address listed on the application, with a notice of denial, non-renewal or notice of intent to suspend or revoke a permit (the "notice"). This notice shall state the reasons for the proposed action, the effective date of the decision, the right of the applicant or permit holder to appeal the decision to the city manager and that the chief of police's decision will be final if no appeal is filed within the time stated. 
(Ord. No. 2936, § 1, 10-27-09)  
18.41.270 - Appeal. 
A.  The right to appeal to the city manager shall terminate upon the expiration of fifteen calendar days from the date of personal service or the date of acknowledgment on the certified mail of the above notice. The appeal shall be personally delivered to or sent by certified mail to the chief of police. 
B.  In the event an appeal is timely filed, the suspension or revocation shall not become effective until a final decision has been rendered by the city manager. If no appeal is filed, the suspension or revocation shall become effective upon the expiration of the period for filing appeals. 
C.  The city manager shall set a date, time and place for a hearing on appeal and shall notify the appellant of such date, time and place of the hearing. Said notice shall be sent by certified mail with proof of service attached, to the appellant, applicant or permittee at least ten calendar days prior to the date of the hearing, addressed to the address listed on the respective application or, the address given in the notice of appeal. The appellant, applicant or permittee shall be entitled to notice of the basis for the proposed action, a copy of the documents upon which the notice was based and will have the opportunity to present contrary evidence at the hearing. 
D.  The city manager, in his sole discretion, may grant or deny a request for a continuance. 
E.  The city manager shall preside over the hearing on appeal or, in the alternative, the city manager may appoint a hearing officer to conduct the hearing and receive relevant evidence. The city manager or his designee shall render a written decision within forty-five calendar days from the date of the hearing. The decision of the city manager or his designee shall be final. 
F.  The following rules of evidence shall apply at the hearing: 
1.  Oral evidence shall be taken only under oath or affirmation. The city manager or designee shall have authority to administer oaths, and to receive and rule on admissibility of evidence. 
2.  Each party shall have the right to call and examine witnesses, to introduce exhibits, and to cross-examine opposing witnesses who have testified under direct examination. The city manager or his or her designee may also call and examine any witness. 
3.  Technical rules relating to evidence and witnesses shall not apply to hearings provided for in this chapter. Any relevant evidence may be admitted if it is material and is evidence customarily relied upon by responsible persons in the conduct of their affairs regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule which might make admission of such evidence improper over objection in civil actions. Hearsay testimony may be admissible and used for the purpose of supplementing or explaining any evidence given in direct examination, but shall not be sufficient in itself to support a finding unless such testimony would be admissible over objection in civil actions. The rules of privilege shall be applicable to the extent they are now, or are hereafter permitted in civil actions. Irrelevant, collateral, undue, and repetitious testimony shall be excluded. 
(Ord. No. 2936, § 1, 10-27-09)  
18.41.280 - New application after denial or revocation of permit. 
A person may not apply for a permit pursuant to this chapter within one year from the denial or revocation of such permit. 
(Ord. No. 2936, § 1, 10-27-09)  
18.41.300 - Surrender of permit. 
Any person to whom a permit has been issued pursuant to this chapter shall immediately surrender his or her permit to the chief of police upon its suspension or revocation. 
(Ord. No. 2936, § 1, 10-27-09)  
18.41.310 - Permissible locations. 
Unless the owner or operator is a holder of a valid CAMTC certificate throughout the terms of the business, a massage establishment shall not be located within a five hundred-foot radius of a church, temple, and other places of religious worship, park, school, child day care facility or residentially zoned property. The distance between a proposed massage establishment and a church, temple, and other places of religious worship, park, school, daycare facility or residential zone shall be measured from property line to property line, along a straight line extended between the two points. This requirement shall not apply to massage establishments legally existing on or before January 1, 2009. 
(Ord. No. 2936, § 1, 10-27-09)  
18.41.320 - Fees. 
The city council shall establish by resolution, and from time to time may amend, the fees for the administration of this chapter. The city shall include in this resolution a health services fee schedule prescribing annual fees to be paid by the operator of each massage establishment, such fees to be paid directly to the County of Los Angeles Health Department and retained by the county as reimbursement for said services related to this chapter. Fees required by this chapter shall be in addition to any other fees that may be required under any other chapter of this code. 
(Ord. No. 2936, § 1, 10-27-09)  
18.41.330 - Violation and penalty. 
A.  Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
B.  Any massage establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be, and the same is declared to be, unlawful and a public nuisance, and the city may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings, for the abatement, removal and enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law, and shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such massage establishments and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining a massage establishment contrary to the provisions of this chapter. 
C.  The penalties set forth herein, including but not limited to the requirement for posting the notice described in Section 18.43.100(Q), are cumulative and in addition to all other remedies, violations and penalties set forth in this chapter, or in any other ordinances, laws, rules or regulations of the city of Whittier, County of Los Angeles and the State of California. 
(Ord. No. 2936, § 1, 10-27-09)  
Chapter 18.42 - PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS 
Sections: 
 
18.42.010 - Created. 
Planned development districts shall be created in the same manner as property is reclassified from one zone classification to another within the city, in the manner set forth in Chapter 18.60. When a planned development district has been so created, it shall be designated upon the zoning map of the city as an overlay zone, by adding the parenthetically enclosed letters "PD" after the zoning symbol, indicating the zone in which the subject property is included. 
(Prior code § 9431)  
18.42.020 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the provisions of this chapter is to provide, with respect to properties classified in any of the R zones, and in the C-O zone for senior citizen housing only: 
A.  A reasonably flexible vehicle which will provide for the controlled development of such properties; and/or 
B.  For the preservation of natural land features, open space and other valuable desirable environmental features of a particular area; and/or 
C.  A method for the development of such properties with projects utilizing unique design features, such as privately maintained recreational and/or service facilities available for the common use of residents of the area, or for specific groups of people such as the elderly and handicapped; 
while insuring compliance with the general plan, any applicable specific plan and compatibility of use with respect to existing and future developments in surrounding areas. 
(Ord. 2343 § 2, 1985: prior code § 9430)  
18.42.030 - Permitted uses. 
No person shall construct or maintain any building, structure or use on any lot included within an established planned development district unless such building, structure or use is permitted pursuant to the regulations contained in this title, applicable to such lot by reason of its underlying zone classification. In addition to such principal permitted uses, accessory uses permitted by the underlying zone classification shall also be allowed, whether or not located on the same lot as the principal use or uses. 
(Prior code § 9432)  
18.42.040 - Development plan—Required. 
A.  No building permit shall be issued for the construction, reconstruction or relocation of any building or structure, nor shall any use of land be commenced or permitted on any real property within the city which is included within a planned development district, unless a precise plan of development therefor (hereinafter, "plan") has been approved, in the time and manner set forth in this chapter. No such plan shall be approved unless the city council determines: 
1.  That the general approval thereof is consistent with the public peace, health, safety and general welfare; 
2.  That the development proposed is consistent with the city's general plan, and any applicable specific plan relating to the areas included within such plan; and 
3.  That substantial compliance will be had with the purpose and intent of the zoning regulations of the city. 
B.  Where such a plan has been so approved, notwithstanding any provision of this title to the contrary, the conditions of approval imposed upon such plan, and the provisions of this chapter shall be observed in development of the areas included within the boundaries of such plan, to the exclusion of the regulations applicable to the lot by reasons of its underlying zone classification. 
(Prior code § 9433)  
18.42.050 - Development plan—Application. 
Applications for plans shall be filed with the director for approval, and shall consist of the following: 
A.  Proof of ownership of property or the written authorization from the owner permitting such filing; 
B.  Maps and drawings showing: 
1.  The name, address and telephone number of the applicant, and of the person who prepared the plan, and 
2.  The street address and legal description of the property involved, and the names of the nearest streets which intersect the street or streets on which the subject is located, and 
3.  The number of lots involved, if more than one, and the lot dimensions and total area, and 
4.  The location, proposed use, size, height, floor plans, elevations of all proposed and existing buildings on the subject lot or lots, and 
5.  Approximate size and location of proposed building pads and driveways, including approximate grades of driveways, and 
6.  Cut-and-fill slopes, banks and terraces, topographic detail, including approximate finished elevation of building pad, driveways, property lines and slopes, and 
7.  Natural features, which are to be preserved, and 
8.  The location, height and type of all walls and fences, and 
9.  The location of pedestrian and vehicular streets and accessways, and 
10.  Sight distance (horizontal and vertical) at all intersections, 
11.  The location, number of spaces, dimensions and circulation pattern of all proposed off-street parking and loading areas, and 
12.  The location of any outdoor lighting fixtures, and 
13.  A detailed plan for the landscaping of the development, including the location and height of screen-planting and a statement setting forth the method by which such landscaping shall be maintained after installation, and 
14.  A preliminary grading plan for the entire development, and 
15.  The location or proposed location of all physical features, including but not limited to such items as fire-fighting facilities, utility facilities, drainage and sewage structures; 
C.  A statement containing the following data: 
1.  The type of building for which pads are designed, and 
2.  Dwelling-unit density proposed, and 
3.  Proposed covenants, and 
4.  Available utilities, and 
5.  Treatment of view sites, and 
6.  Soil conditions, including any known groundwater conditions (dump site, oil-well site, natural ground, etc.); 
D.  Such other matter as the applicant or director may deem appropriate and material to the proposal. 
(Prior code § 9434)  
18.42.060 - Application—Fees. 
A filing and processing fee shall be paid contemporaneously with the filing of a plan application, in an amount as set by resolution of the council. 
(Prior code § 9435)  
18.42.070 - Application—Processing. 
Applications shall be submitted by the director to the engineering, police, water, fire and building and safety departments for comments and recommendations. All such staff reports, including the planning department report, shall be submitted to the commission for its consideration. 
(Prior code § 9436)  
18.42.080 - Hearing—Attendance by interested persons. 
A.  Hearings on plans before the commission and council shall be conducted so as to allow all interested persons a reasonable opportunity to be heard in connection therewith. 
B.  The action of the commission and council shall be taken by resolution. 
(Prior code § 9439)  
18.42.090 - Hearing—Approval by commission—Notice. 
At least ten days in advance of the time set for hearing on such an application by the commission, the director shall give written notice of the time and place of such hearing to the applicant, any person requesting such notice, and all persons occupying and owning property within three hundred feet of the exterior boundaries of the property or use, at the director's discretion, involved in the proposed plan. If the commission finds that the plan as submitted: 
A.  Is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter; and 
B.  Is consistent with the purpose and intent of the subdivision and zoning regulations, the general plan and any applicable specific plan; and 
C.  Is compatible with present and future development of the property within the immediate vicinity; and 
D.  Is consistent with the general peace, health, safety and general welfare; it shall recommend to the city council approval of the plan. The commission may also recommend conditions to be imposed upon such approval, if it deems the same appropriate. 
E.  If the commission finds, as a result of its consideration of the plan, that the same does not comply with subsections A, B, C or D, it shall deny the plan. In cases of denial the commission's action shall be final and conclusive, unless the applicant appeals the same to the city council by filing a written letter of appeal to the city clerk-treasurer, together with a filing and processing fee in an amount set by council resolution, appealing such decision to the city council. Such an appeal shall be filed in the same manner provided in Section 18.52.120. 
(Prior code § 9437) 
( Ord. No. 3019, § 1 , 3-25-14)  
18.42.100 - Hearing—Approval by city council. 
Upon the receipt by the city clerk-treasurer of an appeal in the case of a denial, or a copy of the commission's resolution recommending approval of a plan, he shall set the same for hearing by the council at its next most convenient meeting. The city clerk-treasurer shall give notice as required by Section 18.52.120 of the time and place set for consideration thereof by the council. At such time and place, the council shall consider the commission's files and all applicable staff reports, and any relevant evidence offered by any person, and determine whether the commission's action should be approved, modified or disapproved. The action of the council shall be based upon the same factors as are applicable to the action of the commission. The action of the council shall be final and conclusive. 
(Prior code § 9438)  
18.42.110 - Development plan—Approval conditions. 
Each plan shall comply with the following conditions, and any other express conditions which the planning commission and/or city council deem necessary to insure compliance with the provisions of this chapter: 
A.  Compliance with Precise Plan. All improvements within a planned development district shall substantially conform to the plan as adopted, amended or modified; and 
B.  Construction in Stages. A plan may provide construction in phases; and 
C.  Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions. Covenants, conditions and restrictions, approved as to form by the city attorney, may be established as a part of such precise plan of development. 
(Prior code § 9441)  
18.42.120 - Development plan—Subdivision applicability. 
Any subdivision or parcel map which includes property located in a planned development district shall be denied unless such development has been approved by a plan. 
(Prior code § 9442)  
18.42.130 - Approved plan validity. 
A plan approved pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be valid and in effect for the same time period as applicable to a related and approved tract or parcel map, after approval thereof by the council. The director, for good cause, may extend the period of time pursuant to this section for a reasonable period of time not to exceed an additional twelve-month period. 
(Ord. 2712 § 1 (K), 1997: prior code § 9440)  
18.42.140 - Development standards. 
No plan for properties included in a planned development district shall be approved unless the same complies with the following development standards: 
A.  Minimum Plan Area. No plan shall be approved unless the same includes an area of not less than the minimum lot area as set forth for the underlying zone and/or as shown on the city zoning map. Rather, the planned development procedures and standards shall not apply to legal lots which do not meet the minimum plan area standard. Legal lots which do not meet the minimum plan area may be developed to a maximum density and under development standards applicable to the next most restrictive zone category. 
B.  Open Space. Every dwelling on a lot included within the boundaries of a plan shall have and maintain the following amounts of open space: 
1.  R-E zone, nine thousand square feet per dwelling unit; 
2.  R-1 zone, two thousand eight hundred square feet per dwelling unit; 
3.  R-2 zone, one thousand two hundred square feet per dwelling unit; 
4.  R-3 zone, four hundred square feet per dwelling unit; 
5.  R-4 zone, two hundred fifty square feet per dwelling unit; 
6.  C-O zone, one hundred fifty square feet per dwelling unit (senior citizen housing only); 
Provided, that no less than four hundred square feet nor more than fifty percent of the total required open space for each unit in the R-E, R-1 and R-2 zones shall be maintained as private open space, and no less than one hundred square feet of required open space for each unit in the R-3 and R-4 zones shall be maintained as private open space. 
C.  Lot Area and Width. No lot having an underlying zone classification of R-E or R-1 included in a planned development district shall be created having less than one thousand eight hundred square feet of lot area, nor be less than twenty feet in lot width. No lot having an underlying zone classification in the R-2, R-3 and R-4 zones shall be created having less than one thousand square feet of lot area, nor having a lot width of less than twenty feet. 
D.  Density. The maximum dwelling-unit density in a planned development district shall not exceed the maximum density based upon the underlying zone classification and the formulas hereinafter set forth. The maximum number of dwelling units shall be determined by dividing the total land area included in the plan, exclusive of private or public streets, by the following: 
1.  C-O zone, four hundred thirty-five square feet (senior citizen housing only); 
2.  R-4 zone, one thousand two hundred fifty square feet; 
3.  R-3 zone, one thousand seven hundred fifty square feet; 
4.  R-2 zone, two thousand nine hundred square feet; 
5.  R-1 zone, an amount of square footage equal to the minimum required lot area; 
6.  R-E zone, an amount of square footage equal to the minimum required lot area. 
E.  Off-Street Parking. 
1.  Required Off-Street Parking Facilities. The off-street parking requirements of this title, based upon the underlying zone classification of the lots included within a plan, shall be observed, except that senior citizen housing projects must provide a minimum of one space for each three dwelling units. 
2.  Additional Guest Parking Facilities. In addition to the off-street parking requirements set forth in subdivision (1) of this subsection, one additional parking space shall be continuously provided for each three dwelling units for the purpose of providing for guest, visitor and service parking, except for senior citizen housing projects. 
(Ord. 2469 § 2(b), (c), 1989; Ord. 2343 § 3 (part), 1985; prior code § 9443)  
Chapter 18.44 - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS 
 
18.44.010 - Purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to establish a balance between the rights of individuals to conduct adult businesses, as that term is defined in this chapter, and the right of residents in the city to be protected from negative secondary effects commonly associated with adult businesses and from the increased secondary effects associated with the concentration of adult businesses through reasonable and uniform regulations. It is the intent of this chapter that these regulations be utilized to prevent problems of blight, deterioration, crime, and the spread of sexually transmitted diseases, which have been demonstrated by detailed studies of numerous cities across the nation to accompany the establishment and maintenance of adult businesses. 
(Ord. 2748 § 1, 1999)  
18.44.020 - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall be construed as defined in the following subsections, unless from the context a different meaning is specifically intended and more particularly to the use of such words, terms or phrases. It is the purpose of this section to provide clear and concise definitions of those words, terms and phases most commonly utilized in the regulations and provisions of this chapter in order to assist in the uniform interpretation of said regulations and provisions and to insure uniformity in their application. Those definitions set forth in Chapter 18.06 of this code shall be used for purposes of uniformity of interpretation and application of the regulations and provisions of this chapter but only where they do not conflict with any definition or interpretation set forth in this chapter. 
"Adult bookstore" means a business establishment that devotes more than fifteen percent of the total floor area utilized for the display and sale or rental of material which is distinguished or characterized by its emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, so long as access to such material at such establishment, including movies or video tapes, is restricted to persons over eighteen years of age and is located in a specific section of the establishment where persons under the age of eighteen are prohibited. 
"Adult business," "adult business establishment" or "adult entertainment establishment" means any business establishment or concern which as a regular and substantial course of conduct performs as an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult motion picture arcade, adult drive-in theater, adult cabaret, adult motel or hotel, adult theater, adult model studio, sexual encounter establishment, body painting studio, headshop/drug paraphernalia shop, or sells or distributes adult merchandise or sexually oriented merchandise, or any other business or concern which offers to its patrons products, merchandise, services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical parts, but not including those uses or activities which are preempted by state law. 
"Adult cabaret" means a night club, bar, restaurant or other business, establishment, whether or not serving alcoholic beverages, which features live performances, including by topless or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, exotic dancers, strippers, or similar entertainers, which performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
"Adult cabaret dancer" shall mean any person who is an employee or independent contractor of an "adult cabaret" or "adult business" and who, with or without any compensation or other form of consideration, performs as a sexually oriented dancer, exotic dancer, stripper, go-go dancer or similar dancer whose performance on a regular and substantial basis focuses on or emphasizes the adult cabaret dancer's breasts, genitals, and/or buttocks, but does not involve exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or depicting or engaging in "specified sexual activities." Adult cabaret dancer does not include a patron. 
"Adult drive-in theater" means an open lot or part thereof, with appurtenant facilities, devoted primarily to the presentation of motion pictures, films, theatrical productions and other forms of visual productions, for any form of consideration, to persons in motor vehicles or on outdoor seats, and presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons. 
"Adult hotel or motel" means a motel, hotel, or similar establishment offering public accommodations for any form of consideration which provides on a regular and substantial basis material to patrons by way of closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
"Adult live entertainment" means any physical human body activity, whether performed or engaged in, alone or with other persons, including but not limited to singing, walking, speaking, dancing, acting, posing, simulating, wrestling or pantomiming, in which the performer or performers expose to public view, without opaque covering, "specified anatomical areas," or depicting, describing, or substantially relating to "specified sexual activities" whether or not the specified anatomical areas are covered. 
"Adult model studio" means any business establishment where, for any form of consideration or gratuity, live human figure models display specified anatomical areas for the purpose of being observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or otherwise similarly depicted or reproduced by persons observing the model. This provision shall not apply to any school of art which is operated by an individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation or institution which meets the requirements established in the Education Code of the state of California for the issuance or conferring of, and is in fact authorized thereunder to issue and confer a diploma or is otherwise in compliance with the Private Postsecondary and Vocational Education Reform Act. 
"Adult motion picture theater" means a theater, with a capacity of five or more persons, where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions are shown, and in which a substantial portion of the total presentation time is devoted to the showing of material which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons. 
"Adult motion picture arcade (peep shows)" means any business establishment, wherein coin or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing or amusement devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
"Adult theater" means a theater or other commercial establishment with or without a stage or proscenium which is used for presenting material which is, distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas 
"Body painting studio" means a business establishment which provides the service of applying paint or other substance whether transparent or nontransparent to or on the human body when such body is wholly or partially nude in terms of specified anatomical areas. 
"Establishing an adult entertainment business," as used in this chapter, means and includes any of the following: 
1.  The opening or commencement of any such business as a new business; 
2.  The conversion of an existing business, whether or not an adult entertainment business, to any of the adult entertainment businesses defined in this chapter; 
3.  The addition of any of the adult entertainment businesses defined herein to any other existing adult entertainment business; or 
4.  The relocation of any such business. 
"Headshop" or "drug paraphernalia shop" means an establishment or place where more than fifteen percent of the floor area in any room is used for the sale and display of such paraphernalia and literature, including but not limited to cocaine and sniffing kits, glass mirrors for cutting cocaine, snorting spoons and tubes, strainers to sift cocaine, water pipes (bongs), everyday items with special removable tops that have been converted to conceal narcotics and drugs, including but not limited to beer cans, oil cans and plastic photograph film vials, roach clips (for holding marijuana cigarettes), books and magazines extolling the illegal use of narcotics or controlled substances. This definition does not apply to licensed pharmacies in selling and displaying paraphernalia that is medicinal equipment prescribed by licensed medical practitioners. This definition does not apply to medical marijuana dispensaries that have a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 18.45. 
"Material" means and includes, but is not limited to, accessories, books, magazines, photographs, prints, drawings, paintings, motion pictures, and pamphlets, or any combination thereof. 
"Performer" means any person who is an employee or independent contractor of an adult business, and who, with or without any compensation or other form of consideration, carries out, executes, accomplishes, or acts out adult live entertainment for patrons of an adult business. Performer does not include a patron. 
"School" means an institution of learning for minors, whether public or private, which offers instruction in those courses of study required by the California Education Code or which is maintained pursuant to standards set by the State Board of Education. This definition includes a nursery school, kindergarten, elementary school, junior high school, senior high school or any special institution of learning under the jurisdiction of the State Department of Education, but it does not include a vocation or professional institution or an institution of higher education, including a community college. 
"Sexual encounter establishment" means an establishment, other than a hotel, motel or similar establishment offering public accommodations, which, for any form of consideration, provides a place where two or more persons may congregate, associate or consort in connection with specified sexual activities or the exposure of specified anatomical areas. This definition does not include an establishment where a medical practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist or similar professional person licensed by the state of California engages in sexual therapy. 
"Sexually oriented merchandise" means and includes books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motions pictures, video cassettes, video discs, slides, tapes, records or other forms of visual or audio representations which are characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. This term also includes instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities. Such merchandise shall also include adult video games, or coin-operated electronic game machines having visual displays and animation that depict in any manner, any activity characterized by exposure of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities, including sexually oriented implements or paraphernalia, such as, but not limited to: dildos, auto sucks, sexually-oriented vibrators, Ben Wa balls, inflatable orifices, anatomical balloons with orifices, simulated and battery operated vaginas, and similar sexually-oriented devices which are designed or marketed primarily for the stimulation of human genital organs or sado-masochistic activity. Such merchandise shall also include adult video games, or coin-operated electronic game machines having visual displays and animation that depict in any manner, any activity characterized by exposure of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities. 
"Special needs housing" means children's day care center (emotionally disturbed), as defined in Section 18.06.075 of this code; family day care homes, as defined in Section 18.06.170 of this code; family homes (mentally ill), as defined in Section 18.06.171 of this code; family homes (mentally retarded), as defined in Section 18.06.174 of this code; homes for the aged, as defined in Section 18.06.213 of this code; housing for senior citizens, as defined in Section 18.06.229 of this code; and residential facilities, as defined in Sections 18.06.372, 18.06.375 and 18.06.378; or any successor provisions to the noted provisions. 
"Specified anatomical areas" means and includes any of the following: 
1.  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areolae; and/or 
2.  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
"Specified sexual activities" means and includes any of the following: 
1.  The fondling or any other touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts, actual or simulated; and/or 
2.  Sexual intercourse, actual or simulated; and/or 
3.  Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal, actual or simulated; and/or 
4.  Acts of human masturbation, sexual stimulation or arousal, actual or simulated; and/or 
5.  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or masturbation, actual or simulated; and/or 
6.  Masochism, erotic or sexually-oriented torture, beating, or the infliction of pain, actual or simulated; and/or 
7.  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation, actual or simulated. 
"Transfer of ownership or control," as used in this chapter, means and includes any of the following: 
1.  The sale, lease or sublease of an adult entertainment business; 
2.  The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in such business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means; or 
3.  The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control of such business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing such ownership or control. 
(Ord. 2748 §§ 2—10, 1999; Ord. 2630 § 2 (part), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2919, § 1, 2-10-09)  
18.44.030 - Prohibitions. 
A.  No person or entity shall own, establish, operate, control or enlarge, or cause or permit the establishment, operation, enlargement or transfer of ownership or control of any adult business if such adult business is within two hundred fifty feet of another adult business or within five hundred feet of any school; library; day care facility, as defined in Sections 18.06.072 and 18.06.119; or public or private park within the city; or within two hundred fifty feet of any special needs housing facility, as defined in this chapter; or within two hundred fifty feet of any residentially zoned property in the city, except residentially zoned properties which are used for commercial or institutional uses, such as hospitals, correctional facilities or public utility facilities, and which abut C-2, C-3, or M zoned property. 
B.  An adult business establishment listed in this section shall not be established, operated, enlarged or transferred unless the provisions of the zone in which the site or proposed site is located permits such a use. The conduct of such establishment and the use of premises shall otherwise comply with the zoning regulations of the city and all other applicable regulations. 
C.  All persons wishing to establish an adult entertainment establishment within the city must apply for, on a standard application form supplied by the city's community development department, and be granted an adult conditional use permit for said use, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2748 § 11, 1999) 
(Ord. No. 2919, § 2, 2-10-09)  
18.44.050 - Private viewing rooms. 
A.  No adult booth/individual viewing area shall be occupied by more than one individual at a time. This restriction shall not apply to an adult booth/individual viewing area where the performer or adult cabaret dancer is completely separated from the area in which the performer or adult cabaret dancer is viewed by an individual by a permanent, floor to ceiling, solid barrier. However, in the scenario where a permanent, floor to ceiling, solid barrier is in place, no performers or adult cabaret dancers shall be allowed to perform inside the portion of the adult booth/individual viewing area where the patron is located, nor can the viewing area be occupied by more than one patron. 
B.  The interior of the adult use business shall be configured such that there is an unobstructed view, by use of the naked eye, and unaided by video, closed circuit cameras or any other means, of every public area of the premises, including but not limited to the interior of all individual viewing areas, from a manager's station located in a public portion of the establishment. No public area, including but not limited to the interior of any individual viewing area, shall be obscured by any door, curtain, wall, two-way mirror, or other device which would prohibit a person from seeing into the interior of the individual viewing area, solely with the use of the naked eye and unaided by video, closed circuit cameras or any other means, from the manager's station. A manager shall be stationed in the manager's station at all times the business is in operation or open to the public in order to enforce all rules and regulations. No individual viewing area shall be designed or operated to permit occupancy of more than one person at any one time. 
C.  No doors are permitted on an adult booth/individual viewing area. 
D.  No holes or other opening shall be permitted between adult booths/individual viewing areas. Any such hole or opening shall be repaired within twenty-four hours using "pop" rivets to secure metal plates over the hole or opening to prevent patrons from removing the metal plates. 
E.  No beds, couches, or other furniture designed for lying down or reclining shall be permitted in an adult booth/individual viewing area. 
(Ord. 2748 § 13, 1999) 
(Ord. No. 2919, § 3, 2-10-09)  
18.44.060 - Measure of distance. 
All required minimum distances set forth in Section 18.44.030 shall be measured from the nearest property line of one designated location to the nearest property line of the other designated location along a straight line extended between the two points without regard to intervening structures. 
(Ord. 2748 § 14, 1999)  
18.44.070 - Development and maintenance standards. 
A.  Zone. All uses subject to the provisions of this chapter shall comply with all of the regulations contained in this chapter, and no adult business shall be permitted unless the lot upon which such business is proposed to be located is classified in the C-2, C-3, or M zone. 
B.  Compliance with Other Code Sections. All adult businesses hereafter commenced shall, comply with the following, except as otherwise specifically provided for in this chapter: 
1.  The provisions of Chapter 18.24 (Commercial Zones Generally) and either 18.30 (C-2 Commercial Zone) or 18.32 (C-3 Commercial-Manufacturing Zone), if the adult business is located or its proposed location is in such commercial zone; or the provisions of Chapter 18.34 (M Manufacturing Zone), if the adult business is located or its proposed location is in such manufacturing zone; and 
2.  The provisions of Chapter 18.48 (Off-street Parking); and 
3.  The provisions of Division II of Title 18 of the zoning regulations (Signs). 
C.  Development Review Required. If an application for an adult conditional use permit includes external structural changes to the building requiring a building permit, including the construction of a new building, an addition to an existing building, or a facade remodel of an existing building, the construction, addition, or remodeling shall be reviewed and approved by the design review board, established by Chapter 2.12 of this code, to ensure that the proposed design is consistent with the general architectural character of the neighborhood and shall follow the procedural provisions in Section 18.44.210 of this code. An application for an adult conditional use permit shall be exempt from the provisions of Chapter 18.56 of this code. 
D.  Development Review Not Required. If an application for an adult conditional use permit does not include external structural changes to the building requiring a building permit, including the construction of a new building, an addition to an existing building, or a facade remodel of an existing building, then the adult conditional use permit shall not be subject to review and approval by the design review board. 
E.  Signs. Except for theater marquee signs, changeable copy signs and temporary signs, as defined in Chapter 18.72, are not permitted for adult businesses. In addition to the requirements of Title 18, Division II, of the Whittier Municipal Code, all sign permits shall be subject to review and approval by the planning commission as part of the adult conditional use permit process, such approval to be made according to the provisions regarding the location and nature of signs as provided in Chapters 18.72 and 18.76 of this code. 
F.  Exterior Painting. Buildings and structures shall not be painted or surfaced with any design that would simulate a sign or advertising message and cannot be established or maintained such that the exterior appearance of the structure is substantially inconsistent with the external appearance of structures on abutting properties. 
G.  Displays. Advertisements, displays of merchandise, signs or any other exhibit depicting adult entertainment activities placed within the interior of buildings or premises shall be arranged or screened to prevent public viewing from outside such building or premises. 
H.  Loudspeakers. Outdoor loudspeakers or other outdoor sound equipment advertising or directing attention to an adult business, including but not limited to prerecorded or live music or sounds, are prohibited. 
I.  Graffiti. Upon order of the city manager, graffiti appearing on any exterior surface of a building or premises, of an adult business, which graffiti is within public view, shall be removed and that surface shall be restored within forty-eight hours of notification to the owner or person in charge of the premises or as may be specified in other ordinances of the city regulating graffiti removal. 
J.  Restrooms. If the adult use business provides restrooms for patron use, it shall provide separate restroom facilities for male and female patrons. The restrooms shall be free from sexually oriented materials and sexually oriented merchandise. Only one person shall be allowed in each restroom at any time, unless otherwise required by law, in which case the sexually oriented business shall employ a restroom attendant of the same sex as the restroom users who shall be present in the public portion of the restroom during operating hours. The attendant shall insure that no person of the opposite sex is permitted into the restroom, and that not more than one person is permitted to enter a restroom stall, unless otherwise required by law, and, with the exception of urination, that no persons engage in any specified sexual activity in the public portion of the restroom. 
K.  Security. The following provisions shall apply to adult businesses: 
1.  The adult business shall provide a video surveillance system that visually records and monitors all parking lot areas, rear alley areas immediately adjacent to the business, the main building entrance(s) and exit(s), and any and all cash registers or cash offices on the premises of the adult business. The business owner or his/her designated representative shall instruct the company or individual(s) installing the surveillance equipment at the adult business to position cameras to maximize the quality of facial and body images and to avoid backlighting and physical obstructions. The company or individual(s) installing the surveillance equipment for any adult business shall be responsible for reasonable compliance with those instructions in installing such equipment at the adult business. 
2.  The owner of the adult business shall be responsible for insuring that the adult business' video surveillance system complies with the following minimum standards. 
a.  Video Cameras. Cameras shall have a minimum resolution of five hundred lines per inch and a minimum light factor requirement of 0.7 LUX. Light sensitive lenses or the installation of additional lighting may be required to increase picture clarity and brightness. Cameras shall be calibrated and focused to maximize the quality of the recorded image. 
b.  Video Recorder. The recording device shall be defined as a "high density recorder" by manufacturer specifications. The device shall be a time-lapse recorder that displays a current date and time stamp on the video recording. Systems required to have more than one camera per Section 18.44.070(K)(1) shall include a "quad" or "multiplexer" video display splitter. Quad or multiplexed video systems shall be digital must have the ability to isolate individual camera angles for maximized play back. The recording equipment and all video recordings to be kept in compliance with subsection (K)(4) of this section shall be secured in a locked area in which access is limited to the adult business owner, the permit holder, or his/her designated representative(s). 
c.  Display Monitor. A display monitor with a minimum screen size of twelve inches shall be connected to the video surveillance system at all times. If a "quad" video display splitter is utilized, the display monitor shall have a minimum screen size of fifteen inches. 
3.  Video surveillance systems shall be maintained in good working order at all times. The owner of the adult business shall instruct each employee to immediately report any malfunctioning of or technical problems whatsoever with surveillance equipment. Every three months, the business owner or his/her designated representative shall inspect all cameras and video recorders to ensure proper operation and shall perform the following functions: the camera lenses shall be cleaned and calibrated into focus; any recording heads or other optical equipment shall be cleaned or optimized in another applicable manner, and the date and time stamp shall be calibrated to reflect true information; all wires connected to the camera and video recording device shall be inspected for wear and tear; and, a test recording shall be done to verify the image quality and date and time stamp. The business owner or his/her designated representative shall keep a video surveillance maintenance log documenting all inspections and repairs to the system. Any technical problems or inoperable equipment shall be repaired as soon as possible, not to exceed fifteen days from discovery of the problem. The video surveillance system and maintenance log are subject to periodic inspection by the police department, in order to ensure compliance with this section. 
4.  The video surveillance system and recording device shall be in continuous operation from one full hour before to one full hour after the adult business is open to the public, or any portion thereof. Video recordings of daily business operations shall be kept a minimum of thirty days prior to reuse, destruction or deletion of such video recordings, and shall be provided to the police department upon request. If recordings provided to the police department pursuant to this section are digital, a copy of "player" software shall be provided with the recording, in order to allow viewing of the digital recording(s). Such video recordings shall be clearly marked with the date the video recording was most recently recorded, and, in the event there are multiple recordings of the same date, each video recording shall be clearly marked in the sequential numerical order that it was so recorded. 
5.  Adult businesses providing adult live entertainment shall also provide security officers continuously from one full hour before to one full hour after any adult live entertainment is conducted at the adult business, to maintain the peace and to enforce all statutes, ordinances and conditions of the permit. The number of security officers required shall be determined by the following formula: one security officer per seven hundred fifty square feet of floor area of the adult business that may be occupied by patrons. 
6.  Any security officer required and/or provided by any adult business shall comply with the provisions of California Business and Professions Code Section 7582, et seq. 
7.  The city may increase or decrease the security requirements for an adult business should the particular circumstances at such adult business demonstrate the need for such change. 
8.  The city recognizes that video technology is rapidly changing and that the requirements of this section with respect to video recordings may not keep up with available technology. The chief of police, therefore, is authorized to permit minor deviations from the technical requirements of this section in order to allow the use of additional sources of video and recording technology, so long as such minor deviations are in keeping with the overall purpose of this section to provide for video recordings with images of individuals and activities at adult business establishments that are discernible and recognizable in order to further law enforcement efforts and in order to deter unlawful, unsafe and unhealthy activities or conduct at adult business establishments. 
L.  Landscaping. The landscaping on the exterior of the adult business shall conform to the standards established for the zone in which the adult business is granted a conditional adult use permit. 
M.  Sound. The premises within which the adult business is located shall provide sufficient sound-absorbing insulation so that noise generated inside said premises shall not be audible anywhere on any abutting property, abutting public right-of-way, or from within any abutting building or other separate unit within the same building as the adult business between the hours of 10 p.m. and 7 a.m. each day. 
N.  Lighting. 
1.  Interior. The premises within which the adult business is operated shall be equipped with and, at all times during which the adult business is open to the public, shall remain illuminated with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access with an illumination of not less than two foot-candles as measured at the floor level. 
2.  Exterior. The exterior of the premises upon which the adult business is operated shall be equipped with and, at all times between sunset and sunrise, shall remain illuminated with fixtures of sufficient intensity and number to uniformly illuminate every portion of the property with an illumination level of not less than one and one-quarter (1.25) foot-candle as measured at the ground level and evenly distributed, including, but not limited to the entire perimeter of the building in which the adult business operates, including, landscaped areas, parking lots, driveways, walkways, entry areas, and refuse storage areas. 
O.  Hours of Operation. Adult businesses shall not operate between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. 
P.  Change of Ownership. If an adult business operating with a permit pursuant to this chapter changes ownership, the owner or operator of that business shall notify the police department of the new owner's name and address within ten days of the effective date of such change of ownership. 
Q.  Other Conditions. The planning commission or city council has the limited discretion to add appropriate and narrowly tailored conditions to the granting or modification of a permit pursuant to this chapter, should the particular facts and/or circumstances of a proposed use so justify. Other conditions may be added only because of some unique circumstances, such as the particular location or configuration of a specific adult business, so long as any additional conditions comply with the following requirements: 
1.  The condition is a content-neutral, time, place manner restriction, as those terms are recognized and interpreted in controlling court opinions and judicial precedent; or is specifically and narrowly aimed at lessening, mitigating or eradicating an identified, negative secondary effect of adult businesses; and 
2.  The condition is not based upon any anticipated or expected responses from viewers or those opposing the adult business; and 
3.  The evidence and justification for any additional conditions are set forth in writing and subject to appeal in the same manner as all conditions imposed on the granting, conditional granting, denial, or modification of an adult conditional use permit. 
(Ord. 2773 § 1, 2001; Ord. 2748 § 15, 1999) 
(Ord. No. 2919, §§ 4—10, 2-10-09; Ord. No. 2932, §§ 4, 5, 8-11-09; Ord. No. 3054 , §§ 3, 4, 8-9-16)  
18.44.075 - Adult business offering live entertainment—Operating requirements. 
No person, association, partnership or corporation shall engage in, conduct or carry on, or permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried on the operation of an adult business which offers adult live entertainment unless each and all of the following requirements are met: 
A.  No performer shall perform with any patron or within ten feet of any patron on the premises of the adult business. 
B.  No owner, operator, responsible managing employee, manager or permittee shall permit or allow, on the premises of any adult business, any patron to approach within ten feet of a performer, while performing, or permit or allow a performer, while performing, to approach within ten feet of a patron. 
C.  No owner or person with managerial control over an adult business shall permit, and no employee or independent contractor, other than performers while performing on a permanently fixed stage, of an adult business which is not a theater, concert hall or similar establishment primarily devoted to theatrical performances, while on the premises of an adult business, shall wear any less than a fully opaque covering which covers their specified anatomical areas, while on or about the licensed premises, not including dressing rooms for performers only or restrooms, but excluding the public portion of any restrooms. This provision may not be complied with by applying an opaque covering simulating the appearance of the specific anatomical part required to be covered. 
D.  No owner or person with managerial control over an adult business shall permit, and no employee or independent contractor, other than performers while performing on a permanently fixed stage, of an adult business which is a theater, concert hall or similar establishment primarily devoted to theatrical performances, while on the premises of the adult business, shall wear any less than a fully opaque covering which covers their specified anatomical areas, while on or about the licensed premises, not including dressing rooms for performers only or restrooms, but excluding the public portion of any restroom. This provision may not be complied with by applying an opaque covering simulating the appearance of the specific anatomical part required to be covered. This provision shall not apply to an adult or sexually oriented business that has, on or before July 1, 1998, been adjudicated by a court of competent jurisdiction to be, or by action of the city of Whittier allowing the business to operate as a theater, concert hall, or similar establishment, primarily devoted to theatrical performances. 
E.  No person shall perform adult live entertainment at an adult business except upon a permanently fixed stage which is at least eighteen inches above the level of the floor, and surrounded with a three foot high barrier or by a fixed rail at least thirty inches in height. A distance of at least ten feet, measured horizontally, shall be maintained between patrons and on stage performers while performing. This provision shall not apply to an individual viewing area where the performer is completely separated by a permanent, floor to ceiling, solid barrier, from the area in which an individual patron views the performer. 
F.  No performer or adult cabaret dancer shall have physical contact with any patron, and no patron shall have physical contact with any performer, or adult cabaret dancer, while the performer or adult cabaret dancer is performing on the premises. In addition, while on the premises, no performer or adult cabaret dancer shall have physical contact with a patron or another performer or adult cabaret dancer and no patron shall have physical contact with a performer or adult cabaret dancer, which physical contact involves the touching of the clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks, cleft of the buttocks, perineum, anal region, or female breast with any part or area of any other person's body either before or after any adult live entertainment by such performer or adult cabaret dancer. These prohibitions do not extend to incidental touching. Patrons shall be advised of the separation and no-touching requirements by signs placed on the barrier between patrons and performers or adult cabaret dancers; by other signs, the location and size of which reasonably inform patrons of the no-touching requirements; and, if necessary, by employees of the establishment. Owners and operators shall take all reasonable steps to insure that patrons at the adult business comply with the separation and no-touching requirements. 
G.  As to any adult cabaret dancer performing off stage, a distance of at least two feet shall be maintained between the dancer and patron(s) at all times while the dancer is performing. 
H.  If patrons wish to tip performers or adult cabaret dancers, tips shall be placed in receptacles. Patrons shall not throw tips to performers or adult cabaret dancers, hand tips directly to the performers or dancers, or place tips in the performers' or dancers' costumes. 
I.  The adult use business shall provide an entrance/exit to the premises for performers or adult cabaret dancers which is separate from the entrance/exit used by patrons. 
J.  Neither performers, employees, nor independent contractors of an adult business shall solicit drinks from patrons and the owner of the adult business shall not allow the solicitation of drinks by any performer, employee, or independent contractor of the adult business. 
K.  The operator shall not permit any doors (excepting only restroom doors or restroom stall doors in compliance with Section 18.44.070(J)) on the premises to be locked during business hours and, in addition, the operator shall be responsible to see that any room or area on the premises shall be readily accessible at all times and shall be open to view in its entirety. 
(Ord. 2748 § 16, 1999) 
(Ord. No. 2919, § 11, 2-10-09)  
18.44.080 - New public uses. 
After the effective date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, no public school, public park or residential zoned area shall be allowed to be established within the minimum distances of separation set forth in Section 18.44.030, from an adult entertainment establishment for which a conditional use permit has been granted. 
(Ord. 2630 § 2 (part), 1994)  
18.44.090 - Other regulations, permits or licenses. 
The provisions of this chapter do not waive or modify any other provision of this code with which adult entertainment establishments are required to comply. In particular, a person shall not own, operate, manage, conduct or maintain an adult business without first having obtained, and maintaining current thereafter, a business license from the city clerk, pursuant to Chapter 5.04 of this code. The issuance or denial of a business license, or renewal of such license, to an adult business shall be made within fifteen days of the applicant's submitted application in compliance with Section 5.04.020, or renewal request, and accompanied by the fee required in Section 5.04.070. Nothing in this section is intended to authorize, legalize or permit the establishment, operation or maintenance of any business, building or use which violates any applicable provision of law or regulation, including any city of Whittier ordinance or statute of the state of California regarding public nuisances, sexual conduct, lewdness or obscene or harmful matter or the exhibition or public display thereof. Adult businesses must comply with any and all applicable regulations imposed in other articles of the zoning code, other city ordinances, and state and federal law. 
(Ord. 2630 § 2 (part), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2919, § 12, 2-10-09)  
18.44.100 - Protection of minors. 
All adult businesses, including any employee, owner, operator, responsible managing employee, or manager of an adult business, shall prohibit the admission of minors, i.e. any person below the age of eighteen years, upon the premises or within the confines of that adult business, if no liquor is served therein, or shall prohibit the admission of persons under the legal drinking age of twenty-one if liquor is served at the adult business. 
(Ord. 2748 § 17, 1999)  
18.44.110 - Violations—Public nuisance. 
The conduct of any business within the city in violation of any of the terms of this chapter is hereby found and declared to be a public nuisance per se, and the city attorney or the district attorney may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or proceeding for the civil abatement, removal and enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law; and shall take other steps and shall apply to such courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as well as abate or remove such adult business and restrain and enjoin any person from conducting, operating or maintaining an adult business contrary to the provisions of this chapter. The conduct of any business within the city in violation of any of the terms of this chapter will also serve as grounds for the revocation of an adult conditional use permit pursuant to Section 18.44.240(A)(11). 
(Ord. 2748 § 18, 1999) 
(Ord. No. 2919, § 13, 2-10-09)  
18.44.200 - Permit—Contents of application. 
A.  An application must be signed by the owner or lessee who is applying for a conditional adult use permit and who will be conducting, or whose agents, employees, or independent contractors will be conducting, the adult entertainment on the premises for which the permit is sought. If the application is signed by anyone other than the owner, a notarized statement signed by the owner acknowledging on the application consenting to the application for an adult conditional use permit shall accompany the application. Proof of status is required. 
B.  The application shall include the applicant's mailing address, and name and phone number of the person who is responsible for providing access to the proposed use for inspection purposes. 
C.  The application shall list the legal form of the applicant, e.g., individual, partnership, corporation. 
1.  If the applicant is an individual, the application shall list his or her legal name, any aliases and date of birth; 
2.  If the applicant is a partnership, the application shall list the full and complete name of the partnership, the legal names and addresses of all partners, dates of birth, and all aliases used by all of the general partners, and whether the partnership is general or limited; and 
3.  If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall list the full and complete corporate name, the date and status of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good standing, the legal names and dates of birth, and all aliases used, the capacity of all officers, directors and principal stockholders (i.e., all stockholders with ten percent or more of all outstanding shares), and the name and address of the registered officer for service of process. 
D.  The application must list whether, preceding the date of the application, the application or any of the individuals listed pursuant to subsection "C" of this section, has or had: 
1.  Other licenses and/or permits issued to and/or revoked from the applicant, in the three years prior to the year of the permit application, such other license and/or permit relating to similar business activities as in the permit application. If the application lists such other licenses and/or permits, the list shall include the type, current status, and issuing agency for each license/permit; 
2.  Been a partner in a partnership or an officer, director or principal stockholder of a corporation which has had any other licenses and/or permits, relating to similar business activities as in the permit application, issued to and/or revoked in the three years prior to the year of the permit application. The type, current status, and issuing agency for each previously revoked licenses and/or permits shall be listed on the application, as well as the date(s) of any revocation; 
3.  Been found guilty of or pleaded nolo contendere within the past four years to a misdemeanor or a felony classified by the state as a sex or sex-related offense. 
E.  The application must include the address of the proposed site, including the assessor's parcel number and the complete legal description of the property. 
F.  The application must include a detailed description of the proposed use, including reference to definitions in this chapter and facts sufficient to justify the granting of a permit in accordance with the provisions and requirements of this chapter. 
G.  The applicant shall furnish to the planning department an accurate list of the names and addresses of all property owners to whom notice must be given as provided below in subsections 1 and 2 of this section. The applicant shall furnish a list of the physical addresses of such properties, if such address is different from property owners' addresses. If the physical addresses of such properties include subunits, e.g., apartments, suites, or units, then the applicant shall provide, for each address to which this is applicable, the total number of subunits at the address and the range of consecutive unit designations, e.g., 1500 South Street, five apartments, A through E. 
1.  The city shall give notice of the time and place of public hearings before the commission and council, on an adult conditional use permit application, by United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the owners of property located within a radius of three hundred feet from the external boundaries of the property to which the application relates, addressed to the owners as shown on the latest equalized assessment roll of the county, or from other records which contain more recent and accurate addresses. 
2.  Such notices shall describe the subject property and contain a brief description of the proposed use, and the date, time and place of the hearing. 
H.  The application must include twenty blueline prints of a fully dimensioned plot plan, drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equal to twenty feet, indicating all existing or proposed structures, parking areas, landscaping, walls and fences, lighting, driveways and curb-cuts, sidewalks and walkways, street trees, signs, property lines, easements, topographical features, and any other pertinent items necessary to make a determination. 
I.  The application must include twenty blueline prints showing all four elevations of any proposed structures or elevations of any buildings proposed to be modified. Elevation drawings shall be prepared at a scale of not less than one-eighth inch equal to one foot, and shall include all exterior materials and architectural details intended for final construction. Details of all signage shall also be included. One set of elevation prints shall be colored to represent the proposed colors and materials or a color and materials board shall be submitted. In the case of existing buildings where change of use is proposed and no exterior building modifications are proposed, photographs may be accepted in lieu of elevation drawings if they show all elevations of the structure. 
J.  The application must include twenty blueline prints of a fully dimensioned floor plan, drawn to a scale of not less than one-quarter inch equal to one foot, showing all room type and dimensions, window and door locations, stages or platforms where adult live entertainment will be performed, proposed barriers, bar areas, cash registers, and any other pertinent items necessary to make a determination. 
K.  Applications requiring development review, as specified in Section 18.44.070C of this code, shall submit conceptual elevations of all adjacent buildings with sufficient detail to determine design compatibility. 
L.  All applicants for an adult conditional use permit must also fill out the city's environmental package for purposes of complying with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), and the permit will be conditioned as necessary for compliance with mitigation measures. 
M.  Each application for an adult conditional use permit or modification to an existing adult conditional use permit shall be accompanied by a filing and processing fee in an amount as set by resolution of the city council. The fee shall not exceed the reasonable estimated costs to the city in processing the permit application. Any applicant may withdraw his application by filing a written request to do so at any time prior to final action thereon, provided that there shall be no refund of fees. 
(Ord. 2773 §§ 2—4, 2001; Ord. 2748 § 20: Ord. 2744 § 2, 1999) 
(Ord. No. 2919, §§ 14—18, 2-10-09)  
18.44.210 - Permit—Decision to grant or deny. 
A.  The planning commission ("commission") shall grant, conditionally grant, or deny an application for a permit under this chapter. An application shall be granted, or conditionally granted as necessary and appropriate under the circumstances, in accordance with the provisions of this section, if the locational requirements in Section 18.44.030 are met, the operating requirements in Sections 18.44.050, 18.44.070, 18.44.075, and 18.44.090 are met, and if the application complies with the requirements of Section 18.44.200. In addition to any failure to comply with those specified sections, a denial of a permit, in accordance with the procedural provisions of this section, may be based on, but is not limited to, the following additional considerations: 
1.  Any prior permit/license revocation(s) listed in the application, pursuant to Section 18.44.200(D)(1) and (2), depending on the nature of the permit(s) revoked, the nature of the violation(s) leading to the revocation(s), the total number or permit(s) revoked, and the date of the revocation(s); or 
2.  Any convictions or pleas of nolo contendere listed in the application, pursuant to Section 18.44.200(D)(3), including consideration of the nature of the conviction(s) or plea(s), the total number and the date of such conviction(s) or plea(s). The commission shall give great weight to conviction(s) or plea(s) for sex crimes or crimes involving moral turpitude; or 
3.  Any misrepresentation of material fact in the application or any question in the application is not answered truthfully, including failure to list any permit/license revocation(s), conviction(s) or plea(s) of nolo contendere required to be listed in the application pursuant to Section 18.44.200 D; or 
4.  That the permit applicant has failed to obtain or maintain all required city, county and state licenses and permits applicable to and required for the proposed use; or 
5.  That the proposed use, as proposed, will not comply with the current approved and adopted edition of the various Uniform Building, Uniform Fire, Uniform Electrical and Uniform Plumbing Codes adopted by the city to insure that the operation is not hazardous to the health or safety of the employees or patrons of the business or of the general public. 
B.  The completeness of an application shall be determined by the planning director within five working days of its submittal to the planning department, as required by Section 18.44.200 of this chapter. If it is determined that the application is not complete, the applicant shall be notified in writing that the application is not complete and the reasons therefor, including any additional information necessary to render the application complete. Such writing shall be deposited in U.S. mail, postage prepaid, immediately upon determination that the application is incomplete. Within five working days following the receipt of an amended application or supplemental information, the planning director shall again determine whether the application is complete in accordance with the procedures set forth above. If an amended application is not filed with the city within fifteen days of the date of the notice to the applicant that the application is incomplete, then such application shall be deemed to have been withdrawn and the applicant will be required to submit a new application to the city. 
C.  Upon the filing of a completed application, the commission shall cause to be made by its own members, or members of its staff, an appropriate investigation, including consultation with the building, police, fire and health departments and inspection of the premises as needed. Consultation or investigation are not grounds for the city to unilaterally delay in reviewing a completed application, nor is it grounds to extend the time period to conduct a hearing pursuant to this section or issuing a decision on the application. 
D.  If an application for an adult conditional use permit also requires design review board, as set forth in Section 18.44.070 of this code, the design review board shall also consider the application and issue a determination or decision on the design elements of a project to the planning commission within sixty days of the determination of a complete application. 
E.  The commission shall notice and conduct a public hearing within fifteen days of the determination of a complete application for those applications that do not require development review pursuant to Section 18.44.070(D). Notice of such hearing shall be made as set forth in California Government Code Sections 65091 and 65905. The applicant shall insure that any posted notices on the property for which the permit is sought shall remain posted during the time period provided for in Government Section 65091. 
F.  The commission shall notice and conduct a public hearing, within sixty days of: (1) the decision by the design review board for an application requiring development review pursuant to Section 18.44.070(C), or (2) within sixty days of the determination of a complete application for those applications that do not require development review pursuant to Section 18.44.070(D). Notice of such hearing shall be made as set forth in California Government Code Sections 65091 and 65905. The applicant shall insure that any posted notices on the property for which the permit is sought shall remain posted during the time period provided for in Government Section 65091. 
G.  The planning commission shall render a written decision on the application for an adult conditional use permit within two days of the public hearing required by this section. Such written decision shall include findings upon which the decision is based. 
H.  The failure of the commission to render any decision within the time frames established in any part of this section shall be deemed to constitute a denial. 
I.  The commission's decision shall be immediately hand delivered or immediately mailed to the applicant, and shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of this code. 
J.  Notwithstanding any provisions in this chapter regarding the occurrence of any action within a specified period of time, the applicant may request additional time beyond that provided for in this chapter or may request a continuance regarding any decision or consideration by the city of the pending application. Extensions of time sought by applicants shall not be considered delay on the part of the city or constitute failure by the city to provide for prompt decisions on applications. 
(Ord. 2773 § 5, 2001; Ord. 2748 § 21; Ord. 2744 § 3, 1999) 
(Ord. No. 2919, § 19, 20, 2-10-09; Ord. No. 2932, §§ 6, 7, 8-11-09; Ord. No. 3054 , §§ 5, 6, 8-9-16)  
18.44.220 - Appeal. 
A.  Any interested person may appeal the decision of the commission to the city council in writing, such written appeal to be personally delivered to the city or postmarked within five days of the commission's written decision, or in the case of no written decision, within five days of any denial of a permit application by the commission. 
B.  Consideration of an appeal of the commission's decision shall be at a public hearing, notice of which shall be given pursuant to California Government Code Sections 65091 and 65905 and which hearing shall occur within fifteen days of the filing or initiation of the appeal. 
C.  The city council action on the appeal of the commission's decision shall be by a majority vote of the members present and upon the conclusion of the de novo public hearing, the city council shall grant, conditionally grant or deny the appeal. The city council's decision shall be final and conclusive and shall be rendered in writing within two days of the hearing, such written decision to be immediately mailed or hand delivered to the party appealing the commission's decision and to any other affected parties including the applicant if the appellant is not the applicant. Such written decision shall include findings upon which the decision is based. 
D.  In reaching its decision, the city council shall not be bound by the formal rules of evidence. 
E.  Notwithstanding any provisions in this chapter regarding the occurrence of any action within a specified period of time, the applicant may request additional time beyond that provided for in this chapter or may request a continuance regarding any decision or consideration by the city of the pending appeal. Extensions of time sought by applicants shall not be considered delay on the part of the city or constitute failure by the city to provide for prompt decisions on applications. 
F.  The failure of the city council to render any decision within the time frames established in any part of this section shall be deemed to constitute a denial. 
G.  Each appeal from a denial or conditional approval of an adult conditional use permit shall be accompanied by a filing and processing fee in an amount as set by resolution of the city council. Any person appealing may withdraw the appeal by filing a written request to do so at any time prior to final action thereon, provided that there shall be no refund of fees. 
(Ord. 2773 § 6, 2001; Ord. 2748 § 22: Ord. 2744 § 4, 1999) 
(Ord. No. 2919, § 21, 2-10-09)  
18.44.230 - Permit—Judicial review of decision to grant or deny. 
A.  The time for a challenge to a decision of the city council in a court of law is governed by California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8. 
B.  Notice of the city council's decision and findings shall include citation to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8. 
C.  Any applicant whose permit has been denied or conditionally approved, to which such conditions the applicant objects, pursuant to this chapter shall be afforded prompt judicial review of that decision as provided by law. The city shall make all reasonable effort to expedite such review and shall comply with the provisions of California Code of Civil Procedures Section 1094.8 and/or any subsequent, applicable statutes or rules of the courts of law of the state or nation which specify the prompt judicial review to be provided to an adult entertainment permit applicant. 
(Ord. 2869 §§ 55—56, 2006; Ord. 2773 § 7, 2001: Ord. 2748 § 23: Ord. 2744 § 5, 1999) 
(Ord. No. 2919, § 22, 2-10-09)  
18.44.240 - Permit revocation. 
A.  Any permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by the city on the basis of any one or more of the following: 
1.  That the business or activity has been conducted in a manner which violates one or more of the conditions imposed upon the issuance of the permit, including violations of operational or locational requirements, or which fails to conform to the plans and procedure described in the application, or which violates the occupant load limits set by the fire department; 
2.  That the permittee has failed to obtain or maintain all required city, county and state licenses and permits; 
3.  That the permit is being used to conduct an activity different from that for which it was issued; 
4.  That the permittee has misrepresented a material fact in the application for permit or has not answered each question therein truthfully; 
5.  That due to changes in on-site conditions, the adult business lacks sufficient on-site parking areas for employees and the public under the standards set forth in Chapter 18.48 of this code; 
6.  That the building or structure in which the adult business has been or is being conducted or utilized in a manner that is at all times in compliance with the current approved and adopted edition of the various Uniform Building, Uniform Fire, Uniform Electrical and Uniform Plumbing Codes adopted by the city to insure that the operation is not hazardous to the health or safety of the employees or patrons of the business or of the general public; 
7.  That the permitted business creates sound levels which violate any noise control ordinance of the city which may be in effect at the time of the violation(s); 
8.  That the security measures provided by the permittee have not been adequate to deter unlawful conduct by the employees, independent contractors or patrons of the facility such that the city's public safety department's response to calls for service at the facility is above the average number of calls for service by other entertainment-type facilities; 
9.  That the use for which the approval was granted has ceased to exist or has been suspended, whether voluntarily or involuntarily, for six months or more; 
10.  A patron, or employee or independent contractor of the adult business is found guilty of, or pleaded nolo contendere to, a misdemeanor or felony classified by the state as a sex or sex-related offense, and that such offense or alleged offense occurred on the premises of the adult business. If the conduct is that of a patron, revocation must be based upon a finding that the operators of the adult business failed to take reasonable and appropriate measures to control the conduct of a patron or assisted the patron in the conduct for which he or she is convicted; 
11.  The adult business has violated or allowed the violation of any provision of this chapter on its premises. 
B.  Written notice of hearing on the proposed permit revocation, together with written notification of the specific grounds of complaint against the permittee shall be personally delivered or sent by certified mail to the permittee at least ten days prior to the hearing. 
C.  The revocation hearing shall be heard by the commission and/or the city council, which hearing body shall not be bound by the formal rules of evidence at the hearing. 
D.  The hearing body shall notice and conduct a public hearing on the proposed permit revocation, with notice of such hearing to be made pursuant to California Government Code Sections 65091 and 65905. 
E.  The hearing body shall make its decision to revoke or not revoke the permit within thirty days of the public hearing. 
F.  The hearing body shall revoke, not revoke, or not revoke but add additional conditions to, the permittee's adult conditional use permit. The hearing body's decision shall be in writing, and shall be hand delivered or mailed to the applicant and mailed to all property owners within three hundred feet of the use. 
G.  Any interested person may appeal the decision of the hearing body, if the hearing body was the commission to the city in writing within five days after the written decision of the commission. The timely filing of an appeal by the permit holder shall stay the revocation or the imposition of conditions to which the permit holder objects, the status quo of the permit prior to revocation being maintained until such time as a decision by the city council on the appeal is rendered. 
H.  Consideration of an appeal of the commission's decision shall be at a duly noticed public hearing and shall occur within fifteen days of the filing or initiation of the appeal. Written notice of the appeal hearing shall be personally delivered or sent by certified mail to the permittee and/or the appellant at least ten days prior to the hearing. 
I.  The city council shall approve, conditionally approve or reject the decision of the commission. 
J.  In reaching a decision, the city council shall not be bound by the formal rules of evidence. The city council's consideration of the appeal shall be a de novo hearing. 
K.  The city council action on appeal of the commission's decision shall be by a majority vote of the quorum of the city council and shall be final and conclusive. The city council's decision shall be based upon written findings. 
L.  The time for a challenge to a decision by the city council in a court of law is governed by California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8. 
M.  Notice of the city council's decision and its findings shall be mailed to the applicant and shall include citation to the California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8. 
N.  In the event a permit is revoked pursuant to this chapter, another adult conditional use permit to operate an adult business shall not be granted to the permittee within twelve months after the date of such revocation. 
O.  Any applicant whose permit has been denied or conditionally approved, to which such conditions the applicant objects, pursuant to this chapter shall be afforded prompt judicial review of that decision as provided by law. The city shall make all reasonable efforts to expedite such review and shall comply with the provisions of California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8 and/or any subsequent, applicable statutes or rules of the courts of law of the state or nation which specify the prompt judicial review to be provided to a permit applicant. 
P.  The failure of the city to render any decision within the time frames established in any part of this section shall be deemed to constitute a denial. 
(Ord. 2869 §§ 57—58, 2006; Ord. 2773 §§ 8—12, 2001; Ord. 2748 § 24: Ord. 2744 § 7, 1999) 
(Ord. No. 2919, § 23, 2-10-09)  
18.44.250 - Severability. 
Should any section, subsection, clause or provision of this chapter for any reason be held to be invalid or facially unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect the validity or constitutionality of the remaining portions of this chapter, it being hereby expressly declared that this chapter, and each and every section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase hereof would have been prepared, proposed, approved, adopted and/or ratified irrespective of the fact that any one or more section, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases of this chapter be declared invalid or unconstitutional, including, but not limited to, the locational and operational requirements contained in Sections 18.44.020, 18.44.030, 18.44.050, 18.44.060, 18.44.070, 18.44.075, 18.44.090, 18.44.100, and 18.44.110. 
(Ord. 2748 § 25: Ord. 2744 § 6, 1999) 
(Ord. No. 2919, § 24, 2-10-09)  
Chapter 18.45 - MARIJUANA REGULATIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3071 , § 1, adopted Sep. 12, 2017, repealed the former Ch. 18.45, §§ 18.45.010—18.45.060, and enacted a new chapter as set out herein. The former Ch. 18.45 pertained to medical marijuana regulations and derived from Ord. No. 3049 , § 2, adopted Jan. 26, 2016. 
 
18.45.010 - Purpose and findings. 
The city council hereby finds and determines that it is the purpose and intent of this article to prohibit medical and non-medical commercial cannabis activity, including cultivation, possession, manufacture, processing, storing, laboratory testing, labeling, transporting, distribution, and sale of non-medical cannabis products and medical cannabis products within the meaning of California Business and Professions Code Section 19300 et seq., and to prohibit personal marijuana cultivation outdoors, to the extent permitted by state law, in order to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the residents and the businesses within the city. 
(Ord. No. 3071 , § 1, 9-12-17)  
18.45.020 - Applicability. 
A.  Nothing in this article is intended, nor shall it be construed, to burden any defense to criminal prosecution under the Compassionate Use Act. 
B.  All the provisions of this article shall apply to all property, public and private, within the city. 
C.  All the provisions of this article shall apply indoors and outdoors. 
D.  Nothing in this article is intended, nor shall it be construed, to conflict with the Medical Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act, the Adult Use of Marijuana Act, or any other applicable state law. 
(Ord. No. 3071 , § 1, 9-12-17)  
18.45.030 - Definitions. 
A.  "Commercial cannabis activity" shall mean the cultivation, possession, manufacture, processing, storing, laboratory testing, labeling, transporting, distribution, or sale of marijuana and marijuana products, including medical and non-medical marijuana, non-medical cannabis products and medical cannabis products within the meaning of California Business and Professions Code Section 19300 et seq. 
B.  "Marijuana" shall have the same definition as that set forth in California Health and Safety Code Section 11018. 
C.  "Marijuana cultivation" shall mean the planting, growing, harvesting drying or processing of marijuana plants or any part thereof for any purpose, including medical marijuana and non-medical recreational marijuana, and shall include both indoor and outdoor cultivation. 
D.  "Medical marijuana" shall mean marijuana used for medical purposes in accordance with California Health and Safety Code section 11362.5. 
E.  "Operation" means any effort to locate, operate, own, lease, supply, allow to be operated, or aid, abet or assist in the operation of commercial cannabis activity. 
F.  "Person" means any person, firm, corporation, association, club, society, or other organization. The term person shall include any owner, manager, proprietor, employee, volunteer or salesperson. 
(Ord. No. 3071 , § 1, 9-12-17)  
18.45.040 - Commercial cannabis activity prohibited. 
A.  Commercial cannabis activity by any person, including primary caregivers, qualified patients and dispensaries, is prohibited in all zoning districts within the city. 
B.  Delivery of all marijuana and marijuana products, to locations within City, whether for medical or non-medical use, is prohibited. 
C.  Outdoor marijuana cultivation by any person, including primary caregivers and qualified patients, for any purpose including medical or non-medical (recreational) purposes is prohibited in all zoning districts within the City. 
D.  Cultivation of marijuana indoors, as authorized by state law, shall be permitted within private residences by persons twenty-one years of age or older, provided that the cultivation is conducted in compliance with state law. No person shall cultivate more marijuana plants indoors than is expressly authorized by Health and Safety Code section 11362.2. 
(Ord. No. 3071 , § 1, 9-12-17)  
18.45.050 - Declaration of public nuisance. 
Any use, structure, or property that is altered, enlarged, erected, established, maintained, moved, or operated contrary to the provisions of this article, is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance and may be abated by the city through civil proceedings by means of a restraining order, preliminary or permanent injunction, or in any other manner provided by law for the abatement of such nuisances, including but not limited to the remedies provided for in Section 18.45.050 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 3071 , § 1, 9-12-17)  
18.45.060 - Violations. 
A.  Violations of this chapter shall be punishable pursuant to Chapters 1.08 and/or 1.09 of this code and other civil remedies as available under state and/or federal law. 
B.  This chapter is not the exclusive means for the abatement of illegal marijuana businesses or activity within the city. The remedies set forth pursuant to this section shall be in addition to any other existing remedies for violations of the zoning code, including but not limited to, any action at law or equity. 
(Ord. No. 3071 , § 1, 9-12-17)  
Chapter 18.46 - EQUESTRIAN USES 
 
18.46.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a comprehensive set of regulations applicable to the use of certain land for the keeping of horses for private recreational purposes, and the construction, installation and maintenance of uses accessory thereto. 
(Prior code § 9410)  
18.46.020 - Permitted uses. 
A.  In addition to any other use permitted on lots classified in the R-E or R-1 zones, equestrian uses, subject to the provisions of this chapter, shall be permitted on any such lots, if: 
1.  Such lot is the residence of the person conducting such equestrian use; and 
2.  Such lot has not less than twenty thousand square feet of lot area, provided that an R-E-zoned or R-1-zoned lot having over ten thousand square feet, but less than twenty thousand square feet of lot area, may be utilized for equestrian uses, if the owner or person in possession thereof: 
a.  Has a written lease, for a term of not less than two years, for vacant real property classified in zones R-E or R-1, which is contiguous to such lot, in that the rear lot line of such lot is a common lot line with the leased property and the area of which, when combined with such lot, exceeds twenty thousand square feet, and 
b.  Has agreed, in writing, on a form approved by the city attorney, to discontinue all horsekeeping uses, including removal of all buildings and structures utilized for such use forthwith, upon termination of such lease; 
B.  Where such conditions exist, such lot and the leased property shall be deemed and referred to in this chapter, for the purposes of this chapter, as a single "lot." 
(Prior code § 9411)  
18.46.030 - Restrictions on use. 
The following regulations shall apply to the conduct of all equestrian uses: 
A.  Number of Horses. Not more than two horses may be maintained on a lot which contains twenty thousand square feet of area. One additional horse may be maintained on such a lot for each ten thousand square feet of area over twenty thousand square feet. Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, a foal, until it is one year of age, may be maintained on the same lot as its dam. 
B.  Corral—Stable. All horses shall be confined within a corral or stable constructed in accordance with the development standards of this chapter. 
C.  Stables—Human Habitation. No part of any stable or corral shall be used for human habitation. 
D.  Machinery—Equipment. No storage of machinery or equipment utilized for equestrian purposes shall be permitted, except: 
1.  Incidental supplies and tools utilized for the care and handling of horses kept on the premises, or for the maintenance of corrals, stables and other structures on the lot, and 
2.  Trailers or vehicles which are exclusively used to transport horses kept on the lot, provided that same shall not be parked or stored in a required front or side yard area. 
E.  Sanitary Conditions. No unsanitary conditions shall be permitted to exist on property used for equestrian purposes, and each owner or person in possession of such property shall: 
1.  Daily clean each corral and stable of manure, offal, soiled straw or other refuse, and 
2.  Place all such manure, offal, soiled straw and refuse in flytight covered receptacles, and 
3.  Remove the contents of such receptacles from the lot at least once each week, and 
4.  Not permit the ponding of water within a corral area, and 
5.  Carry out a positive program of fly control (i.e., through the use of traps, pesticides, etc.), and 
6.  Store all trash, manure, offal, soiled straw and other refuse within a completely enclosed building or an area completely enclosed by a view-obscuring wall or fence, not less than six feet in height, fitted with a self-closing self-locking gate, and 
7.  Control dust at all times by regular application of water, or by other suitable means, and 
8.  Take all steps necessary to properly drain, so as to eliminate standing water, and 
9.  There shall be displayed on or in the vicinity of any stable or corral a weatherproof notice setting forth the name of the person(s) responsible for such horses and phone number(s) to be called in the event of an emergency, and 
10.  Horse waste shall not be allowed to accumulate, runoff or leach so as to create a nuisance or be offensive to other persons in the vicinity. 
F.  Hiring of Horses. No person shall permit any horse quartered on any R-E-zoned or R-1-zoned property to be hired out on an hourly, daily, weekly or monthly basis. 
G.  Boarding of Horses. Neither boarding of horses or any other commercial equestrian use shall be permitted pursuant to this chapter. 
H.  Abandonment. When an equestrian use is abandoned, all corrals and stables shall be removed by the owner of such lot within not to exceed six months after such abandonment. 
I.  Screening. When any equestrian use is visible from a public street, such use shall be screened from such public street by a view-obscuring fence, not less than six feet in height. 
(Prior code § 9412)  
18.46.040 - Permit—Required. 
A.  The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all existing equestrian uses within the city as well as to all new uses commenced after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
B.  No person shall commence any equestrian use after such effective date without first obtaining an equestrian permit in the time and manner provided in Section 18.46.050. 
C.  Any person who has maintained an equestrian use which was in existence as of such effective date shall, within a period of twelve months from and after such effective date, obtain an equestrian permit in the time and manner provided in Section 18.46.050, or file a certificate of compliance in the time and manner provided in Section 18.46.060. 
(Prior code § 9414)  
18.46.050 - Permit—Application and issuance conditions—Appeals—Modification or revocation. 
No equestrian use permitted pursuant to Section 18.46.020 shall be commenced unless and until an equestrian permit therefor is obtained, in the manner set forth in this section. 
A.  Applications. Persons desiring an equestrian permit shall file a written application therefor with the director, and shall contemporaneously therewith pay a filing and processing fee in an amount as set by the city council. An application for an equestrian permit shall contain the following information: 
1.  The name and address of the applicant; 
2.  The address, legal description and dimensions of the subject site; 
3.  The number of horses requested; 
4.  A vicinity map; 
5.  A plot plan showing the area and dimensions of all buildings and structures, existing and proposed; 
6.  A list of the names and addresses of all owners shown as such on the latest Los Angeles County assessment roll, and persons who reside on any property which is contiguous to the subject site; 
7.  Any other appropriate information as requested by the planning director. 
B.  Notices. The planning director shall cause a notice of intent to issue equestrian permit to be given to all persons who reside or own real property which is contiguous, i.e., has a common lot line, to the proposed site. The notice shall generally describe the uses sought, the location thereof, and shall advise such persons of their right to protest the granting of such permit. All such protests must be written and filed with the director nor later than the date set forth in such notice. 
C.  Protests. Where no protests are timely filed and the director finds that the uses proposed will comply with the provisions of this chapter, he shall issue such permit, subject to such conditions as he deems reasonably necessary to insure compliance with this title. 
D.  Appeals. The applicant may appeal to the planning commission the action of the director in either denying such permit or conditionally approving the same. Such an appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed within not to exceed ten days after the giving of notice by the director of his decision. A filing and processing appeal fee, in an amount set by the city council, shall be paid contemporaneously with the filing of such an appeal. In the absence of a timely filed appeal, the decision of the director shall be final. 
E.  Commission Action. 
1.  Where one or more written protests are timely filed, or where an appeal is timely filed, the director shall set the matter for public hearing before the planning commission. Ten days' notice shall be given to the applicant, and owners or residents of the contiguous properties, of the time and place of such hearing. The planning commission shall approve the application where it finds: 
a.  That the permit requested will not be detrimental to, or interfere with, the use, enjoyment or valuation of properties located in the vicinity; and 
b.  That the proposed site is adequate in size and shape to accommodate the uses proposed; and 
c.  That the permit, if issued, will be in compliance with the provisions of this chapter; 
2.  The secretary of the commission shall give the applicant and the protestants, if any, notice of its decision. Such decision shall be final and conclusive, unless within ten days after such notice is given, an interested person appeals such decision to the city council by filing a written appeal with the city clerk-treasurer. In the absence of a timely filed appeal, the commission's decision shall be final. 
F.  Appeal to Council. Where a timely appeal is filed and the filing and processing fee therefore, as set by the city council, is paid, the city clerk-treasurer shall set the matter for hearing before the council, and shall give not less than ten days' written notice of the time and place thereof to the applicant and protestants, if any. The council shall approve, modify or disapprove the commission's action. The council's determination shall be based upon the same factors as are applicable to the planning commission, and such action shall be final and conclusive. 
G.  Revocation, Modification. Each permit shall be valid until abandoned or revoked. All such permits shall be subject to revocation, termination or modification as is provided in Sections 18.52.160 through 18.52.180. 
H.  Recordation. Each permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder. 
(Prior code § 9415)  
18.46.060 - Certificate of compliance required. 
As to any equestrian use existing on any R-E-zoned or R-1-zoned lots as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the owner or person in lawful possession thereof shall, within twelve months after such effective date, render all uses in compliance with the provisions of this chapter and thereafter, within the twelve months, file with the director a written instrument, made under penalty of perjury, attesting that all uses are in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, and will continue to be maintained in compliance therewith. Upon receipt of such an instrument, the director shall investigate the matter to determine whether all such uses are in fact in conformity with the provisions of this code. If he finds that the same are in conformity he shall, notwithstanding the provisions of Section 18.46.050, issue to such person an equestrian permit. If the director finds that such uses are not in compliance, he shall advise the person who filed the certificate of such facts, and shall set the matter for a hearing before the planning commission, which shall be noticed in the manner provided in Section 18.46.050E. At the time of such hearing, the commission shall determine whether or not the uses in existence comply with the provisions of this title. If the commission finds that such compliance exists, it shall order the issuance of an equestrian permit. If the commission finds that uses are not in compliance, it shall refuse to issue the same. Notice of the commission's decision shall be given to all interested persons and such decision shall be final ten days after the giving of such notice, unless an appeal is filed in the time and manner set forth in Section 18.46.050F. 
(Prior code § 9416)  
18.46.070 - Development standards. 
All buildings and structures utilized as a part of equestrian usage shall comply with the following developmental standards: 
A.  Placement of Buildings and Structures. No part of any building or structure, utilized for an equestrian use, shall be located: 
1.  Within fifty feet of any building used for human habitation on adjacent property, nor within thirty-five feet of any building used for human habitation located on the same lot; or 
2.  Within fifty feet of any building or structure from which food is dispensed on a commercial basis; or 
3.  Between the front of a building used for human habitation and a front lot line; or 
4.  Within fifty feet of the right-of-way of any public street. 
B.  Lighting. All exposed light sources shall be shielded by appropriate shades or reflectors and shall be arranged to reflect light away from adjacent property. 
C.  Metal. No building or structure shall be constructed of sheet metal or corrugated metal. 
D.  Corrals. Each corral shall be completely enclosed by a fence at least five feet in height, composed of chain link, a metal fence material or a wooden fence. If a wooden fence is used, it shall consist of four-inch by four-inch posts not more than ten feet apart, and not less than three two-inch by six-inch rails. Substantial locking and/or latching devices shall be provided and installed on all gates in such a manner so as to be inaccessible to animals and small children. Each corral shall have a minimum area of five hundred square feet and may be used to house not to exceed one horse. The minimum corral area shall be increased by two hundred square feet for each additional horse over one housed in such corral. Each corral shall have a roofed area of not less than sixty square feet, with dimensions of six feet by ten feet, for each horse housed in such corral. 
E.  Stables. Each stable shall have a minimum ceiling height of nine feet, and usable floor area of not less than two hundred square feet for one horse, and one hundred twenty additional square feet for each additional horse housed therein. 
F.  Stalls. Stalls shall be located and maintained in each stable. The minimum floor area for each stall shall be ten feet by twelve feet. 
G.  Maintenance. All buildings and structures used to house horses shall be maintained in a neat and orderly condition with no broken elements of any fence, wall, gate, building or structure. 
H.  Storage—Hay and Grain. The storage of hay shall be permitted only in an area which has a portland cement concrete slab floor, or such shall be stored not less than eighteen inches aboveground. Such storage of hay shall not exceed a height above ground level greater than twelve feet, and shall not be located within five feet of any property line. The storage of grain shall be confined to rodent-proof containers only. 
I.  Trash—Storage Areas. All storage of trash, manure, offal, soiled straw and other refuse shall be within a completely enclosed building or an area completely enclosed by a view-obscuring fence or wall and gate not less than six feet in height. 
J.  New Material. Every new building or structure constructed for equestrian uses after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section shall be constructed exclusively of new materials. 
(Prior code § 9413)  
Chapter 18.47 - WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES ON PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY 
 
18.47.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter is enacted pursuant to 47 U.S.C. §332(c)(7) to provide standards for wireless telecommunication facilities. It is intended that such facilities be located, installed and operated in a manner consistent with all safety and aesthetic objectives of this chapter, while recognizing the benefit of these facilities to the community. This chapter applies to all wireless telecommunication facilities located within the city of Whittier, whether they are located on public or private property or within a Specific Plan or Planned Community. Facilities located within in the public right-of-way shall be governed by Section 12.56 of the Whittier Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2918, § 1, 2-10-09)  
18.47.020 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall be defined as follows: 
"Antenna" means a device used in communications which radiates and/or receives any radio or television signals for commercial purposes, including, but not limited to, commercial cellular, personal communication service, wireless modem signals, and/or data radio signals. "Antenna" shall not include any noncommercial satellite dish or any antenna utilized for amateur radio, citizen band radio, television, AM/FM or shortwave radio reception purposes. 
"Antenna or (wireless antenna)" means (for the purpose of this chapter) any device used for communications (within the frequency spectrum range assigned to wireless telecommunication providers by the Federal Communications Commission) which radiates and/or receives any signals for communication. "Antenna" or "Wireless Antenna" shall not include any noncommercial satellite dish or any antenna utilized for amateur radio, citizen band radio, television, AM/FM or shortwave radio reception purposes. 
"Antenna structure" means an antenna or array of antennas and its associated support structure, including, without limitation, a mast or tower. 
"Building or Structure height" means the vertical distance measured from the finished grade of the lot immediately beneath the portion of the building or structure being measured, to the highest point of such building or structure, including all faux tree limbs or protruding elements that are associated with a mono-tree or mono-pole. 
"Cellular" means an analog or digital wireless communication technology that is based on a system of interconnected neighboring cell sites. 
"Co-Location or co-located" means the location of multiple antennas which are either owned or operated by more than one service provider at a single location and mounted to a common supporting structure, wall or building. 
"Equipment cabinets/base station" means a fixed station at a specified site authorized to communicate with mobile stations, microcells, repeaters, or other wireless stations, usually housed in metal cabinets or small structures on or within close proximity to the antenna structure on the same site. 
"Mono-pole" means a structure composed of a single spire used to support antennas or related equipment. 
"Personal wireless services" means the commercial mobile services, unlicensed wireless services, and common carrier wireless exchange access services, as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 332(c)(7). 
"Roof-mounted" means mounted above the eave line of a building. 
"Stealth, stealthing or screening" means the effect of locating an antenna and supporting telecommunication equipment within or behind a building, wall, facade, fence, landscaping (real or simulated), berm, and/or other specially designed device so that the public view of the antenna(s) and supporting telecommunications equipment from adjoining and nearby public street rights-of-way and private properties is eliminated or minimized to be unrecognizable. 
"Wall mounted antenna" means an antenna that is mounted on any vertical surface of a building or structure. 
"Wireless telecommunication facility" means a facility consisting of any commercial antenna, monopole, microwave dish and/or other related equipment, or combination thereof, necessary to the transmission and/or reception of any radio or television signals for commercial purposes, including but not limited to, commercial cellular, personal communication service, wireless modem, and/or data radio communications, and which has been granted a certificate of public convenience and necessity, or a wireless registration number by the California Public Utilities Commission, or otherwise provides commercial wireless communications services to the public. "Wireless communication facility" does not include any radio or television facility which is exempt from local regulation pursuant to state or federal law. 
"Whip or omni antenna" means an antenna that transmits signals in three hundred sixty degrees. Whip antennas are typically cylindrical in shape and are less than six inches in diameter and measure up to eighteen feet in height. Also called omnidirectional, stick, or pipe antennas. 
(Ord. No. 2918, § 1, 2-10-09)  
18.47.030 - Applicability. 
A.  Prior to the installation of any new, modified or expanded wireless telecommunication facility on public or private property, the applicant shall first obtain the written permission of the legal property owner of the parcel of land or building on which the wireless telecommunication facility is proposed to be located. 
B.  Unless noted otherwise, all wireless telecommunication facilities shall be governed by the provisions contained herein, in addition to the California Environmental Quality Act. 
C.  Unless specially exempted within this chapter, all wireless telecommunication facilities shall be subject to the review and approval of a conditional use permit and a development review application from the city of Whittier, prior to installation and operation as well as for any expansion of an existing facility, unless previously approved under a master plan of development, as outlined in Section 18.47.090. 
D.  If a new or expanded wireless telecommunication facility is located within any ground or air space easement, the wireless provider shall obtain the written consent of the easement holder(s) prior to the installation or expansion of any telecommunications facility and the issuance of any building permits. 
E.  All new or expanded telecommunication facilities located on public property owned or managed by the city of Whittier shall obtain a city encroachment license/permit prior to installation. 
F.  All wireless telecommunication facilities located within the public right-of-way shall be governed separately under Chapter 12.56 of the Whittier Municipal Code. 
G.  The following types of wireless telecommunication facilities shall not require the approval of a conditional use permit, but shall be subject to the review and approval of a development review application: 
1.  All wireless telecommunication facilities located on property owned by the city of Whittier. 
2.  Any wireless telecommunication facility in which all cellular antennas are physically integrated within the internal framework of a building or structure or are mounted to the roof of a building in which the antennas are completely below or internal to the building parapet wall and do not result in the building or structure exceeding the maximum height limit for the underlying zone. In addition, the cellular equipment must be located either within an underground equipment vault, physically incorporated within a building or located on the roof a building and the equipment is completely below the building parapet walls, so as not be visible from the public right-of-away or the surrounding properties from ground level. 
3.  Any future wireless telecommunication facilities and co-locations that were previously approved under a conditional use permit as part of a comprehensive master plan of development for a wireless telecommunication facility network operated by a specific telecommunications provider within the city of Whittier. 
4.  Any wireless telecommunication facility that the Federal Telecommunications Act may specifically exempt from discretionary review and approval by the city. 
5.  Amateur (ham) radio stations licensed by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC). 
6.  Temporary wireless telecommunication facilities for emergency communications by public officials. 
7.  Co-location with an existing (conforming) wireless telecommunication facility located on a building, structure or property that is upgraded pursuant to the antenna and equipment facility design and location preferences contained within Section 18.47.060(A)(9) of this chapter to the satisfaction of the director of community development. 
8.  Co-location with an existing, nonconforming, wireless telecommunication facility that will be re-developed in compliance with the provisions of this chapter and upgraded pursuant to the antenna and equipment facility design and location preferences contained within Section 18.47.060(A)(9) to the satisfaction of the director of community development. 
9.  Except as provided within Section 18.47.040 (Prohibited locations) or the applicant's failure to comply with the provisions listed below, wireless telecommunication facilities may be developed or expanded on any building, structure, object, property, site, or landscape designated eligible or listed on any local, state or national register as an historic landmark subject to compliance the following requirements: 
1)  The wireless provider shall completely eliminate all exterior, ground level, visibility for all new and existing wireless telecommunication facility antennas and infrastructure (regardless if they belong to the same wireless provider or not) that currently exist on the eligible or designated historic landmark, in compliance with the provisions of this chapter; 
2)  Mono-poles and mono-trees shall not be constructed on any property that is occupied with an eligible or designated historic landmark. In addition, any existing mono-poles or mono-trees located on a property that is occupied with an eligible or designated historic landmark shall be removed, regardless if they belong to the same wireless provider or not. 
3)  New and existing wireless telecommunication facility antennas and infrastructure will not be physically attached to the exterior facade of an eligible or designated historic landmark building, structure or object. 
4)  The placement of any wireless telecommunication facility antennas and infrastructure shall not result in the removal, reconstruction or modification to any significant, original, character defining feature(s) associated with the eligible or designated historic landmark. Likewise, no new or speculative architectural/design features shall be incorporated with the eligible or designated historic landmark as part of a wireless telecommunication facility installation. 
5)  Approval of a certificate of appropriateness (instead of a development review) application by the Historic Resources Commission to ensure that the design of the new and/or re-located wireless telecommunication facility antennas and infrastructure does not degrade the historic integrity of the designated or eligible historic landmark resource by violating any of the Secretary of the Interior's Standards and/or disqualify the eligible or designated historic landmark resource from any local, state or federal listing as a eligible or designated historic landmark. 
(Ord. No. 2918, § 1, 2-10-09)  
18.47.040 - Prohibited locations 
All new and expanded wireless telecommunication facilities are prohibited in the following locations: 
A.  On any property located within the H-R (Hillside Residential), R-E (Single-Family Residential Estate), or R-1 (Single-Family Residential) zone, unless owned by the city of Whittier. 
B.  Property within or abutting a designated scenic corridor. However, with the approval of a conditional use permit, co-location on an existing building or structure may be considered. 
(Ord. No. 2918, § 1, 2-10-09; Ord. No. 2949, § 2, 2-23-10)  
18.47.050 - Application submittal requirements. 
All applications for wireless telecommunication facilities shall be accompanied with the following: 
A.  The appropriate development application fees. 
B.  A radius map and a certified list of the names and addresses of all property owners within three hundred feet of the exterior boundaries of the property involved, as shown on the latest assessment roll from the Los Angeles County Assessor, if the facility is subject to the approval of a conditional use permit. 
C.  A legal description of the property where the wireless telecommunication facility or co-location is to be installed. 
D.  A fully dimensioned and scaled site plan containing the following information: 
1.  The location of all on-site buildings, property lines, parking facilities, landscape planters, perimeter fencing and existing on-site wireless telecommunication facilities, if any. 
2.  The location and distance of the proposed wireless telecommunication facility antennas and supporting equipment from all adjacent property lines and on-site buildings. 
3.  The identification of all adjacent land uses surrounding the proposed wireless telecommunication facility. 
4.  The distance between the proposed wireless telecommunication facility and any buildings on the immediate, contiguous, surrounding properties. 
5.  The size and area of all new and existing on-site cellular antennas, equipment cabinets and infrastructure used to operate the wireless telecommunication facility. 
6.  Spot or contour elevations on the property to demonstrate any grade changes. 
7.  All proposed on-site grading and drainage modifications. 
8.  The public right-of-way widths and improvements adjacent to the property on which the telecommunication facility will be located. 
9.  All future, on-site, wireless telecommunication facility antennas and operating equipment, if known. 
E.  A landscape plan illustrating the following information shall be provided unless, in the opinion the director of community development, no landscaping will be impacted: 
1.  The location of all existing on-site landscape planters that will be created, modified or eliminated as part of the proposed wireless telecommunication facility. 
2.  All proposed or modified on-site landscaping and irrigation. The size and species of all new and existing on-site landscaping material shall be clearly identified on the plans. 
3.  The total area and percentage of on-site landscaping on the property before and after the installation of the wireless telecommunication facility. 
4.  The location, height and type of all new and existing, on-site, perimeter fencing and telecommunication equipment enclosures. 
F.  Fully dimensioned elevations of all telecommunication facility equipment including: 
1.  The height of the antennas from finished grade. 
2.  All proposed building materials and colors of the telecommunications facility and ancillary equipment. 
3.  Construction details of the location and placement of the cellular antennas when placed on or within a pole, building or other structure. 
G.  A balloon or other physical representation of the maximum height of the proposed wireless telecommunications facility antennas shall be provided at the project location for a minimum of one week prior to any required public hearing for the facility to enable the planning commission or approval authority to assess the aesthetic impacts to the surrounding land uses and public rights-of-way of the proposed antenna height. This requirement may be waived by the director of community development, whenever deemed appropriate. 
H.  A propagation map illustrating the existing coverage and the proposed new coverage the wireless telecommunication facility will cover. 
I.  Photographs of the project site, taken from the adjacent public right(s)-of-way, from the surrounding properties and on the property on which telecommunication facility is located, with a corresponding location map key documenting where each photograph was taken. 
J.  A computer photo simulation of the proposed wireless telecommunication facility and supporting cellular equipment cabinets and infrastructure in context with its existing surroundings. All computer photo simulations shall include at least one image from all adjacent public right(s)-of-way(s) when deemed necessary by the director of community development. 
K.  If any wireless telecommunication facility equipment is located above ground (not within a building) and less than one hundred fifty feet to a residential property line, an independent acoustical engineer, deemed acceptable to the director of community development, shall prepare noise study to verify that any noise generated by the telecommunication facility equipment will not violate the city's noise ordinance to the interior and exterior of a residential unit. 
L.  A radio-frequency (RF) study shall be prepared by a qualified, independent, RF engineer, deemed acceptable by the director of community development, documenting that the new or modified telecommunications facility will not exceed maximum RF emission limits, as set by the Federal Communication Commission, for maximum human exposure. RF studies shall include all proposed and existing telecommunication antennas on the same property, at maximum operational capacity. 
M.  A narrative explaining why the applicant chose the project location for a wireless telecommunication facility and how the proposed facility fits into the applicant's telecommunications network. This submission requirement does not require disclosure of confidential business information. 
N.  A PMS color and material sample board of all materials and colors proposed for the wireless telecommunication facility. 
O.  Any additional information deemed necessary by the director of community development to evaluate the proposed telecommunication facility's operational and aesthetic characteristics. 
P.  If a new wireless telecommunication facility is not to be co-located with another such facility, provide a written explanation of why co-location is not possible or the reason co-location has/is being rejected. 
(Ord. No. 2918, § 1, 2-10-09; Ord. No. 2932, § 8, 8-11-09)  
18.47.060 - Development standards. 
A.  General Requirements: 
1.  No wireless telecommunication facility shall interfere with any existing or new emergency communication system at any time. 
2.  All wireless telecommunication facilities shall comply with all Federal Communication Act provisions. 
3.  In no case shall any part of a wireless telecommunications facility create any physical or visual hazards to pedestrian and vehicular circulation on public or private property. 
4.  No telecommunication facility shall reduce the requisite number of off-street parking spaces below that required for the property on which it is developed. 
5.  No wireless telecommunications facility shall interfere with the normal operation of the existing land use(s) on the property hosting the wireless telecommunications facility. 
6.  Prior to the issuance of any building permits for any new, modified or expanded wireless telecommunication facility on private property, the property owner shall comply with the provisions contained within Section 18.62 of the city's nonconforming ordinance. 
7.  All wireless telecommunication facilities shall comply with the city's noise ordinance at all times. 
8.  All wireless telecommunication facilities shall be singularly and collectively (if multiple cellular operators exist on a single structure or property) be designed to ensure that the maximum Electro Magnetic Radiation exposure limits for human health does not exceed the Federal Communication Commission's maximum health human exposure limits. Prior to any discretionary permit approval for a new or expanded wireless telecommunication facility, a radio-frequency (RF) report shall be prepared by a qualified, independent, RF engineer, acceptable to the director of community development, to document compliance. 
9.  All wireless telecommunication facilities shall be stealthed to eliminate or substantially reduce their visual and aesthetic impacts from the surrounding public rights-of-way and adjacent properties. To accomplish this goal, all wireless telecommunication facility antennas and supporting equipment shall be developed with the intent of locating and designing such facilities in the following manner and order of preference (from top to bottom). 
a.  Antennas: 
i)  Architecturally integrated within the internal framework of a building or structure whether existing, proposed, or as a building addition, so as to be completely obscured and non-visible from any public view. 
ii)  Located on the rooftop of a building and situated entirely below or internally within the building parapet wall so as to be entirely stealthed from any public view on the ground. 
iii)  Architecturally integrated within the internal framework of a new (functional or non-function) freestanding structure (i.e., a clock tower, water tower, freestanding sign, flag pole, cultural monument, etc.) that is compatible with the bulk, mass, scale and height of the surrounding buildings, structures or environmental features and does not eliminate any required on-site parking, landscaping or create the need for a setback variance. 
iv)  Mounted to an existing building/structure whereby the antennas are placed on the building or structure in such a manner so as to act as a decorative architectural feature of the building/structure it is located on. 
v)  On a "mono-tree" that is surrounded by a grove of living trees that have or will attain a future height (within fifteen years) that is generally comparable to the freestanding "mono-tree." Within a natural setting (i.e., a park, undeveloped hillside etc.) a "mono-rock" or faux rock outcropping may be considered when the topography or geology of the site has similar natural features. When a wireless telecommunication facility is located within a public park or along the Greenway Trail, a mono-tree shall be the primary design preference. 
vi)  On a "mono-pole" that is substantially screened from all public rights-of-way by a building, structure or object of a similar height and mass. 
b.  Telecommunication Facility Equipment: 
i)  Within an underground equipment vault. 
ii)  Incorporated inside of an existing or new building/structure or located entirely below a building roof parapet wall so as to be completely screened from public view on the ground. 
iii)  Ground mounted in a non-obtrusive location and enclosed by a decorative wall (not exceeding six feet high) or with another high quality screening material. Screen walls composed of chain-link, wood, metal or wire mesh are prohibited. 
c.  Site Selection Preferences: 
i)  On any city owned parcel of property. 
ii)  Co-located with an existing telecommunications facility or at a pre-approved location by the city of Whittier as part of a master plan of development for a wireless telecommunication facility provider in the city. 
iii)  In an industrial zone; 
iv)  In a commercial zone; 
v)  In a mixed-use development or building within a planned community or specific plan; 
vi)  Within a multi-family residential zone; 
B.  Development Criteria: 
1.  Setbacks. 
a.  All wireless telecommunication facilities (including all antennas and related accessory equipment cabinet(s)) shall meet all front, side and rear yard setback requirements of the zoning classification it is located in, except as identified otherwise within this chapter. However, the approval authority may designate greater setbacks so long as it does not disrupt the reception or transmission of wireless telecommunication signals. 
b.  Wireless telecommunication equipment cabinets may be located within any side or rear yard setback, if located entirely below ground, within a vault. 
c.  There shall be no new freestanding mono-poles or mono-trees located within a seven hundred fifty-foot radius of another such facility that is of the same general design or faux tree type, except on property owned by the city of Whittier. The approval authority many deem a lesser distance appropriate to avoid a coverage gap in a wireless telecommunication provider's system. 
2.  Building or Structure Height. 
a.  The maximum height for a new freestanding building or structure designed to accommodate a wireless telecommunication facility shall not exceed the maximum building height limit for the zoning classification of the property it is development on or seventy feet, which ever is less. In instances where the maximum building height for the zoning classification is less than seventy feet, the approval of a conditional use permit shall be required to enable a wireless telecommunication facility to be constructed up to seventy feet high. The maximum building height shall include all architectural features located above the actual placement of the wireless antennas. Additional building or structure height may be considered with the approval of a variance subject to meeting all of the following provisions: 
i)  It can be documented by a qualified, independent, RF engineer that there is no feasible alternative location or design that would allow the telecommunication facility to comply with the maximum building height limit without adversely impacting the ability of the wireless provider to receive and send communication signals. Alternatively, additional building height is necessary to be able to co-locate on an existing wireless telecommunication facility without interfering with the communication signals from an existing wireless provider. 
ii)  There are exceptional circumstances such as topography, existing vegetation or structures that require the telecommunication facility to exceed the underlying zoning classifications maximum building height limit. 
b.  Wireless telecommunication facilities employing mono-poles or mono-trees over forty feet in height shall be located within the rear one-half of the property, unless constructed on public property owned by the city of Whittier. In such case, the exact location shall be determined by the city's approval authority. 
3.  Lot Coverage. All freestanding, ground-mounted, wireless telecommunication facilities, including any related above-ground telecommunication equipment cabinet(s), shall be counted towards the maximum allowable lot coverage for the property the wireless telecommunication facility is developed on. 
4.  Landscaping. All wireless telecommunications facilities and related cellular equipment structures, vaults, and cabinets shall be surrounded by a minimum five-foot-wide, irrigated, landscape planter that is maintained in good condition at all times. 
5.  Fencing. All ground mounted wireless telecommunication facility equipment (except that located within an underground vault) shall be enclosed by a decorative block wall or other material deemed acceptable to the director of community development. In no case shall the decorative wall or fencing material exceed seven feet high. 
6.  Signage. 
a.  There shall be no on-site advertising or signage on any portion of a wireless telecommunication facility except that required by law, identified within this chapter and/or required by the city of Whittier. 
b.  Health and safety signage shall be conspicuously posted in locations near all access points into a wireless telecommunication facility that identify the minimum distance that should be maintained from all cellular antennas and equipment that have RF or electromagnetic radiation emissions. 
c.  A contact person and valid emergency phone number of the wireless telecommunication facility provider shall be conspicuously posted and kept current on wireless telecommunication facilities. 
7.  Lighting. No wireless telecommunication facility structure may be illuminated unless specifically required to do so by any applicable governmental agency that has regulatory authority over telecommunication facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2918, § 1, 2-10-09)  
18.47.070 - Design standards. 
The following general design standards shall be considered for regulating the location, design, and general aesthetics of all wireless telecommunication facilities: 
A.  Visual Impact. 
1.  All wireless telecommunication facilities shall be stealthed to eliminate or reduce their visual and aesthetic impacts from the surrounding public right(s)-of-way and adjacent properties. Where feasible and appropriate, all colors and designs shall be integrated and compatible with the surrounding on-site buildings. 
2.  No wireless telecommunication facility shall have a bright, shiny or reflective finish. All facilities shall be finished in a color to neutralize it and blend it with, rather than contrast it from, the sky and the on-site improvements immediately surrounding the facility. 
3.  In developing a wireless telecommunications facility, screening of the facility must take into account the existing improvements or natural features on or adjacent to the site including all landscaping, walls, fences, berms or other specially designed devices which preclude or minimize the visibility of the telecommunications facility and the grade of the site, as related to the surrounding grades of properties and public rights-of-way. 
4.  Compatible with the general mass and scale of any/all on-site and off-site buildings, poles and structures immediately surrounding the wireless telecommunications facility. 
5.  All new or modified wireless telecommunications facilities shall be designed, whenever possible, to accommodate for the potential co-location of at least one additional wireless carrier on-site. 
6.  All ground mounted wireless telecommunication facility structures, equipment and other infrastructure shall be treated with an anti-graffiti material coating, where appropriate. 
7.  When a mono-tree is proposed as part of a wireless telecommunication facility, the selection of the type of mono-tree shall be based on the existing or proposed type and size of trees on the site it is being developed on. Such mono-trees shall be placed within a grove or windrow of similar living trees that will have a complementary height and appearance at maturity. 
8.  When possible, the maximum tree branch/frown density shall be used and incorporated within the design of all mono-trees for antenna stealthing purposes. In addition, all cellular antennas mounted to a mono-tree shall incorporate the use of "sock covers" (except on mono-palms) over each antenna to simulate tree branches/leaves/needles etc. for additional stealthing. 
9.  Any technological stealthing improvements or upgrades that can be made to an existing telecommunication facility shall be made upon the modification or expansion of an existing facility, including ground mounted equipment. 
10.  The use of microwave antennas are discouraged on all wireless telecommunication facilities when not completely stealthed from the public right-of-way. 
B.  Landscaping. 
1.  All new landscaping planted in conjunction with a wireless telecommunication facility shall be strategically placed around the facility so as to screen the infrastructure from public view. 
2.  Landscaping shall be compatible with the surrounding landscaping and shall be of a type and variety capable of screening portions of any ground mounted wireless telecommunication facility equipment and infrastructure. 
3.  Unity of design shall be achieved by repetition of certain plant varieties and other materials, and by coordination with adjacent landscaping, where appropriate. 
4.  Landscape groupings shall be of a compatible type and size. 
5.  All new trees planted in conjunction with a wireless telecommunications facility shall be a minimum of thirty-six-inch box in size. All landscape shrubby shall be a minimum of fifteen-gallon in size, when planted. For Palm Trees, each tree shall have a minimum twelve to fifteen-foot brown trunk height at the time of planting. 
6.  All new landscaping shall be properly irrigated and maintained in good condition at all times. Any dead or dying vegetation or trees shall be removed and replaced by the wireless telecommunications facility operator within fourteen days of discovery or upon being notified by the property owner or the city of Whittier. 
C.  Fencing. 
1.  Fences and walls shall be built with attractive, durable, materials including but not limited to: brick, wrought iron, tubular steel, textured concrete block, stucco walls with a decorative top cap, or "woodcrete" fencing etc. 
2.  Chain-link, natural wood, plexi-glass, and corrugated metal fencing are specifically prohibited as part of any fencing palette for any wireless telecommunication facility. 
3.  All decorative walls, wrought iron fences and other high quality wall/fencing materials shall be consistent with the materials and designs used throughout the project. 
(Ord. No. 2918, § 1, 2-10-09)  
18.47.080 - Maintenance. 
A.  Wireless telecommunications facilities shall be maintained on a regular basis. All maintenance associated with a wireless telecommunication facility shall be performed between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday. In the event of an emergency in which normal maintenance of the wireless telecommunications facility can not be performed, the wireless provider shall be exempt from this requirement, but shall notify the director of community development within forty-eight hours of the emergency. The emergency situation will temporarily modify these maintenance guidelines until said emergency has been mitigated or resolved. 
B.  The operator of any wireless telecommunications facility shall provide and maintain at all times proof of California Public Utilities Commission (PUC) and the Federal Communication Commission (FCC) certification to operate each and every one their facilities in the city of Whittier. 
C.  It shall be the joint and individual responsibility of the wireless operator and the property owner to remove/repair any graffiti or vandalism found with a wireless telecommunication facility within seventy-two hours of its discovery. 
(Ord. No. 2918, § 1, 2-10-09)  
18.47.090 - Master plan of wireless telecommunication facilities. 
All future, anticipated, wireless telecommunication facilities that are to be built by a single wireless provider for their network that are pre-approved simultaneously under one conditional use permit, as part of a comprehensive master plan of telecommunication facilities on one or more properties within the city, and in accordance with the requirements of this chapter, may be constructed without a time limit or the need to obtain any supplemental conditional use permit approvals. However, all pre-approved wireless telecommunication facilities shall be designed and constructed in substantial compliance with the approved master plan, as determined by the director of community development. 
(Ord. No. 2918, § 1, 2-10-09)  
18.47.100 - Lease agreements for wireless telecommunication facilities. 
A.  All leases on private property shall be non-exclusive. In addition, the operator of a wireless telecommunication facility located on public or private property shall make all supporting telecommunication structure(s) of the facility available to any other licensed wireless telecommunication facility provider wishing to co-locate, to the extent technically feasible. 
B.  Wireless telecommunication facilities located on any city owned property, right-of-way, city easement, or structure shall be subject to lease agreement with the city of Whittier specifying the use of the property, required maintenance and repair, reimbursements to the city for costs associated with the proposed use, and such other terms as the city may require. Applicants shall also agree to indemnify, hold harmless, and defend the city from any liability arising out of its approval to allow for the construction and operation of a wireless telecommunication facility. The telecommunications facility provider shall also provide the city with a certificate of insurance (for general commercial liability) for an amount, as required by the city manager, naming the city as an additional insured. The insurance shall be placed with a company satisfactory to the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 2918, § 1, 2-10-09)  
18.47.110 - Required findings for all wireless telecommunication facilities, demonstration of burden of proof and appeals. 
A.  Instead of the findings contained within Section 18.52.040(B) of the Whittier Municipal Code, the following findings are required for every wireless telecommunications facility approved within the city of Whittier. In all cases, the applicant shall have the burden of proof to show, by relevant evidence, the existence of facts which support the conclusion that the standards, as set forth in this section, are met: 
1.  The property hosting the wireless telecommunication facility is of adequate size, shape and topography to support the development of the facility without the need for any variances; 
2.  The wireless telecommunications facility will not interfere or disrupt the communication reception and transmission of any public or private entity. 
3.  The telecommunications facility will comply with the provisions of this chapter and all other applicable city, state and federal regulations. 
B.  Any decision to deny a request to place, construct or modify a wireless telecommunication facility shall be supported by evidence contained in a written record documenting why the wireless telecommunication facility cannot be approved, as detailed within Section 18.52.100 of the Whittier Municipal Code. 
C.  Any request to appeal a decision to approve or deny a telecommunication facility shall comply with the requirements contained within Section 18.52.120 and 18.52.130 of the Whittier Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2918, § 1, 2-10-09)  
18.47.120 - Removal of wireless telecommunication facilities. 
A.  Discontinued use. The operator of a lawfully erected wireless telecommunications facility and the owner of the premises upon which it is located on shall notify, in writing, within fifteen days, the director of community development documenting when the wireless telecommunication facility was temporarily or permanently discontinued. In the event that the discontinued use of a wireless telecommunications facility is permanent, the private property owner and/or wireless provider shall obtain a demolition permit to promptly remove the facility, repair any/all on-site damage to the premises and restore the site to its original condition, consistent with the Whittier Municipal Code. All such removal, repair and restoration shall be completed within sixty days after the use is permanently discontinued, and shall be performed in accordance with all applicable health and safety code requirements to the satisfaction of the director of community development. 
B.  Abandonment. Any wireless telecommunication facility that is inoperative or unused for a period of one hundred eighty consecutive calendar days shall be deemed "abandoned." It shall be the joint and individual responsibility of the wireless provider and the property owner to give written notice to the director of community development within fifteen days after abandonment. Thereafter, an abandoned facility shall be deemed a public nuisance and shall be completely removed from the property on which the wireless telecommunication facility is located. The wireless telecommunication provider and private property owner hosting the facility shall be responsible for one hundred percent reimbursement to the city of Whittier for any/all costs associated with the removal of the telecommunications facility by the city, if necessary. If the facility is located on public property, the telecommunication facility provider shall be solely responsible for all costs associated with the removal of the facility and the restoration of the public property or easement to the satisfaction of the director of community development. 
(Ord. No. 2918, § 1, 2-10-09)  
18.47.130 - Emergencies and disasters. 
In the event the mayor or city manager declares a state of emergency or disaster in the city of Whittier, the director of community development may exempt wireless telecommunication facilities from any or all of the requirements contained in this chapter during the duration of such emergency or disaster. 
(Ord. No. 2918, § 1, 2-10-09)  
Chapter 18.48 - OFF-STREET PARKING 
 
18.48.010 - Facilities required. 
1.  Off-street parking facilities for automobiles and vehicular loading spaces shall be deemed to be accessory uses in each zone established pursuant to this chapter. Every use permitted in each zone shall be provided with permanently maintained off-street parking facilities and vehicular loading spaces, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
2.  Off-street parking facilities including, but not limited to, all: landscaping, irrigation, paved surfaces, striping, signage, pavement markings, etc. contained therein shall be maintained in good condition and repair at all times. 
(Ord. 2865 § 2, 2005: prior code § 9340)  
18.48.020 - Schedule of parking requirements. 
1.  Required on-site parking for each parcel shall be based on each on-site land-use conducted on the parcel. 
2.  The off-street parking spaces required for each use permitted by this title shall not be less than the following, provided that any fractional parking space shall be computed as a whole: 
Off-Street Parking Schedule 
Land Use Classification 	Parking Requirements 
1. Residential 	(Spaces/net floor area) 
 A. Residential Zones R-E and R-1 	Four parking spaces for each unit. Off-street parking facilities shall provide a minimum of two non-tandem parking spaces within an enclosed garage. Additional on-site parking spaces may be developed in tandem on the property. 
 1. Accessory living areas 	One parking space, if the accessory living area includes any bathing facilities. 
 2. Accessory Dwelling Units in the R-E, and R-1 zones, including multi-family zoned properties 	One tandem parking space on an existing driveway or one non-tandem parking space that is either covered or uncovered when the accessory dwelling unit is one thousand two hundred square feet or less. No additional curb cuts are permitted for an accessory dwelling unit unless approved by the Director of Public Works. 
(See Section 18.10.020 (I)(7)(C) for Accessory Dwelling Units not subject to these Parking Requirements per California Government Code 65852.2, as it may be amended from time to time.) 
	For accessory dwelling units that are over one thousand two hundred square feet and built on a lot that is twenty thousand square feet and greater, a minimum of two covered, non-tandem, on-site parking spaces shall be provided for the accessory dwelling unit. 
(See Section 18.10.020 (I)(7)(C) for Accessory Dwelling Units not subject to these Parking Requirements per California Government Code 65852.2, as it may be amended from time to time.) 
 B. Multi-Family Residential (rental and ownership units) 	1. Covered Parking. Parking shall be provided within an enclosed garage, covered parking stall or parking structure. Required parking shall be provided as follows: 2.0/Studio or one bedroom unit, 2.0/Two bedroom unit, 2.25/Three or more bedrooms; plus 1 guest space/4 units. 
	Each ownership unit shall be provided with a minimum of two spaces located within a separate enclosed garage or within a parking structure and shall be included as part of each unit's ownership. 
	2. Garages. Each of the two required parking spaces for each ownership unit shall be located in a parking structure or within a two car garage, which shall be provided with an automatic garage door opener. Additional parking in excess of two spaces per unit may be within a parking structure, carport or enclosed garage that may be leased/rented to residents by the project owner or homeowner's association or be designated as additional uncovered guest parking. 
	3. Guest Parking. Guest parking shall be provided as follows: One space for each three units when the development consists of up to 9 units. 
One space for each four units when the development consists of 10 or more units. 
All guest parking spaces shall be clearly marked and maintained for guests only. In addition, no guest parking spaces shall be located within a private garage, but may be located within an above and/or below ground parking structure that serves the on-site parking needs of the development. The location of guest parking spaces, which are not visible from the public right-of-way, must be directed by signs and dispersed throughout the site. Guest parking within a gated community shall be located behind a secured gate and be accessible via a phone access system or manned guard gate unless specifically approved by the approval authority when it can be found that such guest parking located outside the gated area is: 
	a. Conveniently located to all units in the project; 
	b. Oriented in a manner that will be properly maintained; and 
	c. Visible to arriving guests and adequately screened from adjoining public streets. 
	4. Substandard Roadways. Projects with ownership and nonownership units which are served by streets with roadway widths which are insufficient for providing on-street parking or where such parking is restricted or prohibited shall permanently provide and maintain additional off-street parking spaces at a ratio of one space for each thirty lineal feet, or fraction thereof, of curbed street where parking is prohibited. In no case shall such additional off-street parking, including guest spaces per subsection (B)(3) of this section, need not exceed one open parking space per ownership and nonownership unit. 
	5. Distance Between Garages. The minimum distance between garages facing one another or between a garage and a building or wall shall be twenty-eight feet. 
C. Senior Citizen Ownership and Non-Ownership apartments and condominiums 	The number of required on-site parking spaces shall be determined by the approval authority, based on a traffic study conducted by a California licensed traffic engineer but no less than .75 spaces per unit. 
D. Clubs, fraternity, sorority, and boarding houses 	1 space/each sleeping room or 1 space/bed, whichever is greater. 
E. Congregate and assisted living facilities 	The number of required on-site parking spaces shall be determined by the approval authority, based on a traffic study conducted by a California licensed traffic engineer. 
2. Non-Residential 	(Spaces/net floor area or seats) 
A. General Retail 	1/250 s.f. 
B. Restaurant 	1/3.5 seats plus 1/40 s.f. for restaurant assembly space consisting of: banquet rooms, customer waiting rooms and ordering areas. 
C. Fast Food, including Drive-thru 	Same as "Restaurant." 
D. General Office 	1/300 s.f. 
E. Medical or Dental Office 	1/200 s.f. 
F. Banks, savings and loans 	1/300 s.f. 
G. Assembly uses—includes theaters, churches, etc. 	1/3 seats and 1/100 s.f. of area devoted to assembly purposes without fixed seats such as banquet, waiting, and reception rooms. 
	Parking shall be based upon all activities occurring and portions of building in use at any one time on the site; or as determined by a parking demand study prepared by a California licensed traffic engineer and approved by the applicable approval authority. 
H. Clubs and Lodges 	Same as "Assembly" uses. 
I. Commercial Recreation 	1/100 s.f. or per a parking demand study prepared by a California licensed traffic engineer and approved by the applicable approval authority. 
J. Trade, Business, Vocational, and Traffic Schools 	1/50 square feet; or 1/3.3 seats, whichever is greater. 
K. Health and Exercise Clubs 	1/100 s.f. or per a parking demand study prepared by a California licensed traffic engineer and approved by the applicable approval authority. 
L. Self-Storage Facilities 	1/100 storage units, plus 1/250 s.f. of retail sales, plus 1/300 s.f. of office. 
M. Warehouse Facilities 	1/1,500 s.f. 
N. Industrial Zones 	1/500 s.f. or ½ employees, whichever is greater. 
O. Catering and Delivery Vehicles 	One on-site space for each catering or delivery vehicle parked on-site, in addition to the required on-site parking for the business it is associated with. Also see WMC Section 18.52.030(H). 
P. Lodging Facilities* 	1 space per guest room for 20 rooms or less, plus 2 staff spaces; or 
1.2 spaces per guest room for more than 20 rooms, plus 
2 check-in guest spaces per 50 rooms or fraction thereof. 
Additional spaces as required by ancillary uses. 
A request to deviate from these standards can be considered if a parking study is submitted with the Conditional Use Permit application. 
Q. Uses for which a conditional use permit is required and no reference to required on-site parking is made within this chapter. 	The number of required on-site parking spaces shall be determined by the approval authority, based on a traffic study conducted by a California licensed traffic engineer. 
3. Unique circumstances or required on-site parking for any land use not specifically included in this parking ordinance shall be determined by a parking study conducted by a California licensed traffic engineer. The approval authority shall have the ability to accept, reject or modify the parking study recommendations, upon consultation with the city traffic engineer. 
4. Non-residential uses that cannot provide their required number of on-site parking spaces within a shared parking lot may submit a parking study, prepared by a California licensed traffic engineer, to justify that the reduced on-site parking for the use will not adversely impact the overall demand for on-site parking within the shared parking lot. The approval authority shall have the ability to accept, reject or modify the recommended number of on-site parking spaces, upon consultation with the city traffic engineer. 
5. Parking standards for developments located within the Uptown Whittier Specific Plan area shall be as set forth in the specific plan, unless specified otherwise therein. 
6. The number of disabled on-site parking stalls for all developments within the city of Whittier shall be determined based on Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations, as related to access by the disabled. 
 
* Including existing hotels and motels with certificates of occupancy dated prior to March 1, 2019. 
(Ord. 2899 § 1, 2007: Ord. 2887 § 3, 2007: Ord. 2865 § 3, 2005: Ord. 2787 § 2, 2001; Ord. 2748 §§ 26—30, 1999; Ord. 2518 § 7 (part), 1990; Ord. 2515 § 3 (part), 1990; Ord. 2423 § 11, 1987; Ord. 2411 §§ 4, 5, 1987; prior code § 9341) 
(Ord. No. 2938, § 3, 10-27-09; Ord. No. 2950, § 2, 2-23-10; Ord. No. 3068 , § 7, 6-13-17; Ord. No. 3099 , § 3, 5-28-19)  
18.48.030 - Mixed occupancy requirements. 
In the case of mixed uses in a building or on a lot, the total requirements for off-street parking facilities shall be the sum of the requirements for the various uses computed separately. Off-street parking facilities for one use shall not be considered as providing required parking facilities for any other, except as specified in this chapter for joint use. 
(Prior code § 9342)  
18.48.040 - Joint uses authorized when. 
The director, upon application by the owner or lessee of any property, shall authorize the joint use of parking facilities by the following uses or activities under the conditions specified in this chapter: 
A.  The parking facilities required by this chapter for a use which is nonresidential and is primarily a daytime use may be provided by the parking facilities of a use which is primarily a nighttime and/or Sunday use and vice versa, provided such reciprocal parking shall be subject to conditions set forth in subsection B of this section. 
B.  Conditions Required for Joint Use. 
1.  The outer boundaries of the properties upon which the uses are proposed, to which the application relates, shall be located within one hundred fifty feet of each other. 
2.  The applicants shall show that there is no substantial conflict in the principal operating hours of the uses for which the joint use of off-street parking facilities is proposed. 
3.  Schools and churches may be permitted to have up to eighty percent of their required on-site parking located on an off-site parking lot, through a joint use parking agreement, subject to the approval of the director of community development. 
4.  Parties concerned with the joint use of off-street parking facilities shall evidence agreement for such joint use by a legal instrument approved by the city attorney as to form and content. Such instrument, when approved, shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder and copies thereof filed with the community development department. 
(Ord. 2865 §§ 4—5, 2005; prior code § 9343)  
18.48.050 - Plan required. 
The plans for any proposed parking area shall be submitted to the department of building and safety at the time of the application for the building permit for the building for which such parking facilities are necessary. The plans shall clearly indicate the proposed development, including location, size, shape, designs, curb cuts, lighting, landscaping and other features and appurtenances of the proposed parking lot. 
(Prior code § 9344)  
18.48.060 - Loading spaces. 
All uses located in non-residential zones, except for office uses, shall have and maintain vehicular loading spaces and areas as follows: 
A.  For non-residential developments in centers which are on sites of less than one acre in size each loading space shall be a minimum of twelve feet in width and twenty-five feet in depth. For all other developments, each required loading space shall be a minimum of twelve feet in width and a minimum of forty feet in length. All loading spaces shall have an unobstructed vertical clearance of not less than fourteen feet and all loading spaces shall be readily accessible from a street or alley. 
B.  The minimum loading areas which shall be provided for each C and M use shall be as follows: 
1.  Not less than two hundred fifty square feet where the net floor area of all buildings on the lot is not more than twenty thousand square feet; 
2.  Not less than five hundred square feet where the net floor area of all buildings on the lot is more than twenty thousand square feet and not more than fifty thousand square feet; 
3.  Not less than seven hundred fifty square feet where the net floor area of all buildings on the lot exceeds fifty thousand square feet. 
(Ord. 2865 §§ 6—7, 2005; Ord. 2515 § 3, 1990; prior code § 9345)  
18.48.070 - Improvement and maintenance. 
A.  Size. Each off-street parking space shall have open and unobstructed dimensions as follows: 
1.  Non-Residential. Full-size parking spaces shall have a depth of not less than nineteen feet and a width of not less than nine feet; 
2.  Residential. Full-sized parking spaces shall have a depth of not less than twenty feet and a width of not less than ten feet. The parking space dimensions may not include the thickness of exterior walls, support columns, interior separation walls etc. when located inside a garage, carport, or similar structure. 
B.  Location of Off-Site Parking Facilities. Off-street parking facilities shall be located on the same lot as the principal use served, except: 
1.  For any C or M use, if the same is located upon a lot classified in any C or M zone which is located within three hundred feet of the outer boundaries of the lot upon which the principal use so served is located; 
2.  For any joint-use parking facility allowed pursuant to Section 18.48.040. 
C.  Location of On-Site Parking Facilities. 
1.  On-site off-street parking facilities shall be located on a lot, only as follows: 
a.  On any portion of any lot where a main building may be placed, except the same shall not be located within fifty feet of the front lot line on any R-2-zoned, R-3-zoned or R-4-zoned lot unless: 
i.  Such facilities are located within a building which has a closable garage door for each off-street parking space located therein, or 
ii.  Each such off-street parking space is oriented and screened so that the interior thereof is not directly visible from an abutting street, 
b.  In required rear yard areas when there is no alley abutting such lot, and 
c.  In that portion of required side yard areas on interior lots within twenty-five feet of the rear lot line or abutting the rear property line or the rear one-third of the side property line of an R-zoned lot, if such parking facilities are not within a building, and 
d.  Where the turnaround or backup space for a parking space is a driveway accessing a major arterial or secondary street, such parking space shall be set back from the street right-of-way line a minimum of fifteen feet; and 
e.  Where a driveway serves only one dwelling (in addition to any "secondary dwelling unit" on the premises), the required, uncovered, on-site parking (including any guest parking space(s)) may be provided on the driveway serving the dwelling unit(s) and may include up to two tandem parking spaces. Operable vehicle(s) in good repair may be parked within the front yard setback on the driveway. 
2.  a.  Off-street parking facilities required on lots classified in the R-E, and R-1 zones shall provide a minimum of two non-tandem parking spaces within a garage. Additional on-site parking spaces may be developed in tandem on the property. 
b.  Off-street parking facilities required on lots classified in the R-2 zone shall be located within a garage, except for required guest spaces. 
c.  Covered, partially enclosed parking spaces for commercial uses that are subject to a discretionary permit, shall be provided with security closures, subject to approval of the design review board. 
3.  Not less than two-thirds of the off-street parking facilities required on lots classified in zones R-3 and R-4 shall be located in garages or carports. 
a.  The approval authority or the director of community development shall have the ability to permit an above or below ground covered parking structure instead of a garage or carport to shelter required parking spaces within a multi-family development when it is deemed necessary for the sole purpose of meeting the minimum required on-site density for the development. 
D.  Access Driveways. 
1.  Width. Driveways serving parking areas for less than five vehicles shall be a minimum of ten feet wide. Driveways serving parking areas for five or more vehicles shall be a minimum of twelve feet wide. Where both egress and ingress are provided on a single driveway, the minimum width shall be twenty feet. Parking areas for thirty or more vehicles shall be provided with separate driveways for ingress and egress, each of which shall be not less than twelve feet in width. In no event shall driveways cover more than thirty-three and one-third of the total lot width. "Dead end" vehicular drive aisles shall be avoided to the greatest extent possible. 
a.  Throats. Curbed entrance "throats" shall be provided to prevent stacking of vehicles in public streets at all points of vehicular ingress to non-residential developments. Parking facilities with less than three hundred on-site parking spaces shall provide a thirty linear foot "throat," as measured from the property line. Parking facilities with over three hundred on-site parking spaces shall provide a sixty linear foot "throat," as measured from the property line. 
The approval authority or the director of community development may, on the basis of land use, estimated traffic generation, existing traffic volumes, vehicle delay, and accident rates have the authority to require longer "throats" upon consultation with the city traffic engineer. 
b.  Residential. 
i.  Single-Family Dwellings. Driveways serving lots with one single-family dwelling shall be a minimum of ten feet wide. The maximum width of a driveway in the front of a lot shall not exceed one-third of the width of the lot, or twenty-four feet, whichever is the lesser, provided that no such driveway serving a two-car garage located on the front of the lot shall be required to be less than twenty feet in width, within twenty feet of the face of the garage entrance. 
ii.  Two or More Dwellings. Driveways for projects of two or more dwelling units, serving five or less parking spaces, shall be a minimum of twelve feet wide. Driveways serving six or more parking spaces shall be a minimum of eighteen feet wide and shall not be wider than one-third of the width of the lot or twenty-four feet, whichever is the lesser. 
iii.  Any driveway which is over one hundred feet in length shall not be less than fifteen feet in width. 
iv.  Walkways. Walkways from the street to the entry of a dwelling, shall not exceed an average of six feet in width within the required front yard area and the total combined width of the driveway and walkway shall not exceed forty percent of the width of the lot within the front yard and such walkways shall be separated from a driveway by a raised curb, or a landscaped area not less than three feet wide, to prevent use of the walkway for parking. 
v.  Circular Driveways. Circular driveways shall meet the minimum requirements illustrated below and shall be reviewed and approved by the city's public works department for all new curb cuts. 
(A)  Circular driveways are only permitted for lots that are a minimum of one hundred-foot wide; and 
(B)  The combined width of the driveways shall not exceed thirty-three percent of the lot width, or twenty-four feet, whichever is less. The minimum driveway width for R-E and R-1 zones is ten feet. The driveway(s) width shall be measured at its widest point within the front yard setback. 
  
c.  Non-residential. Two-way drive aisles that are not adjacent to on-site parking stalls shall be a minimum of twenty-six feet in width. For one-way drive aisles, the minimum width shall be fourteen feet. 
d.  Maximum Width. In no event shall driveways cover more than thirty-three and one-third percent of the total lot width. 
2.  Location. The location of access driveways shall be as follows: 
a.  On properties which are served by an alley, access to parking spaces shall be from the alley, unless there are physical conditions which make it impractical to access the parking from the alley. 
b.  Where there is an existing driveway from the street and the majority of the lots on the block do not have driveways from the street and new construction results in the parking being provided from an alley, such existing driveway and drive approach shall be removed and replaced with full height curb, gutter and sidewalk. The development review authority may waive this requirement where such driveway is found to be compatible with the development of adjacent properties. 
c.  Driveways serving garages on the front fifty feet of a lot shall be separated from side property lines by a landscaped area not less than three feet wide; 
3.  Joint Use. Joint use driveways are strongly encouraged at the time of development and/or redevelopment of any commercial or manufacturing site in order to reduce the conflict to a smooth flow of traffic on major arterial, secondary highway or other roadway identified in the circulation element within the city. When joint use driveways are used they shall be located and constructed in such a manner as to provide safe and convenient access to the site. Reciprocal access, parking and maintenance agreements shall be required on forms approved by the city attorney and maintained on file with the city. Driveways on properties other than commercial and manufacturing developments, used in combination with abutting properties shall be allowed when proper easements or agreements, approved as to form by the city attorney, have been executed and filed with the city; 
4.  Clearance. All driveways shall be maintained with a vertical clearance of not less than twelve feet. No encroachment of any type, including but not limited to utility meters, trash receptacles, power poles, exterior plumbing or any other similar encroachment shall be permitted; 
5.  Parking in Driveways. 
a.  "No Parking" signs and lettering not less than two inches in height shall be placed conspicuously at the entrance to, and at intervals of not less than fifty feet along each required driveway which serves parking facilities for five or more vehicles, 
b.  Where a driveway serves parking facilities for five or more vehicles, no person shall park, stand or leave any vehicle in any portion of the driveway, except for the purpose of, and during the process of, loading or unloading passengers or goods; 
6.  Parking Access. Access driveways which serve off-street parking facilities located on any lot shall be designed and located so that a motor vehicle may leave any such space without backing into a street which is designated, for the purposes of the city's select system, as an arterial or collector street. 
E.  Surfacing. All off-street parking areas, including driveways and aisles, shall be paved with concrete or asphaltic concrete pavement in accordance with adopted city standards therefor. Such surfacing shall be designed, constructed and maintained so as to dispose of all surface water in accordance with city standards therefor. 
F.  Barricades. Each parking space shall be provided with a suitable concrete curb, timber barriers, or fencing designed to stop the movement of vehicles. Such curbing, barriers or fencing shall be securely installed and permanently maintained. 
G.  Screening. It is the purpose of this section to provide barriers which will partially screen parking areas from adjoining streets and protect residential areas adjacent to or across the street from parking areas. Every uncovered parking or maneuvering area that is subject to a discretionary permit, which: 
1.  Is located upon a lot which has a common lot line with any R-zoned lot shall be screened therefrom by a solid, view-obscuring wall six feet in height. Any such required wall which is adjacent to the side of a front yard area on the adjoining R-zoned property shall conform to the height regulations applicable to front yard area in such R-zoned property; and 
2.  Is within twenty-five feet of any property line separating the area from a street; shall have and maintain an earthen berm or a decorative, view obscuring, wall or combination thereof except where approved driveways are provided, at a precise height to be determined by the director pursuant to Section 18.50.040, not to exceed a height of sixty inches or be less than twenty-four inches, measured from top of curb on the public street or parking surface, whichever is higher, subject to the review and approval of the design review board who shall act upon the request. 
H.  Lights. Suitable lighting shall be provided so as to adequately illuminate any parking area having spaces for five or more vehicles or new or used-car sales areas permitted by this title. Such lighting shall be arranged so as to reflect the light away from adjacent properties. 
I.  Entrances and Exits. The location and design of all entrances and exits to streets or alleys from off-street parking facilities shall be subject to the approval of the city traffic engineer, to insure that such will result in a minimum of interference with the traffic flow on such adjacent streets and alleys. 
J.  Striping. All parking spaces shall be double striped in a manner clearly showing the layout of the intended parking stalls. Such striping, not less than three inches in width, shall be maintained in a clear, visible and orderly manner. 
  
K.  Signs. Where required by the city engineer for safety purposes, appropriate exit, entrance and directional signs and markings shall be installed and maintained. 
L.  Maintenance and Irrigation. All parking areas shall be kept clean and free of dust, mud or trash. Parking areas shall be used only for the purpose of parking vehicles. Where landscaping is provided or required within or along parking areas, an adequate irrigation system shall be provided. 
M.  Landscaping of Parking Areas. 
1.  Each parking area adjacent to a street shall be located no closer to the street than the required landscaped setback of the zone in which it is located. Said setback shall be permanently landscaped in accordance with Section 18.24.040(J); 
2.  All areas within a parking lot not otherwise used as parking spaces, loading or maneuvering areas shall be permanently landscaped and maintained; 
3.  Not less than ten percent of the total parking area, exclusive of required yards, shall be permanently landscaped and maintained in accordance with Section 18.24.040(J); and twenty-four-inch-box shade trees shall be planted within the parking rows at a ratio of one tree to every six parking spaces. The placement of said trees shall be in accordance with the city landscape guidelines. 
4.  All required landscaped areas shall be permanently and continuously maintained by the owner or person in the possession of such areas. Landscaped areas shall be surrounded by a minimum continuous six-inch-high solid concrete or decorative block curb; 
5.  All parking spaces located adjacent to an interior property line shall have a landscape setback of not less than five feet in width, except for conditions where reciprocal parking is provided in accordance with this chapter; and 
6.  a.  All parking spaces located adjacent to a building, where there are public entrances, shall be separated therefrom by a four-foot wide sidewalk and four-foot wide landscaped area, exclusive of allowed parking space overhang. 
b.  For parking spaces adjacent to building walls, which are not visible from a public street, contiguous to an R zone or do not have a public entrance, the parking space shall be separated therefrom by only a five-foot wide landscaped area; 
7.  In all non-residential parking facilities, a twelve-inch wide concrete curb shall be provided within each parking lot landscape finger adjacent to a parking stall. 
  
N.  Parking Layout. Attached to this chapter as Appendix B is that document entitled "Parking Standards Chart," which contains certain charts, diagrams and standards. Parking facilities shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the charts, diagrams and standards as set forth in Appendix B, except that the aisle width for aisles serving only small-car parking spaces may not be less than ninety degrees—twenty feet, sixty degrees—seventeen feet and forty-five degrees—thirteen feet. 
(Ord. 2887 §§ 4—13, 2007; Ord. 2865 §§ 8—21, 2005; Ord. 2787, §§ 1, 3, 5 and 18, 2001; Ord. 2712 § 1(d), 1997; Ord. 2610 § 1(L—O), 1993; Ord. 2518 § 7 (part), 1990; Ord. 2515 § 3 (part), 1990; Ord. 2453 § 1, 1988; Ord. 2411 §§ 6—8, 1987; Ord. 2318 § 1(f), 1984; Ord. 2297 § 1(a—c), 1983; prior code § 9346) 
(Ord. No. 2932, § 10, 8-11-09; Ord. No. 3054 , §§ 7, 8, 8-9-16)  
18.48.080 - Exemption—Certain residential zone uses. 
The provisions within this chapter pertaining to the number of required on-site parking spaces for the R-E and R-1 zones may be waived or modified by the planning commission when it can be dem onstrated that the required on-site parking cannot be provided because of usual circumstances associated with the property due to one or more of the following findings: 
A.  The topography of the property cannot be sufficiently altered to accommodate the required on-site parking. 
B.  The property is eligible or listed on a local, state or National Historic Register or is a contributing resource within a historic district and the required on-site parking would adversely impact the historic setting or significance of the property should the required on-site parking necessitate significant grading to the property, demolition to existing or eligible on-site historic structures/resources, and/or the alteration of significant historic characteristics/features associated with the property. 
C.  The existing property does not comply with the city's minimum required lot size, depth and/or width and the required parking cannot be physically developed on-site without the approval of a variance. 
D.  The physical location of the existing primary residence and/or an accessory unit on the property does not enable the required on-site parking to be provided without the primary or accessory unit being demolished or significantly altered. 
The planning commission's finding(s) shall be documented in writing and may be appealed to the city council within twenty calendar days of the date of the commission's decision. The appeal shall be filed with the appropriate fees with the city clerk. 
(Ord. 2887 § 14, 2007: prior code § 9350) 
(Ord. No. 3068 , § 6, 6-13-17)  
18.48.090 - Exemption—Parking districts. 
Lots which are included in a planned comprehensive parking district, formed under a special assessment district proceeding, shall also be exempted from the provisions of this chapter under the following circumstances: 
A.  The commission shall conduct a public hearing, noticed in the manner set forth in Section 18.52.090. 
B.  At the hearing the commission shall determine, and accordingly recommend to the council, whether or not the district should be formed, based upon its findings that: 
1.  The public interest, convenience and necessity so require; 
2.  The district as established will substantially comply with the purpose and intent of this title; and 
3.  The exemption, if granted, will be conditioned so as to insure that the purpose and intent of the provisions of this title, including but not limited to the provisions of this chapter, are met. 
C.  1.  Upon receipt of a recommendation by the commission, the council shall conduct a hearing, noticed in the same manner as that held by the commission, and shall determine, based upon the standards set forth in subsection B, whether the exemption should be granted. It shall have the authority and power to grant the exemption, with conditions if necessary, so as to insure that substantial compliance is had with reference to the provisions of this title, and to insure compatibility of the physical facilities and uses. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to, a limitation upon the extent to which the construction of new buildings and structures, or the reconstruction or expansion of existing buildings or structures located on the lots included in the district, shall be permitted; 
2.  Planned comprehensive parking districts created under this chapter are declared to be entitled to the exemption provided for in this section. 
D.  Any condition imposed upon a planned comprehensive parking district may be modified, or new conditions may be added, if the city council, after a hearing, determines that the public interest so requires. 
(Prior code § 9347)  
18.48.100 - Limitations on use. 
A.  Accessibility to Parking Spaces. Each parking space so required by this chapter shall be accessible without it being necessary to move any other vehicle except as provided within Section 18.48.070(C)(1)(e) and (C)(2)(a). 
B.  Parking Charge. The parking of motor vehicles shall be without monetary charge when such parking is required in conjunction with a use or uses permitted by this title, except as is expressly provided in Section 18.52.030. 
C.  Storage of Vehicles. The parking facilities required by this chapter shall be used only for the temporary parking of vehicles used in conjunction with the uses they serve. Such parking facilities shall not be used for any other purpose, including but not limited to, storage of vehicles. 
D.  Required parking spaces in the R-2, R-3 and R-4 zones shall be utilized solely for parking of motor vehicles belonging to the tenants of the development and their guests. For the purpose of this paragraph, "required parking space" means all existing parking spaces, whether or not required at the time of construction, which do not exceed the requirements of the most recent zoning regulations. 
(Ord. 2887 § 15, 2007; Ord. 2610 § 1(P), 1993; prior code § 9348)  
18.48.110 - Underground parking facilities. 
A.  Notwithstanding any other of the provisions of this chapter relating to the location of buildings and structures on a lot, off-street parking facilities may be located in any required yard area on a lot, except a required front yard, if: 
1.  The same are subterranean; and 
2.  The plans for the same are approved by the city engineer to insure that there will be adequate lateral support and safe vehicular and pedestrian ingress and egress thereto. 
B.  "Subterranean," for the purposes of this section, means entirely below the finished grade of a lot. 
(Prior code § 9349)  
18.48.120 - Parking of commercial vehicles. 
A.  It shall be unlawful to park or store any commercial vehicle, of an unladen gross vehicle weight in excess of fourteen thousand pounds, tow trucks (including dismantlers' or repossessor's tow vehicles), trailers, or other related equipment within residential zones within the city. A limit of one commercial vehicle fourteen thousand pounds or less is allowed per residential lot or residence, whichever is less, within residential zones. The provisions of this subparagraph do not apply to passenger vehicles, pickup trucks, passenger or cargo vans, recreational vehicles or utility trailers. For additional definitions and restrictions, refer to Chapter 10.40 of the Whittier Municipal Code. 
B.  The provisions of this section shall not apply to any vehicle owned by the city or a public utility or licensed contractor while necessary in use in the construction, installation or repair of any public utility, or to any commercial vehicle actually being used for the pickup or for the delivery of goods, wares and merchandise, or for the delivery of materials to be used in the repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of any building. 
( Ord. No. 3018, § 3 , 3-25-14) 
Appendix B 
Non-Residential Parking Standards Chart 
9' × 19' Spaces (with 2' overhang) (1) 
Angle 	Depth of 
Stall 	Aisle 
Width 	Stall Curb Length 	Width of Parking Section 
N 	S 	S' 	A 	C 	D 	E 	P 	P' 
0° 	9' 0? 	9' 0? 	12' 	22' 	N/A 	N/A 	30' 	30' 
30° 	17' 10? 	15' 1? 	12' 	18' 2? 	17' 4? 	4' 6? 	49' 	44' 2? 
35° 	18' 10? 	16' 1? 	14' 	15' 8? 			51' 8? 	46' 2? 
40° 	19' 8? 	16' 10? 	14' 	14' 1? 			53' 4? 	47' 8? 
45° 	20' 6? 	17' 4? 	16' 	12' 9? 	14' 2? 	6' 5? 	57' 	50' 8? 
50° 	21' 1? 	18' 3? 	16' 	11' 8? 			58' 2? 	52' 6? 
55° 	21' 7? 	19' 	18' 	10' 11? 			61' 2? 	56' 
60° 	21' 10? 	19' 7? 	20? (2) 	10' 5? 	10' 	7' 10? 	63' 8? 	59' 2? 
65° 	22' 	20' 	21' (2) 	9' 11? 			65' 	61' 
70° 	21' 11? 	20' 4? 	22' (2) 	9' 7? 			65' 10? 	62' 8? 
75° 	21' 8? 	20' 6? 	23' (2) 	9' 4? 	9' 1? 	8' 8? 	66' 4? 	64' 
80° 	21' 4? 	20' 6? 	24' (2) 	9' 1? 			66' 8? 	65' 
85° 	20' 11? 	20' 5? 	25' (3) 	9' 			66' 10? 	65' 10? 
90° 	20' 	20' 	26' (3) 	9' (4) 	N/A 	9' 	66' 	66' 
 
Notes: 
(1)  Aisle widths of twenty feet to twenty-four feet allow two-way traffic, when a turnaround is provided. 
(2)  Aisle widths twenty-five feet and over allow two-way traffic. 
(3)  A space, the side of which is against a building, wall, or fence must be twelve feet in width. 
(4)  A two-foot vehicular overhang is permitted into a landscape planter area. 
  
(Ord. 2887 § 16, 2007: Ord. 2865 § 22, 2005: Ord. 2787 § 10, 2001)  
Chapter 18.49 - SMOKING LOUNGES 
 
18.49.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations for smoking lounges within the city of Whittier for the purpose of protecting the public's health, safety and welfare while eliminating or mitigating the undesirable land-use impacts associated with smoking lounges. 
(Ord. No. 2937, § 1, 8-25-09)  
18.49.020 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, a "smoking lounge" means any facility or location whose business operation, whether as its principal use or as an accessory use, is denoted by the on-site smoking or inhaling of tobacco or any other substances. 
(Ord. No. 2937, § 1, 8-25-09)  
18.49.030 - Conditional use permit required. 
A.  It is unlawful for any entity or business to engage in, conduct, or carry on, in or upon any premises within the city of Whittier, a smoking lounge in the absence of an approved conditional use permit pursuant to the provisions contained within this chapter and all other applicable provisions of the Whittier Municipal Code. 
B.  Prior to the establishment of any smoking lounge within the city, a conditional use permit shall be granted for said use pursuant to the provisions contained within Chapter 18.52 (Variances and Conditional Use Permits) of the Whittier Municipal Code. 
C.  Any increase in the maximum building occupancy rate or physical expansion to the floor area of an existing smoking lounge shall require the prior review and approval of a new or modified conditional use permit. 
(Ord. No. 2937, § 1, 8-25-09)  
18.49.040 - Smoking lounges—Development and maintenance standards. 
A.  Locations allowed: 
Smoking lounges may be conditionally permitted within the C-1, C-2, C-3, and any "M" zone, including any location specifically designated for a smoking lounge (or an equivalent use) within a specific plan. 
No smoking lounge may be located within five hundred feet of another smoking lounge nor within two hundred fifty feet of any medical marijuana dispensary (including collectives and cooperatives), park, arcade, pre-school, school (except trade schools) or daycare facility in the city of Whittier. 
B.  No outdoor seating or gather space for smoking is permitted. All smoking related activities shall occur indoors. Outdoor seating may be permitted for the consumption of food and beverages or for non-smoking gathering space only. 
(Ord. No. 2937, § 1, 8-25-09)  
18.49.050 - Smoking lounges—Operating requirements. 
A.  All smoking lounges shall comply with the following operational requirements: 
1.  There shall be no on-site smoking or inhaling of any illegal or prescription drug or substance at any time. 
2.  No smoking lounge shall operate as a medical marijuana dispensary, collective or cooperative at any time. In addition, no smoking lounge may operate as a primary care provider for the cultivation, transportation or distribution of medical marijuana or related paraphernalia products. 
3.  The business shall be owner-operated or otherwise exempt from the prohibition of smoking in the workplace set forth in California Labor Code Section 6404.5. 
4.  No person under eighteen years of age shall be permitted within any area of the business premises where the smoking of tobacco or other substances is allowed. 
5.  No live entertainment shall be permitted within a smoking lounge unless approved under a conditional use permit, as contained within Chapter 18.43 (Alcohol and Entertainment) of the Whittier Municipal Code. 
6.  No alcoholic beverages shall be served or sold for on-site consumption without the prior review and approval of a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 18.43 (Alcohol and Entertainment) of the Whittier Municipal Code. 
7.  No window coverings shall prevent visibility of the interior of the smoking lounge from outside the premises. Any proposed window tinting shall be approved in advance by the police chief. All signs shall comply with Section 18.76 of the Whittier Municipal Code. 
8.  The interior of the business shall maintain adequate illumination to make the conduct of patrons and employees within the premises readily discernable. The actual lighting level shall be approved in advance by the police chief and maintained during all hours of operation. 
9.  No arcade (five or more amusement machines), as defined in Section 18.06.030 (Definitions) of the Whittier Municipal Code, shall be permitted anywhere within the business. 
10.  Parking shall be provided using the standards contained in Section 18.48.020.2.2(B) (Restaurant) of the Whittier Municipal Code, unless alternative parking standards are provided specifically for a smoking lounge within any applicable specific plan area where the smoking lounge is located. 
11.  The maximum occupancy limit of a smoking lounge shall not exceed the lesser of: 
a)  That established by the Los Angeles County Fire Department or; 
b)  As a specific condition of approval for the conditional use permit approved for the facility pursuant to this chapter. 
12.  The business shall be in compliance with all other city, state, and federal laws at all times, including all California Occupational Safety and Administration (Cal OSHA) requirements. Should any conflict arise, the director of community development shall determine which law shall prevail. 
13.  Smoking advertisements, products, paraphernalia, and promotions shall not be located within six feet of a business window. 
14.  The sale or rental of any smoking devices (i.e., pipes, hookahs etc.) shall comply with all California Health and Safety Codes at all times. 
15.  No patron or customer shall be permitted to bring onto the premises a hookah at any time. 
16.  Plans shall be submitted to the approval authority that demonstrate compliance with the following: 
a.  Furnishings shall not encroach into any public right-of-way, required pedestrian access way, landscaping or parking area at anytime. 
b.  All required emergency access/exits and fire lanes shall be provided and maintained at all times, as determined by the County of Los Angeles Fire Department. 
c.  Outdoor portable or non-fixed furnishings shall not be set up outside the smoking lounge more than one-half hour prior to the opening of business and shall be removed no later than one-half hour after closing. Permanent or fixed furnishings may remain overnight, but shall be cleaned upon closing. 
d.  Outside furnishings shall not contain advertising or depict any product or product name, logo, trademark, or similar identification or advertising display. The design, color and material of the furnishings shall be compatible with the building and reviewed and approved by the director of community development prior to installation. 
e.  Adequate trash receptacles shall be provided on-site at all times. The design, color and material of the trash receptacle(s) shall be compatible with the building. 
f.  The smoking lounge owner and operator shall be responsible for the removal of all trash, debris, spilled food or beverage items in a timely manner. In addition, all outdoor seating area(s) shall be maintained in a clean, sanitary, and trash-free manner at all times. 
g.  The interior of the smoking lounge shall be configured such that there is an unobstructed view of every smoking area on the premises. No public area shall be visually obscured or enclosed by a door, curtain, wall, two-way mirror or any other such method. In addition, there shall be no private rooms within a smoking lounge. 
h.  Full height walls from the ground to the underside of the deck/ceiling above shall be provided to separate the smoking lounge from any other contiguous business. 
i.  Separate return, supply and condensation air for heating, ventilation and air conditioning (HVAC) systems shall be provided for every smoking lounge to prevent fugitive smoke from entering into an adjacent tenant suite or building. 
j.  All smoking lounges must be located within buildings provided with an approved National Fire Protection Agency 13 (NFPA 13) automatic fire suppression system. 
k.  The business shall comply with all fire and building code requirements at all times. 
l.  All entry and exit doors to the business shall remain closed at all times, except for the ingress and egress of patrons and employees. 
(Ord. No. 2937, § 1, 8-25-09)  
18.49.060 - Application for permit. 
A.  Each conditional use permit application for a smoking lounge shall include: 
1.  All application submittal fees; 
2.  A site plan with all applicable items and information listed on the city's conditional use permit/development review application checklist; 
3.  A floor plan with all applicable items and information listed on the city's conditional use permit/development review application checklist; 
4.  Elevations of all proposed exterior modifications. All applicable items on the city's conditional use permit/development review application checklist shall be submitted or included on each elevation; 
5.  A complete written description of all aspects of the proposed operation including (but not limited to): the hours of operation, number of employees on each shift; and the proposed interior and exterior improvements with sufficient detail to demonstrate the quality and character of the establishment; 
6.  The legal name, residence, address and telephone number of the owner(s) and applicant(s) of the proposed establishment making application; 
7.  The exact nature and location of the activity for which the conditional use permit is requested and an estimate of the maximum number of patrons to be served at the establishment during full capacity; 
8.  All goods, services, and products offered on-site; 
9.  A security plan for the control of pedestrian and vehicular traffic and to prevent unlawful conduct; 
10.  A vicinity map identifying the location of the proposed business and all surrounding land uses within a five hundred-foot radius around the proposed establishment and; 
11.  All other details and information deemed necessary to evaluate the proposed project application, as determined by the director of community development. 
B.  Submitting false information on the application shall constitute grounds for denial of the conditional use permit or future revocation of any approved conditional use permit. 
(Ord. No. 2937, § 1, 8-25-09)  
18.49.070 - Required findings for all smoking lounges—Demonstration of burden of proof and appeals. 
A.  In addition to the findings contained within Section 18.52.040(B) of the Whittier Municipal Code, the following findings shall be required for every smoking lounge approved within the city of Whittier. In all cases, the applicant shall have the burden of proof to show the approval authority, by relevant evidence, the existence of facts which support the conclusion that the standards, as set forth in this section, are met: 
1.  The smoking lounge is consistent with the goals and objectives of the general plan, and any applicable specific plan. 
2.  The smoking lounge will not impair the integrity and character of the subject zoning district, and will comply with the provisions of this chapter and all other applicable city, state and federal regulations. 
B.  Any decision to deny a request to establish, construct or modify a smoking lounge shall be supported by evidence contained in the written record documenting why the smoking lounge cannot be approved, as detailed within Section 18.52.100 of the Whittier Municipal Code. 
C.  Any request to appeal a decision to approve or deny a smoking lounge application shall comply with the requirements contained within Section 18.52.120 and 18.52.130 of the Whittier Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2937, § 1, 8-25-09)  
18.49.080 - Application to existing businesses. 
A.  Any smoking lounge lawfully existing as of the effective date of this chapter that becomes nonconforming by reason of the adoption of this ordinance shall be brought into full compliance with the provisions of this chapter not later than fifteen years following the effective date of this chapter. 
B.  No lawfully existing smoking lounge shall be deemed to be nonconforming, for purposes of this section, for failure to comply with the location and parking requirements or the prior establishment of an outdoor patio smoking area established for such use under this chapter unless the smoking lounge is terminated for any reason or voluntarily discontinued for a period of at least ninety consecutive calendar days or more following the effective date of the adoption of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2937, § 1, 8-25-09)  
18.49.090 - Waivers. 
Modifications or waivers to the standards and provisions contained within this chapter may be granted by the planning commission, subject to the approval of a conditional use permit, if it is determined that the standards and/or provisions which are being requested to be altered or waived will not impact the public health, safety and welfare and are not contrary to the general purpose and intent of this chapter. Waivers may not be given for noncompliance with the provisions contained within Chapter 18.62 (Nonconforming Uses, Structures and Sites) of the Whittier Municipal Code unless noted otherwise within this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2937, § 1, 8-25-09)  
18.49.100 - Nonconforming. 
Except as provided in this chapter, the provisions of Chapter 18.62 (Nonconforming Uses, Structures and Sites) of the Whittier Municipal Code shall be applicable to all business establishments with smoking lounges. In the event any conflict between the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of Chapter 18.62, the provisions of this chapter shall control. 
(Ord. No. 2937, § 1, 8-25-09)  
18.49.110 - Revocation. 
A.  The following conditions shall trigger the scheduling of a public hearing before the appropriate approval authority to determine whether or not the conditional use permit issued to the business for operating a smoking lounge shall be revoked or modified: 
1.  Issuance of three or more collective administrative or criminal notices of violation or citations within a twelve-month period from any combination of the fire marshal, building official, code enforcement, and/or the police department. However, the police chief, director of community development, or the appropriate approval authority may require immediate review at anytime due to a particular incident. 
2.  The imposition of any disciplinary action or finding of violation by the department of alcoholic beverage control, if alcoholic beverages are sold for on-site consumption. 
B.  The city of Whittier does not want to discourage business owners or others from contacting the police department or any other emergency service provider when warranted. Therefore, the number of emergency calls for service to the Whittier Police Department may not necessarily be used as the singular basis for concluding that a business is operating as a nuisance. 
C.  The approval authority may revoke a conditional use permit following the procedures set forth in Section 18.52.160, based on any one or more of the following findings: 
1.  That the conditional use permit was approved based on information that was erroneous, fraudulent, misleading or misrepresented, regardless of the intent of the entity that obtained the conditional use permit; 
2.  That the condition(s) of approval adopted under the conditional use permit for the smoking lounge have been violated in whole or in part; 
3.  Local, state and/or federal law was violated; 
4.  The establishment for which the permit was issued is being operated in an illegal, unpermitted or disorderly manner; 
5.  The noise generated from the establishment violates the City's Noise Ordinance; 
6.  The smoking lounge has had or is having an adverse impact on the public health, safety, peace, and/or general welfare; 
7.  The smoking lounge has ceased to exist for at least ninety calendar days or more by reason of voluntary abandonment. 
(Ord. No. 2937, § 1, 8-25-09)  
18.49.120 - Discontinuance and enforcement. 
A.  Any conditional use permit for a business with a smoking lounge may be summarily revoked following a public hearing thereon if the use is discontinued for at least ninety consecutive calendar days. The approval authority shall hold a noticed public hearing to consider the revocation pursuant to Section 18.52.160 of the Whittier Municipal Code. 
B.  Any violation to this chapter shall be prosecuted as a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2937, § 1, 8-25-09)  
Chapter 18.50 - ADMINISTRATION 
 
18.50.010 - District boundaries—Determination. 
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any zone shown on the official zoning map of the city, or any part thereof or any amendment thereto, such uncertainty shall be resolved pursuant to Section 18.50.030. 
(Prior code § 9240)  
18.50.020 - Classification of annexed areas. 
Areas annexed to the city shall be classified in an appropriate zone by the city council in a manner specified by the provisions of Section 65800 et seq. of the Government Code. 
(Prior code § 9241)  
18.50.030 - Clarification of regulations—Commission authority. 
If any ambiguity shall be found with reference to these regulations, including but not limited to the appropriate zone classification of a particular use, the commission shall consider the matter and shall recommend to the city council the appropriate clarification of such ambiguity. When such a commission recommendation has been approved by the city council, the same shall be in force and effect and shall govern the interpretation of the affected provisions of this title, to which the same relates, until such time as an appropriate amendment to this title has been duly adopted. 
(Prior code § 9242)  
18.50.040 - Interpretation of provisions—Director's authority—Review by council. 
A.  It shall be the duty of the director, where reasonably necessary, to interpret the provisions of this title to assure adherence to the city council's purpose and intent in adopting the provisions contained in this title. All such interpretations shall be reduced to written form, and shall be permanently maintained by the director. 
B.  Any person who is aggrieved by such an interpretation by the director may, in writing, request that such interpretation be reviewed by the planning commission. If the planning commission's determination is not satisfactory to either the director or such person, either or both may request the city council to review the same. Upon receipt of such a request, the city council shall review the interpretation as made, and shall approve, modify or disapprove the same. The decision of the city council shall be final and conclusive. 
C.  Actions taken pursuant to this section shall include but not be limited to the designation of the front and rear lot lines of a through lot. 
(Prior code § 9245)  
18.50.050 - Temporary certificates—Requirements. 
A.  Application to C and M Zones. No person shall use for any purpose any C-zoned or M-zoned lot, building or structure located thereon, nor shall the owner of any such lot allow such use, unless and until the director of building and safety issues for such use a certificate of occupancy indicating the same complies with all applicable laws, including but not limited to the provisions of this title. 
B.  Application to R-Zoned Lots. The provisions of subsection A of this section shall apply to R-zoned lots, and buildings and structures located thereon, but only as to newly constructed or reconstructed buildings and/or structures. Such certificates of occupancy shall not be required for changes in occupancy on such lot, so long as such occupancy is limited to residential use. 
C.  Action of Director of Building and Safety. Where the director of building and safety refuses the issuance of such a certificate he shall give the applicant written notice thereof. His decision shall be subject to an appeal in the time and manner provided in Section 18.50.040. 
D.  Temporary Certificate. Temporary certificates of occupancy may be issued, in the discretion of the director of building and safety, where a portion of a building under construction may be safely occupied. 
(Prior code § 9243)  
18.50.060 - Certificate of occupancy and building permits—Voided when. 
No building permit required pursuant to the city's building regulations or a certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any building, structure or use which has been erected, constructed, maintained or utilized in violation of any provision of this title, or any other applicable law. Any such permit or certificate issued erroneously for a use, building or structure which does not comply with such laws shall for all purposes be null, void and of no effect. 
(Prior code § 9244)  
18.50.065 - Change of zone—Use of building permit. 
Any person who has obtained a building permit shall be allowed to exercise such permit and complete the project to which the permit applies notwithstanding a change of zoning which becomes effective after the permit has been issued but before it is exercised, if such permit is exercised within one hundred eighty days after its issuance 
(Ord. 2787 § 17, 2001; Ord. 2478 § 2, 1989: Ord. 2477 § 2, 1989)  
18.50.070 - Noncompliance declared public nuisance. 
Any use, building or structure to which the provisions of this title apply, but which do not comply with such provisions, shall be a public nuisance. 
(Prior code § 9246)  
18.50.080 - Transfer of matters pending before the planning commission. 
Whenever the planning commission, on a particular legislative or administrative matter pending before it, is unable to resolve the matter by the requisite vote of that body, either by virtue of disqualification of members, or by virtue of the absence of members of the commission, if it appears to the planning director that a decision cannot expeditiously be rendered by the commission on such matter, the planning director shall report the same to the city manager. If the city manager determines that the matter cannot be expeditiously acted upon by the planning commission he shall certify such matter to the city council for action by that body without further action by the planning commission. Upon the transfer of such matter to the city council the city clerk-treasurer shall give the required legal notice for such matter and thereafter the city council shall dispose of such matter in accordance with applicable law. 
(Ord. 2459 § 1, 1989: Ord. 2458 § 2, 1989)  
Chapter 18.51 - REASONABLE ACCOMMODATIONS IN HOUSING TO DISABLED OR HANDICAPPED INDIVIDUALS 
 
18.51.010 - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter, pursuant to fair housing laws, to provide individuals with disabilities reasonable accommodation in the application of the city's rules, policies, practices and procedures, as necessary to ensure equal access to housing. The purpose of this chapter is to provide a process for individuals with disabilities to make requests for, and be provided, reasonable accommodation, when reasonable accommodation is warranted based upon sufficient evidence, from the various city laws, rules, policies, practices and/or procedures of the city, including land use and zoning regulations. 
(Ord. 2896 § 1 (part), 2007)  
18.51.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
A.  "Applicant" means a person, business, or organization making a written request to city for reasonable accommodation in the strict application of land use or zoning provisions of this title. 
B.  "City" means the city of Whittier. 
C.  "Code" means the Whittier Municipal Code. 
D.  "Department" means the community development department of the city. 
E.  "Director" means the director of community development of the city. 
F.  "Disabled or handicapped person" means an individual who has a physical or mental impairment that limits one or more of that person's major life activities; anyone who is regarded as having such impairment; or anyone who has a record of having such an impairment, but not including an individual's current, illegal use of a controlled substance. 
G.  "Fair housing laws" means the "Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988" (42 U.S.C. Section 3601, et seq.), including reasonable accommodation required by 42 U.S.C. Section 3604(f)(3)(B), and the "California Fair Employment and Housing Act" (California Government Code Section 12900, et seq.), including reasonable accommodation required specifically by California Government Code Sections 12927(c)(1) and 12955(l), as any of these statutory provisions now exist or may be amended from time to time. 
H.  "Minor reasonable accommodation" means any deviation requested and/or granted from the strict application of the city's laws, rules, policies, practices and/or procedures of the city, including land use and zoning regulations of this title, and which can be removed or terminated in sixty days or less after the need for the reasonable accommodation ends. 
I.  "Major reasonable accommodation" means any deviation requested and/or granted from the strict application of the city's laws, rules, policies, practices and/or procedures of the city, including land use and zoning regulations of this title, resulting in a physical modification to the property which cannot be restored or terminated within sixty days or less after the reasonable accommodation is terminated. 
(Ord. 2896 § 1 (part), 2007)  
18.51.030 - Notice to the public of availability of accommodation process. 
The department shall prominently display in the public areas of the planning and building and safety department at City Hall a notice advising those with disabilities or their representatives that they may request a reasonable accommodation in accordance with the procedures established in this chapter. City employees shall direct individuals to the display whenever they are requested to do so or reasonably believe that individuals with disabilities or their representatives may be entitled to a reasonable accommodation. 
(Ord. 2896 § 1 (part), 2007)  
18.51.040 - Requesting reasonable accommodation. 
A.  In order to make specific housing available to an individual with a disability, a disabled person or representative may request reasonable accommodation, pursuant to this chapter, relating to the application of various land use, zoning, or building laws, rules, policies, practices and/or procedures of the city. 
B.  If individual or representative needs assistance in making a request for reasonable accommodation, or appealing a determination regarding reasonable accommodation, the department will endeavor to provide the assistance necessary to ensure that the process is accessible to the applicant or representative. The applicant may be represented at all stages of the proceeding by a person designated by the applicant as his or her representative. 
C.  A request for reasonable accommodation in laws, rules, policies, practices and/or procedures must be filed on an application form provided by the department, shall be signed by the owner of the property, and shall include the following information: 
1.  A description of how the property will be used by the disabled individual(s); 
2.  The basis for the claim that the fair housing laws apply to the individual(s) and evidence satisfactory to the city supporting the claim, which may include a letter from a medical doctor or other licensed health care professional, a handicapped license, or other appropriate evidence which establishes that the individual(s) needing the reasonable accommodation is disabled/handicapped pursuant to the fair housing laws; 
3.  The specific reason the requested accommodation is necessary to make particular housing available to the disabled individual(s); and 
4.  Verification by the applicant that the property is the primary residence of the person for whom reasonable accommodation is requested. 
D.  A filing fee in an amount as determined from time to time by resolution of the city council, but not to exceed the reasonable estimated costs to the city in processing the application. 
(Ord. 2896 § 1 (part), 2007)  
18.51.050 - Decision on application. 
A.  The director shall have the authority to consider and act on any application for a minor reasonable accommodation. The director shall issue a written determination within thirty days of the date of receipt of a completed application and may: (1) grant the accommodation request, (2) grant the accommodation request subject to specified nondiscriminatory conditions, (3) deny the request, or (4) may refer the matter to the planning commission, which shall render a decision on the application in the same manner as it considers an appeal. 
B.  The planning commission shall have the authority to consider and act on any application for a major reasonable accommodation, or any minor reasonable accommodation request referred to it by the director. The planning commission shall consider an application at the next reasonably available public meeting after submission of an application for reasonable accommodation, after the submission of any additional information required pursuant to this section or after referral from the director, and shall issue a written determination within thirty days after such public meeting. The planning commission may: (1) grant the accommodation request, (2) grant the accommodation request subject to specified nondiscriminatory conditions, or (3) deny the request. 
C.  All written determinations shall give notice of the right to appeal and the right to request reasonable accommodation on the appeals process, if necessary. The notice of determination shall be sent to the applicant by first class mail. 
D.  If necessary to reach a determination on any request for reasonable accommodation, the director may request further information from the applicant consistent with this chapter, specifying in detail what information is required. In the event a request for further information is made, the thirty-day period to issue a written determination shall be stayed until the applicant reasonably responds to the request. 
E.  If, based upon all of the evidence presented to the director or the planning commission, the findings required in this chapter may reasonably be made, the director, the planning commission or the city council, as applicable, shall grant the requested reasonable accommodation. 
F.  A reasonable accommodation that is granted pursuant to this chapter shall not require the approval of any variance as to the reasonable accommodation. 
G.  The reasonable accommodation shall be subject to any reasonable conditions imposed on the approval that are consistent with the purposes of this chapter to further fair housing. Such conditions may generally include, but are not limited to the following restrictions: 
1.  That the reasonable accommodation shall only be applicable to particular individual(s); 
2.  That the reasonable accommodation shall only be applicable to the specific use for which application is made; and/or 
3.  That any change in use or circumstances which negates the basis for the granting of the approval shall render the reasonable accommodation null and void and/or revocable by the city. 
H.  All reasonable accommodations granted by the city shall be subject to the requirement that they be recorded with the county recorded as to the applicable property record. The recorded notice of the reasonable accommodation shall include all of the following: 
1.  A termination provision requiring that the reasonable accommodation be terminated within a specified reasonable period of time after the circumstances leading to the granting of the reasonable accommodation are no longer present; 
2.  A notice provision requiring the following: 
a.  That notice be given to the city when there is any material change in the disability/handicap leading to the granting of the reasonable accommodation; 
b.  That notice be given to the city when there is any sale or transfer of ownership of the property upon which the reasonable accommodation is applicable. 
(Ord. 2896 § 1 (part), 2007)  
18.51.060 - Required findings. 
The following findings must be made in order to approve a request for reasonable accommodation: 
A.  The housing, which is the subject of the request for reasonable accommodation, will be occupied as the primary residence by an individual protected under the fair housing laws. 
B.  The request for reasonable accommodation is necessary to make specific housing available to one or more individuals protected under the fair housing laws. 
C.  The requested reasonable accommodation will not impose an undue financial or administrative burden on the city. 
D.  The requested accommodation will not require a fundamental alteration of the zoning or building laws, policies and/or procedures of the city. 
(Ord. 2896 § 1 (part), 2007)  
18.51.070 - Appeals. 
A.  Within ten days of the date the city issues a written determination, any person aggrieved or affected by a decision on an application requesting the accommodation may appeal such determination in writing to the planning commission or to the city council, as applicable. 
B.  All appeals shall contain a statement of the grounds for the appeal. 
C.  No such appeal shall be accepted unless there is, paid contemporaneously with the filing of such letter, a filing and processing fee in a sum to be set by resolution of the city council. Upon receipt of a timely filed appeal, together with the filing and processing fee, the secretary of the planning commission or the city clerk-treasurer shall set the matter for a de novo hearing before the planning commission or city council, as applicable, at its next reasonably available public meeting. 
D.  The planning commission or the city council, as applicable, shall hear the matter and render a determination as soon as reasonably practicable, but in no event later than sixty days after an appeal has been filed, or after an application has been referred to it by the director. All determinations shall address and be based upon the same findings required to be made in the original determination from which the appeal is taken. 
E.  An applicant may request reasonable accommodation in the procedure by which an appeal will be conducted. 
F.  An applicant requesting the accommodation may appeal an adverse determination or any conditions or limitations imposed by the planning commission's decision to the city council, in accordance with this section. 
(Ord. 2896 § 1 (part), 2007)  
18.51.080 - Waiver of time periods. 
Notwithstanding any provisions in this chapter regarding the occurrence of any action within a specified period of time, the applicant may request additional time beyond that provided for in this chapter or may request a continuance regarding any decision or consideration by the city of the pending appeal. Extensions of time sought by applicants shall not be considered delay on the part of the city, shall not constitute failure by the city to provide for prompt decisions on applications and shall not be a violation of any required time period set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. 2896 § 1 (part), 2007)  
Chapter 18.52 - VARIANCES AND CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS  
Article I. - Variances 
 
18.52.010 - Conditions for granting. 
When practical difficulties, unnecessary hardships or results inconsistent with the general intent and purpose of this title occur by reason of the strict and literal interpretation of any of its provisions, a zone variance may be granted in the manner set forth in this chapter. 
(Prior code 9250)  
18.52.020 - Issuance—Burden of proof. 
Before any zone variance is granted, the applicant shall show, to the reasonable satisfaction of the body hearing such matter, that there are special circumstances applicable to the property involved, such as size, shape, topography, location or surroundings, which do not generally apply to other adjacent properties included in the same zone as the subject property, and which make the granting of the zone variance necessary in order to facilitate a reasonable use of the property involved. 
(Prior code § 9251)  
Article II. - Conditional Use Permits 
 
18.52.030 - Required for designated uses. 
The purpose of any conditional use permit shall be to insure that the use for which the same is required will be rendered compatible with other existing and permitted uses located in the general area of the same. The following uses, each of which possesses characteristics of such unique and special form as to render impractical their operation without specific approval, shall be permitted in the zones as hereinafter set forth, provided that a conditional use permit is first obtained pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, unless such use is designated as a permitted use in a particular zone. 
A.  Uses conditionally permitted in all zones: 
  Cemeteries; 
  Dump, inert solid-fill; 
  Oil, gas or other hydrocarbon substances, the drilling and production thereof, including but not limited to exploratory borehole operations; 
  Public utility facilities and utilities operated by mutual companies, except any public facility for which a building permit is not required pursuant to the city's building regulations, and any such facility which is permitted by a city-granted franchise; 
  Quarries; 
  Solid-fill projects; 
B.  Uses conditionally permitted in the R-E zone: 
  Animals, fish, fowl, homing pigeons of the order Columbae, kept and maintained for noncommercial purposes and not otherwise permitted as an accessory use (minor conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 18.58); 
  Golf courses, privately owned; 
  Livestock, care and maintenance for commercial or noncommercial purposes (minor conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 18.58); 
  Temporary real estate subdivision sales offices on recorded residential tracts; 
C.  Uses conditionally permitted in the R-1 zone: 
  Those uses conditionally permitted in the R-E zone; 
  Christmas tree farms, provided sales of trees are allowed only during the month of December; 
  Churches, temples and other places or worship; 
  Crops, field, tree, bush, berry and row, including nursery stock, the growing of; 
  Educational institutions; 
D.  Uses conditionally permitted in the R-2 zone: 
  Those uses conditionally permitted in the R-1 zone; 
  Boarding or rooming houses, subject to the requirements in Section 18.52.190; 
  Conversion of residential rental units to residential condominiums; 
  Home for the aged (seven to twelve persons); 
  Mobilehome park; 
  Residential care facilities, serving seven or more persons, except when such facilities constitute a "family" for purposes of Section 18.06.168 of this code; 
E.  Uses conditionally permitted in the R-3 zone: 
  Those uses conditionally permitted in the R-2 zone; 
  Parking lots, commercial; 
F.  Uses conditionally permitted in the R-4 zone: 
  Those uses conditionally permitted in the R-3 zone; 
  Adult day care centers; 
  Family homes (mentally ill); 
  Family homes (mentally retarded); 
  Fraternities; 
  Homes for the aged (seven or more persons); 
  Hospitality houses; 
  Private clubs; 
  Residential facilities limited (former drug abusers); 
  Sororities; 
G.  Uses conditionally permitted in the C-O zone: 
  Those uses conditionally permitted in the R-4 zone; 
  Children's treatment centers (emotionally disturbed); 
  Day care centers; 
  Day centers (mentally retarded); 
  Day treatment hospitals; 
  Facilities for the rehabilitation of drug addicts; 
  Hospitals; 
  Long-term facilities; 
  Mortuaries; 
  Nursing and convalescent hospitals; 
  Off-street parking facilities for which a parking charge is imposed other than for residential uses; 
  Psychiatric hospitals; 
  Radio or television towers and transmitters; 
  Resident facility (mentally retarded); 
  Resident schools (mentally retarded); 
  Residential facilities (former drug abusers); 
  Rest homes; 
  Self-service laundries (laundromats); 
  Telephone exchanges; 
  Any business which, as a course of its normal operation, includes any business related activity between the hours of twelve midnight and six a.m.; 
H.  Uses conditionally permitted in the C-1 zone: 
  Those uses conditionally permitted in the C-O zone; 
  Any business that includes drive-through operation; 
  Any use permitted in the applicable commercial zone which utilizes three or more service vehicles in conjunction therewith, where such vehicles are parked or stored overnight at the place of business; 
  Automobile services uses (not including auto body and fender repair or auto painting); 
  Bookstores with three thousand square feet or more of gross floor area; 
  Food markets with three thousand square feet or more of gross floor area; 
  Furniture stores with three thousand square feet or more of gross floor area; 
  Health centers/fitness clubs; 
  Internet cafes, subject to compliance with the requirements of Section 18.24.030(F) of the Whittier Municipal Code; 
  Music stores with three thousand square feet or more of gross floor area; 
  Restaurants with three thousand square feet or more of gross floor area; 
  Restaurants with an on-sale alcohol beverage license; 
  Smoking lounges; 
  Sporting goods stores with three thousand square feet or more of gross floor area; 
  Tire sales and installation; 
  Toy shops with three thousand square feet or more of gross floor area; 
  Video rental stores with three thousand square feet or more of gross floor area; 
I.  Uses conditionally permitted in the C-2 zone: 
1.  Those uses conditionally permitted in the C-1 zone, except: 
a.  Homes for the aged, 
b.  Mobilehome parks, 
2.  The following uses: 
  Adult entertainment establishments, subject to the provisions of Chapter 18.44; 
  Alcoholic beverage sales, if such use is proposed to be located on a lot, the boundaries of which are within three hundred feet of a lot upon which a commercial recreation facility is located, or is such lot is located within one hundred fifty feet of an R-zoned lot; 
  Alcoholism hospitals; 
  Antique malls; 
  Auto body and fender repair; 
  Auto painting; 
  Bakery goods, wholesale distributor; 
  Banquet facilities; 
  Beer bars, having on-sale license for beer, wine or other alcoholic liquors or spirits; 
  Boat sales; 
  Body piercing; 
  Building material sales; 
  Camper sales; 
  Car washes and auto detailing; 
  Circuses, carnivals, fairs with duration of more than seven days; 
  Cocktail lounges, having an on-sale license for beer, wine or other alcoholic liquors or spirits; 
  Columbariums, crematories and mausoleums; 
  Commercial recreation facilities open to the public which are privately owned and operated; 
  Convenience market (all); 
  Dancehalls; 
  Drive-in restaurants; 
  Electric distribution substations; 
  Helistops and small heliports, FCC Class 1A; 
  Hospital, small animal; 
  Liquor stores; 
  Lodging facilities; 
  Machinery equipment rental service; 
  Motorcycle sales (new and used); 
  Precision engine rebuilding; 
  Recreational vehicle sales; 
  Restaurants and cafes having on-sale licenses for beer, wine or other alcoholic liquors in conjunction therewith; 
  Self storage; 
  Service stations; 
  Tattoo parlors; 
  Theaters and auditoriums; 
  Ticket sales in conjunction with music or video sales; 
  Trailer sales, rental, and repair; 
  Used car sales (not in conjunction with new car sales); 
  Utility trailer and truck rental; 
  Wedding chapels; 
J.  Uses conditionally permitted in the C-3 zone: 
1.  Those uses conditionally permitted in the C-2 zone: 
a.  Internet cafe; 
K.  Uses conditionally permitted in the M zone: 
1.  Uses conditionally permitted in the C-3 zone, except: 
a.  Those uses of a residential character, 
2.  The following uses: 
  Airports; 
  Auction houses; 
  Automobile dismantling yards; 
  Automobile impound yards; 
  Concrete-mixing batch plant; 
  Draying—freighting or trucking terminals; 
  Dumps, rubbish and refuse; 
  Explosives, storage of ten pounds or more; 
  Heliports (all FAA classes); 
  Machinery equipment rental service; 
  Medical marijuana dispensaries; 
  Open-air theaters; 
  Parcel service delivery; 
  Recycling, large collection facility; 
  Recycling, processing facility; 
  Rock-crushing, including the sale of rock, sand or gravel; 
  Storage space for transit and transportation equipment; 
  Swap meet (indoor or outdoor); 
  Truck repairing, overhauling and servicing. 
(Ord. 2897 § 12, 2008; Ord. 2870 § 1, 2006; Ord. 2864 § 4, 2005; Ord. 2841 § 2, 2005; Ord. 2740 § 5, 1998) 
(Ord. No. 2937, § 1, 8-25-09; Ord. No. 3099 , § 4, 5-28-19)  
18.52.040 - Prerequisites—Burden of proof. 
A.  The following subsections of this section shall constitute the standards relating to the granting of an application for a conditional use permit. Where the body hearing such an application finds that all of the standards, as hereinafter set forth, are met by the evidence presented at the hearing, it shall grant the conditional use permit. The applicant shall have the burden of proof to show, by relevant evidence, the existence of facts which support the conclusion that the standards as set forth in this section are met. 
B.  The standards for the granting of a conditional use permit are as follows: 
1.  That the site proposed for the use is adequate in size, shape and topography; and 
2.  That the site proposed for the use has sufficient access to streets which are adequate, in width and pavement type, to carry the quantity and quality of traffic generated by the proposed use; and 
3.  That the proposed use will not unreasonably interfere with the use, possession and enjoyment of surrounding and adjacent properties; and 
4.  That the proposed use will be compatible with the permitted uses of surrounding and adjacent properties; and 
5.  That the use will, as to location, operation and design, be consistent with the general plan, any applicable specific plan, and the Whittier zoning regulations. 
C.  The standards set forth in this section relating to the granting of an application for a conditional use permit do not apply to internet cafes or adaptive re-use of a historic building or structure. Standards relating to the granting of an application for a conditional use permit specific to internet cafes are set forth in Section 18.24.030(F) of the Whittier Municipal Code for internet cafes and Section 18.84.490 (Adaptive Reuse of Historic Resources) for the adaptive reuse of a building or structure that was formerly operating as a legal commercial use within a residential zone in the city of Whittier and has been officially deemed eligible or designated as a local, state or federal historic landmark. 
(Ord. No. 3074 , § 2, 9-26-17) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3074 , § 2, adopted Sep. 26, 2017, repealed the former § 18.52.040 and enacted a new section to read as set out herein. The former § 18.52.040 pertained to similar subject matter derived from prior code, § 9261; Ord. 2323, § 1, adopted in 1984; and Ord. 2841, § 3, adopted in 2005.  
18.52.050 - Exemptions for certain permitted or nonconforming uses. 
A.  Application of Sections 18.52.030 through 18.52.050—Permitted Use. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, if any use is designated as a permitted principal use in any zone, the conditional use permit requirement shall not apply to that use in that zone. 
B.  Nonconformity. None of the uses enumerated in Section 18.52.030, for which a conditional use permit is required, shall be nonconforming if: 
1.  The same complied with the zoning regulations in effect at the time the affected use was established; and 
2.  The same would otherwise have acquired a nonconforming status solely by reason of the application of Section 18.52.030; and 
3.  There is no alteration or enlargement of the use, nor the commencement of any new use on the lot where located, except that, as to existing convenience markets and self storage facilities such uses shall obtain, within a period of two years after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section, a conditional use permit allowing such use and comply with the requirements of the police department regarding reducing the potential for robbery and theft. 
(Ord. 2553 § 4, 1991; prior code § 9262)  
Article III. - Procedure 
 
18.52.060 - Applications—Who may file—Contents. 
A.  Applications for a zone variance, conditional use permit, minor zone variance or minor conditional use permit shall be filed by the owner of the property affected thereby, his agent, or by a public utility which has filed an eminent domain action with regard to such property with the director, on forms furnished by the director, which shall set forth fully the nature of the proposed use, and the facts sufficient to justify the granting of the variance or conditional use permit in accordance to the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  The applicant shall furnish to the director an accurate list of the names and addresses of all property owners to whom notice must be given as provided in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 9270)  
18.52.070 - Applications—Filing Fees. 
Each such original application, modification application or appeal shall be accompanied by a filing and processing fee in an amount as set by the council. Any applicant may withdraw his application by filing a written request to do so at any time prior to final action thereon, provided that there shall be no refund of fees. 
(Prior code § 9271)  
18.52.080 - Applications—Hearings. 
Every application for a zone variance or conditional use permit shall be set for a public hearing before the commission by the director, except as provided in Chapter 18.58 or elsewhere in this code. Hearings may be continued from time to time by the commission or council, as it may deem necessary. 
(Ord. 2887 § 17, 2007: prior code § 9272)  
18.52.090 - Hearings—Notice. 
A.  Notice of the time and place of public hearings before the commission and council, on zone variance and conditional use permit applications, shall be given by United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the occupants and owners of property located within a radius of three hundred feet from the external boundaries of the property or use, at the director's discretion, to which the application relates, as shown on the latest equalized assessment roll of the county, or from other records which contain more recent and accurate addresses. 
B.  Such notices shall describe the subject property and contain a brief description of the proposed use, and the date, time and place of the hearing. 
(Prior code § 9274) 
( Ord. No. 3019, § 2 , 3-25-14)  
18.52.100 - Hearings—Commission decision. 
Within a reasonable time after the public hearing upon a variance or conditional use permit application, the commission shall, by resolution adopted by not less than a majority of its total membership, approve, conditionally approve or deny the same. The resolution shall contain a brief statement of facts upon which its action is based. Within seven days following the adoption of such a resolution, the commission's secretary shall forward a copy thereof to the city clerk-treasurer, to the applicant, and to any other person requesting the same. 
(Prior code § 9275)  
18.52.110 - Variances and permits—Additional conditions. 
The granting of any zone variance or conditional use permit may be conditioned. The purpose of any such conditions shall be to insure that the activity thus permitted will be conducted in a manner consistent with the public peace, safety, general welfare and the provisions of this title. 
(Prior code § 9273)  
18.52.120 - Variances and permits—Effective date—Appeals. 
A.  The resolution of the commission granting or denying a variance or conditional use permit shall become effective and final on the thirtieth day following its adoption, unless within such period of time an appeal in writing is filed with the city clerk-treasurer, by the applicant or any other interested person. Any such appeal shall be accepted for filing only upon the payment of an appeal fee as set forth by the city council. In the event no city council meeting is held within said thirty day period, the effective date shall be extended to the date immediately following the next city council meeting at which time the city council conducts such meeting and at which time the item has been lawfully posted and agendized for city council consideration. 
B.  The decision of the commission shall be final and conclusive in the absence of a timely filed appeal. The timely filing of an appeal shall stay the effective date of the commission's resolution pending action by the city council. 
(Ord. 2819 § 3, 2003; Ord. 2550 § 1, 1991; prior code § 9276)  
18.52.130 - Appeals procedure. 
Upon the filing of an appeal the secretary of the commission shall forward to the city clerk-treasurer the commission's files with regard to such zone variance or conditional use permit application. Upon receipt of the same the city clerk-treasurer shall promptly set the matter for a public hearing before the city council. The city council shall conduct a de novo public hearing upon the matter, and thereafter shall determine whether the application shall be approved, conditionally approved or denied. In making its determination the city council shall observe the standards set forth in Sections 18.52.020 and 18.52.040, whichever is applicable. In its discretion the city council may refer, prior to its decision, such matter to the commission for a further report, with or without additional public hearings before the commission. The determination of the council shall be by resolution, adopted by not less than a majority of the total voting membership of the city council. The resolution shall set forth the facts as found by the city council supporting its action. The decision of the city council shall be final and conclusive in all cases. 
(Prior code § 9277)  
18.52.140 - Resolution—Notice of adoption required. 
Within seven days following the adoption of the resolution by the city council, the city clerk-treasurer shall mail a copy thereof to the applicant and any other person requesting the same. 
(Prior code § 9278)  
18.52.150 - Failure to give notice not to affect proceedings. 
Inadvertent failure to give notice in the manner prescribed shall have no effect upon any proceeding before the commission or the council. 
(Prior code § 9279)  
Article IV. - Revocation, Modification and Expiration 
 
18.52.160 - Variances and permits—Revocation required—Hearing. 
A.  Upon recommendation by the director of community development, the commission shall conduct a noticed public hearing to determine whether such variance or conditional use permit should be revoked, unless the city council granted or modified such variance or conditional use permit upon the condition that it be subject only to city council revocation, in which case the commission may, but need not, make a recommendation concerning the revocation and the city council shall conduct the required public hearing. If the commission or city council finds any one of the following facts to be present, it shall immediately revoke or modify the variance or conditional use permit unless it concludes that some other action is appropriate to address the circumstances warranting revocation, in which case that action shall be immediately implemented or imposed: 
1.  The variance or permit was obtained by fraud; or 
2.  The use for which such approval was granted has ceased to exist by reason of a voluntary abandonment; or 
3.  The permit or variance granted is being or has been exercised contrary to any conditions of approval imposed upon such permit or variance, or in violation of any law; or 
4.  The use for which the approval was granted in being exercised so as to be detrimental to the public health or safety, or so as to constitute a public nuisance. 
B.  If the revocation hearing is conducted by the commission, its decision shall be subject to review on appeal, taken in the time and manner set forth in Sections 18.52.120 through 18.52.150. 
(Ord. 2909 § 4, 2008)  
18.52.170 - Variances and permits—Period of validity—Extensions. 
The period of validity for any variance or conditional use permit approved by the city shall be as set forth in Section 18.04.110. Time extension(s) of the period of validity for any variance of conditional use permit approved by the city shall be granted only in accordance with Sections 18.04.120 and 18.04.130. 
(Ord. 2909 § 5, 2008)  
18.52.180 - Variances and permits—Modification conditions. 
Conditions may be modified, eliminated, or new conditions added to any variance or conditional use permit, in compliance with Section 18.04.120. 
(Ord. 2909 § 6, 2008)  
Article V. - Additional Regulations 
 
18.52.190 - Boarding or rooming houses. 
A.  All boarding or rooming houses shall obtain approval of a conditional use permit prior to establishing such use within the city and shall pay to the city the regular fees associated with such permit. The conditional use permit application for any boarding or rooming house shall include a management plan for the facility, which shall provide sufficient detail regarding how the facility will be operated and managed in order that the city may determine that the facility will be compatible with surrounding uses, including the following information, at a minimum: 
1.  If boarders and/or common areas in boarding/rooming houses are to be supervised or monitored, how and when such supervision or monitoring shall be provided, including whether twenty-four-hour on-site resident management will be provided, the manner in which compliance with all rules and regulations of the city or state applicable to the boarding/rooming house operations will be observed and maintained, and whether and what house rules will be applied to residents and how such rules will enforced by the operator of the proposed boarding/rooming house; 
2.  The total number of boarders proposed to occupy the boarding/rooming house and the total number of rental rooms to be occupied by boarders at the proposed boarding/rooming house, which numbers shall be in compliance with the maximum numbers permitted by this section; 
3.  The number, type, and general responsibilities of staffing for the facility; 
4.  How the facility will provide equal access to housing to those who are handicapped or disabled; 
5.  Provisions for internal and external security, including vehicle security; 
6.  Methods for tenant selection; 
7.  Nature of rules that will apply to residents ("house rules"); and 
8.  Any other information which the applicant feels demonstrates that the boarding or rooming house will be well-managed in harmony with adjacent uses. 
B.  Conditional use permits granted pursuant to this section shall contain all of the following conditions, in addition to any other reasonable conditions which may be imposed by the city upon the granting of such permits: 
1.  All boarding/rooming house operations shall be conducted in a manner at all times consistent with a city approved management plan; 
2.  Revisions to the management plan shall require modification of the approved conditional use permit and the city approved management plan, except that minor changes, that do not fundamentally alter the operations or the management plan of a boarding/rooming house, may be approved by the director; 
3.  No more than five persons may reside in the boarding/rooming house, and the number of persons per rental room shall not exceed two persons; and 
4.  The number of sleeping rooms shall not exceed four and none of the sleeping rooms may contain kitchens or any individual cooking facilities. 
C.  Any conversion of a boarding or rooming house to an apartment, condominium or other multi-family development must comply with the density requirements of this code and the city's general plan at the time of such conversion. 
D.  All boarding or rooming houses shall comply with the parking requirements applicable to boarding or rooming houses, as set forth in Chapter 18.48 of this code, prior to establishing such use within the city. The minimum parking requirements of subsection (1)(D) of the table in Section 18.48.020 of the code shall apply to boarding or rooming houses. 
E.  No parolee shall be permitted to reside in a boarding or rooming house at any time, except as may be required by state or federal law. 
F.  No boarding or rooming house shall be within five hundred feet of any other boarding or rooming house. 
G.  No boarding or rooming house shall be within five hundred feet of any public or private school (pre-school through twelfth grade), including child day care facilities, as defined in Section 18.06.072 of this code and pre-schools; any residential care facilities, as defined in this title; any family day care home, as set forth in California Health and Safety Code Sections 1597.30 et seq.; any bar (with a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages for on-site consumption from the Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control); or any facility or retail business establishment selling alcohol (with a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages for off-site consumption from the Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control). 
H.  The distance requirements herein shall be measured from the closest property line to the closest property line, along a straight line extended between the two points. 
I.  All boarding or rooming houses shall require boarders or roomers to sign an agreement that provides that a conviction for any criminal violation, not including infractions and minor traffic violations, during residency in the boarding or rooming house, is grounds for termination of the residency or tenancy of that boarder or roomer, whether the rental, lease, or sublease agreement is written or oral. 
J.  Boarding or rooming houses shall be in compliance with all requirements of the city's zoning code at all times, as well as any other applicable provisions of this code, including obtaining any other permits or licenses, such as building permits or a business license, required before establishing, expanding or maintaining the use. 
K.  Any violation of any local, state or federal laws by boarders or roomers while on the premises shall be grounds for revocation of the boarding or rooming conditional use permit, including but not limited to any violations of this section, where the property owner contributed to or did not take all reasonable steps to protect against or prevent the violation; and for any violation of California Penal Code Section 3003.5 or Chapter 9.66 of this code. 
L.  No boarding or rooming house shall be maintained in a manner which constitutes a nuisance, as defined in California Civil Code Section 3479 or other applicable law. The conduct of any boarding or rooming house within the city in violation of any of the terms of this chapter or other applicable provisions of this code is hereby found and declared to be a public nuisance, and the city attorney or the district attorney may, in addition or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or proceeding for the abatement, removal and enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law; and shall take other steps and shall apply to such courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such boarding or rooming house and restrain and enjoin any person from conducting, operating or maintaining a boarding or rooming house contrary to the provisions of this chapter or code. 
M.  Boarding or rooming houses existing prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section shall be made to comply with the provisions of this section within six months of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section, except as to existing leases or rental agreements with respect to subsection G, which subsection shall be complied with as soon as the termination, expiration, renewal or modification of any then existing leases or rental agreements. 
N.  Any owner, operator, manager, employee or independent contractor of a boarding or rooming house violating or permitting, counseling, or assisting the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or applicable provisions of this code regulating boarding or rooming houses shall be subject to any and all civil remedies, including conditional permit revocation, criminal penalties pursuant to Chapter 1.08 of this code, and/or administrative citations pursuant to Chapter 1.09. All remedies provided herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive. Any violation of these provisions shall constitute a separate violation for each and every day during which such violation is committed or continued. 
(Ord. 2897 § 14, 2008)  
Chapter 18.54 - TEMPORARY USES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3098 , § 2, adopted March 26, 2019, repealed the former Ch. 18.54, §§ 18.54.010—18.54.050, and enacted a new chapter as set out herein. The former Ch. 18.54 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from prior code, §§ 9290—9293; Ord. 2862, § 1(part), adopted in 2005; and Ord. 2863, § 1(part), adopted in 2005. 
 
18.54.010 - Definitions. 
In addition to the definitions set forth in Chapter 18.06, the following definitions shall apply to the provisions of this chapter: 
A.  "Fundraising event" means a sale of goods or services for a charitable, religious, educational, cultural, civic or political purpose. 
B.  "Nonprofit organization" means an association of persons who are so associated for a charitable, religious, educational, cultural, civic or political purpose. 
C.  "Owner," as to real property, means the person who holds fee title to the real property, or the person who is entitled to possession of such realty by virtue of a written lease agreement having a term of not less than six months. 
D.  "Promotional event" means any event or activity, such as an antique, art, fashion or sport show, which is intended to attract business to a location, but which event or activity does not involve the sale of merchandise outside of a building. Such event may also include incidental sales of goods by individual exhibitors who do not use the premises as a permanent place of business. 
E.  "Promotional sale" means a sale, conducted outside of a building, of goods and services, by a person holding a valid city business license. 
F.  "Temporary event" means an activity: 
1.  Which involves the use of any real property, including buildings and/or structures, located in the city; and 
2.  Which involves the assembly of twenty-five or more persons; 
3.  For which a charge is made for the use of the real property, by the owner; or 
4.  For which a charge is made for admission to the activity. 
(Ord. No. 3098 , § 2, 3-26-19)  
18.54.020 - Temporary use permit required. 
Temporary use permits shall be required for all of the activities enumerated in Section 18.54.050, and all activities found by the director of community development to be similar or related thereto, except such activities sponsored by the city. The activities, being temporary in nature, possess characteristics of such unique and special form as to make impractical their operation without specific approval, upon such conditions as may be appropriate, in the manner set forth in this chapter. The issuance of a temporary use permit pursuant to this chapter shall not be a waiver of any requirement of any other provision of this code. Notwithstanding the above, a temporary use permit pursuant to this chapter shall not be required for events or activities which have as their primary purpose free speech expression protected by the First Amendment of the United States Constitution or Article I, Sections 2 and 3 of the California Constitution, based upon a verified statement under penalty of perjury to that effect by the sponsor or responsible party for the event or activity. 
(Ord. No. 3098 , § 2, 3-26-19)  
18.54.030 - Permit—Application—Fees. 
A.  A written application for a temporary permit shall be filed with the director of community development containing the following information: 
1.  Name of applicant (including the names and addresses of all principals, partners or corporate officers); 
2.  Proposed location; 
3.  Nature of activity; 
4.  Duration of activity; 
5.  Description of any activity to be used; 
6.  Such other information as the director of community development deems appropriate 
B.  A filing and investigation fee in an amount set by the city council shall be required with each such application, except for nonprofit organizations proposing temporary events without alcohol. 
C.  "Applicant" as used in this chapter means, with reference to a temporary event, that person who actually proposes to conduct the temporary event for which a permit is sought. 
(Ord. No. 3098 , § 2, 3-26-19)  
18.54.040 - Permit—Issuance conditions—Administration—Appeals. 
A.  Issuance. 
1.  The director of community development, upon proper application, shall issue a temporary use permit if it is determined that the proposed activity can and will be conducted in a manner compatible with the preservation of the public peace, safety, health and general welfare, and will not be injurious or detrimental to the use of property located in the immediate vicinity thereof. 
2.  The director of community development shall have the power to impose reasonable conditions upon the issuance of such permits to insure the preservation of the public peace, safety, health and general welfare, and to ensure that the activity will not be injurious or detrimental to property located in the immediate vicinity of the proposed location for the activity. 
B.  Administration. 
1.  Immediately upon issuance of a temporary use permit, the director of community development shall notify the chief of police of such fact together with all pertinent information regarding the issuance. Thereafter the chief of police shall have the responsibility of administrative enforcement. Where the chief of police determines that other permits, licenses or fees are required by law, he or she shall notify the respective city department or other agency having jurisdiction thereof. Then the permit shall be suspended until all other such licenses, permits or fees are obtained. 
2.  The chief of police shall inspect the activities for which temporary use permits have been issued, at appropriate times during the duration of such permit. He or she shall maintain suitable records of all enforcement matters in this chapter, and all matters related thereto, that may be pertinent to the use, activities or the public welfare. 
C.  Denial. The director of community development shall refuse to issue a permit if the activity would not be compatible with the preservation of the public peace, safety or general welfare, or if the same would be injurious or detrimental to properties adjacent to or in the vicinity of the proposed location of the activity. The director of community development shall give written notice to the applicant of the fact of such denial together with a statement of the reasons therefor. 
D.  Suspension. 
1.  The chief of police or the director of community development shall have the power to suspend, and shall suspend, any temporary use permit if he or she finds that the permittee: 
a.  Has violated any condition of approval imposed upon the permit, or 
b.  Has violated any provision of law, or 
c.  Is, by the actual conduct of the activity, threatening the preservation of the public peace, safety or general welfare, or unreasonably interfering with the use and enjoyment of other property in the immediate vicinity of the activity; 
2.  The chief of police shall give the permittee written notice of such suspension. Immediately upon the giving of such notice of the order of suspension, all activities under such permit shall forthwith cease, except as provided in this chapter. 
E.  Appeals from a Decision of the director of community development. 
1.  Any person aggrieved (hereinafter "applicant") by any decision, determination or action taken by the director of community development in connection with the granting or denying of a temporary use permit shall have the right of immediate appeal to the city council. Such an appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed with the city clerk within thirty days of the date of mailing notice of the action appealed from. Upon receipt of an appeal, the city clerk shall notify the director of community development thereof, and shall set the matter on the city council agenda for its next regularly scheduled meeting. The city clerk shall give the party appealing, and any other person requesting the same, at least five days' written notice of the time and place of such hearing. This notice provision may be waived by the appellant and all other such persons who have requested such notice. 
2.  At the time of the hearing, the applicant shall have the right to present any relevant written or oral evidence. The city council shall consider such evidence, together with appropriate staff reports and other information deemed by it to be relevant, and shall determine whether the decision was justified and reasonable under all of the circumstances. 
3.  The hearing before the council in such cases shall not be a formal public hearing. The council's decision shall be final and conclusive. 
F.  Appeals from Orders of Suspension. At any time prior to the expiration of a temporary use permit, an appeal may be taken by a permittee from an order of suspension issued by the chief of police or director of community development. Upon the filing of such an appeal with the city manager, the order so appealed from shall be suspended pending a hearing on such matter from the city manager. Such appeal hearing shall be set by the manager as expeditiously as possible: He or she shall give the appellant and the chief reasonable oral and/or written notice of the time and place of such hearing. At the time of the hearing the applicant shall have the right to present any relevant written or oral evidence, together with appropriate staff reports and other information deemed by him or her to be relevant. The hearing shall determine whether the suspension was justified. The decision of the city manager shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. No. 3098 , § 2, 3-26-19)  
18.54.050 - Permit—Activities affected—Validity. 
A.  Activities Included. No person shall sponsor, participate or engage in any of the following enumerated activities or any activity similar or related thereto, without first obtaining a temporary use permit therefor issued by the director of community development: 
1.  Circuses; and 
2.  Carnivals; and 
3.  Fairs; and 
4.  Aircraft and helicopter landings and parachutist demonstrations; and 
5.  The outdoor sale of Christmas trees or pumpkins, including one banner a maximum of 3'X5' which may be affixed to a temporary fence, except when such plans are held in conjunction with an established commercial business, by the person who holds a valid city business license for such commercial business; and 
6.  Promotional sales, fundraising sales or events and promotional events if conducted on C-zoned or M-zoned lots and within commercially designated districts within the specific plans, which lots are utilized by an existing use authorized as such by the zoning regulations contained in this title, provided that: 
a.  The total aggregate number of such events or sales upon any one lot shall not exceed forty-five days in any one calendar year, and 
b.  The duration of any such sale or event shall not exceed three consecutive days, and 
c.  No portion of any required off-street parking facility shall be utilized for such sale or event, and 
d.  The owner has, in writing, consented thereto, and 
e.  Rummage sales and white-elephant type displays and sales area shall be screened from a public street or alley or any residentially zoned or used property, and 
f.  Promotional sales shall be limited to no more than three such events on any lot in a calendar year; 
7.  Temporary events, which are limited to four events per calendar year, provided that a permit is obtained by the owner of the real property and by the person proposing to conduct the temporary event. Alcohol may be sold or provided in conjunction with a temporary use permit, which meets all police and Alcohol Beverage Control (ABC) requirements. The provisions of this subdivision 7 shall not apply to a temporary event: 
a.  Which is conducted on any lot classified in any of the R zones, as that term is defined in Sections 18.06.459 and 18.06.462, or 
b.  For which a conditional use permit is required pursuant to the provisions of this title, except for alcohol sold or provided in conjunction with a temporary use permit, or 
c.  For which a permit is required pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 18.54.020, 8. Notwithstanding the above, any of the events or activities listed above which are exempt from a temporary use permit pursuant to Section 18.54.020, upon a verified statement required by that section, shall not be required to obtain a temporary use permit. 
B.  Duration of Permits. The duration of permits for the activities enumerated in subsections A.1. through A.4., inclusive, shall be limited to a period not to exceed seven consecutive calendar days and limited to two events per calendar year. Activities permitted pursuant to subsection A.5. shall be permitted for a period not in excess of thirty consecutive calendar days with an additional seven days each for set up and tear down. No person shall engage or participate in any of the activities described in this section for a longer period of time than set forth in this section, without first obtaining a conditional use permit therefor. 
(Ord. No. 3098 , § 2, 3-26-19)  
Chapter 18.56 - DEVELOPMENT REVIEW* 
 
18.56.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of a development review shall be to ensure that the design is based upon the general architectural character of the neighborhood, design quality, development compliance with the provisions of applicable laws, consistency with the design of the neighborhood in which the development is located, compliance with development standards, guidelines and conditions of approval. 
(Ord. 2580 § 5 (part), 1992: Ord. 2515 § 9 (part), 1990)  
18.56.020 - Development review required. 
Development review shall be required prior to the issuance of a building permit for all single-family, duplexes, multiple family, office, commercial and industrial development. Additions to existing single-family, duplexes, multiple family, commercial and industrial development shall also require development review. Submittal of plans for development review shall follow the submittal requirements set forth in Section 18.56.030 of this chapter. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any development projects which are located within an historic district as designated by this title. Within an historic district, development proposals shall adhere to the procedures required for a certificate of appropriateness as established by the applicable chapter of this title. 
(Ord. 2723 § 2, 1998: Ord. 2515 § 9 (part), 1990) 
( Ord. No. 3019, § 3 , 3-25-14)  
18.56.030 - Information to be submitted. 
Where a development review plan is required, the applicant shall submit to the director the following information: 
1.  A completed application for development review containing the name, address and telephone number of the applicant, the owner and the person who prepares the plan, the authorized agent, if any; and 
2.  The street address and a brief legal description for the property involved, and the names of the streets which serve the subject property; and 
3.  The net and gross property size, the number of lots involved, if more than one, and all the lot dimensions and lot areas of each lot as these requirements apply to the specific development; and 
4.  The approximate square footage and location of all buildings and structures, including the location and striping of all off-street parking facilities and related parking lot landscaping; and 
5.  Conceptual landscape plans for all proposed public and private open spaces and landscaped areas; and 
6.  The proposed use or uses of the site and/or building(s); and 
7.  Detailed building elevations (front, rear and sides) and floor plans; and 
8.  Conceptual elevations of all adjacent buildings in sufficient detail, in the opinion of the director, to determine design compatibility; and 
9.  Notification requirements consistent with the level of review authority; and 
10.  Such other information as the director deems necessary to meet the purposes of this section and to determine compliance with applicable standards and guidelines. 
(Ord. 2515 § 9 (part), 1990)  
18.56.040 - Review by director. 
Upon the receipt of an application for development review, submitted with the requirements of Section 18.56.030 and the appropriate filing/processing fee in the amount set by the city council, the director shall have thirty calendar days in which to review the application for completeness and provide written notice to the applicant of the deficiencies in the application. The application shall not be processed until such time as the applicant has caused the application to be complete. Once the application has been determined to be complete, the director shall determine whether the application complies with all applicable laws, standards and guidelines. The director shall prepare or cause the preparation of a recommendation regarding the development review. Notwithstanding the approval authority outlined in Section 18.56.045 of the Whittier Municipal Code, the director may refer any development review application to the design review board and/or planning commission for action. 
(Ord. 2515 § 9 (part), 1990) 
(Ord. No. 3054 , § 9, 8-9-16)  
18.56.045 - Approval authority. 
A.  Planning Director. The director shall have the authority to approve, conditionally approve or deny development review applications for: 
1.  All construction resulting in a total of not more than two dwelling units on a lot or within a subdivision project, including, but not limited to single-family dwellings, duplexes, additions, accessory structures, pools, siding, windows and re-roofing in the H-R, R-E, R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 zones and within the Uptown Whittier Specific Plan; 
2.  Residential construction resulting in exterior remodels that propose an additional floor/story; 
3.  Residential construction resulting in additional floor area of more than six hundred square feet of the existing floor area that is visible; 
4.  Exterior remodeling and additions to existing multiple-family developments which do not exceed six hundred square feet in floor area; 
5.  All nonresidential construction, additions and exterior remodeling with a floor area not in excess of five thousand square feet in the C and M zones and within the Uptown Whittier Specific Plan; 
6.  Signs, awnings, landscaping, parking lots, fences, walls, retaining walls and similar permits; 
7.  Commercial development projects adjacent to existing residential uses; 
8.  Public notice will be required for development review applications identified in Sections 18.56.045(A)(2), 18.56.045(A)(3) and 18.56.045(A)(7). Public notice of applications for Planning Director approval shall be given to adjacent property owners and occupants, as appropriate, to include all properties within one hundred feet of the property boundary, and at a minimum, fourteen properties surrounding the project, whichever is greater: 
a.  For typical lots, two properties on either side of a subject parcel, five properties behind and five properties across the street from a project. 
b.  For corner lots, two properties on interior side of a subject parcel, three properties in front and behind and five properties across the opposite street from a project. 
c.  For unusual circumstances, the director of community development shall have the ability to modify the notification requirements. 
9.  Public notice exceptions may be granted by the director of community development if the additions are interior to the residential structure or not visible. 
B.  Zoning Administrator. The zoning administrator, pursuant to Section 18.58.060 of this title, shall have the authority to approve, conditionally approve or deny development review applications for: 
1.  Development projects resulting in a total of three to nine dwelling units on a lot or within a subdivision project, and additions to existing multiple-family developments which exceed six hundred square feet in floor area. 
2.  Nonresidential development projects with a floor area in excess of five thousand square feet, but less than fifteen thousand square feet, on C and M zones and within the uptown Whittier specific plan. 
3.  Exceptions from required yards in commercial or manufacturing zones, pursuant to Sections 18.24.040(B) and 18.34.050(B) and overheight walls pursuant to Section 18.24.040(F) of this title. 
4.  Public notice of applications for zoning administrator approval shall be given to adjacent property owners and occupants, as appropriate, to include all properties within one hundred feet of the property boundary, and at a minimum, fourteen properties surrounding the project, whichever is greater: 
a.  For typical lots, two properties on either side of a subject parcel, five properties behind and five properties across the street from a project. 
b.  For corner lots, two properties on interior side of a subject parcel, three properties in front and behind and five properties across the opposite street from a project. 
c.  For unusual circumstances, the director of community development shall have the ability to modify the notification requirements. 
C.  Planning Commission. The planning commission, pursuant to Section 18.52.090 of this title, shall have the authority to approve, conditionally approve or deny development review applications for: 
1.  Development projects resulting in a total of ten dwelling units or more on a lot or within a subdivision project; 
2.  Nonresidential development projects with a gross floor area of more than fifteen thousand square feet on C-O, C-1, C-2, C-3 and M zoned lots and within the uptown Whittier specific plan; 
3.  Any development project where optional development standards are utilized, pursuant to Sections 18.10.040, 18.22.040 and 18.24.050. 
D.  Design Review Board. The design review board shall be responsible for reviewing and approving project designs on a citywide basis including: 
1.  Residential development projects consisting of three or more dwelling units; 
2.  Nonresidential development projects and additions with a floor area in excess of one thousand square feet; 
3.  Exterior façade remodels of any buildings located in the Uptown Whittier Specific Plan area regardless if any square footage is being added and/or removed; 
4.  Monument signs in the C and M zones and neon signs in the uptown Whittier specific plan; 
5.  Awnings for non-residential uses; 
6.  Murals on private property; 
7.  Master sign program; 
8.  Covered, partially enclosed parking structures for commercial uses that are subject to a discretionary permit; 
9.  Screening for every uncovered parking or maneuvering area that is subject to a discretionary permit, which has a common lot line with any R-zoned lot and/or located within twenty-five feet of any property line separating a project area from the street; 
10.  Any project which is referred to the board by an approval authority including front yard and street side, side yard fence design exceptions. 
11.  Front yard and street side, side yard fence designs that do not conform to the approved fence and wall palette. 
(Ord. 2839 § 15, 16, 2004: Ord. 2838 § 15, 16, 2004: Ord 2798 §§ 2—5, 2002; Ord. 2765 § 2 (part), 2000; Ord. 2620 § 2 (part), 1994: Ord. 2610 § 1 (R), 1993: Ord. 2580 § 5 (part), 1992: Ord. 2528 § 1, 1991; Ord. 2518 § 8, 1990: Ord. 2515 § 9 (part), 1990) 
(Ord. No. 2932, § 11, 8-11-09; Ord. No. 3019, § 4 , 3-25-14; Ord. No. 3054 , § 10, 8-9-16)  
18.56.050 - Notification of decision. 
Within ten calendar days of final action on a development review application, the director shall mail to the applicant, a written notice of the decision of the approving authority and any accompanying conditions of approval. The director shall also give similar notice to the planning commission and/or city council. The action of the director and/or planning commission is final unless appealed in accordance with Section 18.56.055. 
(Ord. 2541 § 1 (part), 1991: Ord. 2515 § 9 (part), 1990)  
18.56.055 - Appeal of action of approving authority. 
A.  Within twenty calendar days from the date of the planning director's action on a development review application, the applicant may file with the secretary of the commission, a written letter of appeal accompanied by appropriate appeal fee. Upon receipt of such a letter of appeal fee, the secretary shall give the appellant ten calendar days written notice of the time and place of such hearing. 
B.  Within the appeal period provided for in Section 18.52.120(A) thirty days, the applicant or any aggrieved person may file with the secretary of the planning commission or with the city clerk-treasurer, a written letter of appeal together with an appeal fee as set by the city council. Within said appeal period as provided in Section 18.52.120(A), any member of the planning commission may appeal the decision of an approval authority. 
C.  Notice of the time and place of the public hearing on the appeal pursuant to subsection B of this section, shall be given in the manner provided in Section 18.52.090 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2819 § 4, 2003; Ord. 2620 § 2 (part), 1994; Ord. 2550 § 2, 1991; Ord. 2541 § 1 (part), 1991: Ord. 2533 § 1, 1991: Ord. 2515 § 9 (part), 1990)  
18.56.056 - Development review approval—Period of validity—Extensions. 
The period of validity for any development review approval approved by the city shall be as set forth in Section 18.04.110. Time extension(s) of the period of validity for any development review approval approved by the city shall be granted only in accordance with Sections 18.04.120 and 18.04.130. 
(Ord. 2909 § 7, 2008)  
18.56.057 - Development review approval—Modification conditions. 
Conditions may be modified, eliminated, or new conditions added to any development review approval, in compliance with Section 18.04.120. 
(Ord. 2909 § 8, 2008)  
18.56.060 - Action of the planning commission. 
The director shall prepare a report to the planning commission describing the application, conditions of approval, specific reasons and explanations of conditions and findings, reasons for the appeal or reasons for the denial, and transmit the report along with any other plans and material necessary for the planning commission to render a decision on the appeal. The planning commission shall consider the appeal with respect to conformance with the Whittier general plan, the zoning ordinance, development guidelines and other city standards. The planning commission shall have the authority to approve, conditionally approve or deny the application. The secretary of the commission shall provide written notification of the action of the planning commission to the appellant within ten calendar days of the action of the planning commission. The decision of the commission shall be final unless appealed to the council in accordance with Section 18.56.055. 
(Ord. 2515 § 9 (part), 1990)  
18.56.065 - Action of city council. 
The council shall consider an appeal from a decision of the planning commission in the same manner as prescribed in Section 18.56.060. The decision of the council shall be final. 
(Ord. 2515 § 9 (part), 1990)  
Chapter 18.58 - ZONING ADMINISTRATOR 
 
18.58.010 - Position created. 
The position of zoning administrator for the city is created. In the absence of a contrary direction by the city council, the director of planning shall serve as zoning administrator for the city, without additional compensation therefor. 
(Prior code § 9308(1))  
18.58.020 - Functions and duties. 
The function of the zoning administrator shall be to hear and consider all applications for minor zone variances; minor conditional use permits as described in this chapter, together with all proceedings relating to the modification and/or revocation thereof, a cottage food operation permit, and development review applications pursuant to Section 18.56.055 of this title. 
(Ord. 2620 § 2 (part), 1994: prior code § 9308(2)) 
(Ord. No. 2998, § 3, 4-23-13)  
18.58.030 - Permits and variances—Procedure. 
The zoning administrator shall not act upon any minor conditional use permit application without having set the same for public hearing. The zoning administrator may act upon an application for a minor variance, a cottage food operation permit, or development review application without holding a public hearing, as provided in Section 18.58.060(D). Notice of a hearing on a minor conditional use permit application shall be given as in the case of matters set before the planning commission. In acting upon a variance and/or conditional use permit, or modification or revocation matters relating thereto, the zoning administrator shall be bound by the standards governing the conduct of the planning commission and the city council with respect to variances and conditional use permits as set forth in this code, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 2620 § 2 (part), 1994: Ord. 2457 § 1, 1989: prior code § 9308(3)) 
(Ord. No. 2998, § 4, 4-23-13)  
18.58.040 - Approval or denial—Notice. 
Within ten days following the close of a public hearing upon a minor zone variance or a minor conditional use permit, or a modification or revocation proceeding relating to the same, the zoning administrator shall approve, conditionally approve or deny the same. Within thirty days of receipt of a complete application for a cottage food operation permit, the zoning administrator shall approve or deny the same. The zoning administrator's action shall be in written form and shall contain a brief statement of the facts upon which such determination is based. Not later than five working days following the rendering of such determination, the zoning administrator shall forward a copy of his decision by United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the applicant and any other persons requesting a copy of the same. The action of the zoning administrator shall be final and conclusive, unless within the time permitted an appeal is filed appealing the decision of the zoning administrator to the planning commission. 
(Prior code § 9308(4)) 
(Ord. No. 2998, § 5, 4-23-13)  
18.58.050 - Appeals from administrator decisions—Commission authority. 
Within ten days from and after the date of the giving of the notice by the zoning administrator of his determination, any person aggrieved by such decision may file a written appeal with the secretary of the planning commission appealing the decision of the zoning administrator. No such appeal shall be accepted unless there is, paid contemporaneously with the filing of such letter, a filing and processing fee in a sum to be set by resolution of the city council. Upon receipt of a timely filed appeal, together with the filing and processing fee, the secretary of the planning commission shall set the matter for a de novo hearing before the planning commission at its next most convenient meeting. In acting upon such appeals, the commission shall conduct de novo hearings and shall act upon such minor zone variance, minor conditional use permit, modification or revocation proceeding relating thereto, or cottage food operation permit, in the same manner as is set forth in this code with respect to original filings in the planning commission. 
(Prior code § 9308(5)) 
(Ord. No. 2998, § 6, 4-23-13)  
18.58.060 - Jurisdiction. 
The zoning administrator of the city shall have the jurisdiction to hear only the following enumerated matters, which for the purposes of Chapters 18.52 through 18.58 shall be described as "minor zone variance" or "minor conditional use permit," as the case may be: 
A.  Conditional use permits which would have the effect of allowing the keeping and maintenance, for noncommercial purposes, of any animal, fish or fowl not otherwise permitted pursuant to the provisions of this code, on any R-zoned lot within the city; and 
B.  Conditional use permits which would allow the keeping and maintenance of livestock on any R-zoned property within the city; and 
C.  Minor variances as follows which would not allow deviation from the standards set forth in this code greater than the percentage listed: 
1.  Yard encroachments, twenty percent; 
2.  Wall, fence and retaining wall height limitations are in the front yard setback and on the street side, side yard of property adjacent to a public street, ten percent; 
a.  Wall, fence and retaining wall height limitations in the rear and interior side yard setback, twenty-five percent. This provision shall not apply to residential property lines that are immediately contiguous to the Greenway Trail, which may have a fence or wall constructed up to ten feet in height, as per Section 18.10.030(D) of the Whittier Municipal Code. 
3.  Building height variations, five percent; 
4.  Driveway widths, twenty percent; 
5.  Distance between buildings and/or structures, ten percent; 
6.  Allowed height and background sign area of signs, ten percent; and, 
7.  Installation of heating, ventilation and air-conditioning equipment located on the roof of an existing building, where other permitted locations are not possible or practical. 
D.  Modification and/or revocation proceedings relating to permits granted pursuant to this section. 
E.  Development projects as provided for in Section 18.56.045(B). 
F.  Determination of eligibility, upon application, of minor variance exception to amortization provisions for commercial signs, pursuant to Section 18.78.020. 
G.  Approval and/or denial of permit for cottage food operation as an accessory use pursuant to Section 18.10.020(L). 
H.  Determination of eligibility, upon application, of minor variance exception to amortization provisions for commercial signs, pursuant to Section 18.78.020. 
(Ord. 2901 § 2, 2007; Ord. 2900 § 8, 2007; Ord. 2864 § 5, 2005; Ord. 2839 §§ 17, 18, 2004: Ord. 2838 §§ 17, 18, 2004: Ord. 2787 § 16, 2001; Ord. 2746 § 4, 1999; Ord. 2573 § 6, 1992; Ord. 2457 § 2, 1989; Ord. 2345 § 3, 1985: prior code § 9309) 
(Ord. No. 2932, § 12, 8-11-09; Ord. No. 2998, § 7, 4-23-13; Ord. No. 3054 , § 11, 8-9-16)  
18.58.070 - Referral to commission. 
Notwithstanding the grant of jurisdiction pursuant to this chapter, the zoning administrator in his sole discretion may decline to act on any application for a minor conditional use permit or minor zone variance. If the zoning administrator declines to act, the matter shall be heard by the planning commission pursuant to Chapter 18.52. 
(Ord. 2457 § 3, 1989)  
18.58.080 - Report to commission. 
Whenever the zoning administrator acts on an application for a minor zone variance pursuant to this chapter, he shall advise the planning commission of the action taken. 
(Ord. 2457 § 4, 1989)  
18.58.090 - Zoning administrator approval—Period of validity—Extensions. 
The period of validity for any zoning administrator approval approved by the city shall be as set forth in Section 18.04.110. Time extension(s) of the period of validity for any zoning administrator approval approved by the city shall be granted only in accordance with Sections 18.04.120 and 18.04.130. 
(Ord. 2909 § 9, 2008)  
18.58.100 - Zoning administrator approval—Modification conditions. 
Conditions may be modified, eliminated, or new conditions added to any zoning administrator approval, in compliance with Section 18.04.120. 
(Ord. 2909 § 10, 2008)  
Chapter 18.60 - AMENDMENTS 
 
18.60.010 - Authority. 
The provisions of this title shall be amended, including but not limited to the reclassification of specific properties to different zones, whenever the public interest, convenience and necessity so require. 
(Prior code § 9310)  
18.60.020 - Initiation—Methods authorized. 
A.  Amendments to the provisions of this title or the reclassification of specific properties from one zone to another shall be initiated only in one of the following ways: 
1.  By motion of the city council; or 
2.  By motion of the commission; or 
3.  With reference to the reclassification of specific real property, by the owner thereof or his authorized agent, or by any public utility which has commenced the exercise of its power of eminent domain with regard to such property; or 
4.  With reference to an amendment to specific regulations, by any person who is a resident of the city or an owner of property within the city. 
B.  Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the city council from taking action pursuant to Section 65858 of the Government Code. 
(Prior code § 9311)  
18.60.030 - Initiation—Zone changes. 
The director shall prepare a suitable application form entitled "Request for Zone Change," and shall assist any applicant in preparing the request form. Any such application shall be accepted for filing by the director only upon the payment by the applicant of a filing and processing fee in an amount set by the council. Any applicant may, in writing, withdraw his request at any time during the processing of such request; provided, however, that there shall be no refund of any fees paid in connection therewith. 
(Prior code § 9312)  
18.60.040 - Proposed amendments—Hearing—Notice. 
A.  The commission shall conduct a noticed public hearing on each proposed amendment. The secretary of the commission shall give notice of such hearing. The notice requirements contained in Section 18.52.090 relating to zone variances and conditional use permits shall also be met, if the request for amendment relates to specific properties. 
B.  The applicant, where mailings are required, shall supply the director with a list of the names of property owners who own property within three hundred feet of the external boundaries of the subject property, as set forth in Section 18.52.060. 
(Prior code § 9313)  
18.60.050 - Proposed amendments—Action by commission. 
A.  After conducting a hearing on any proposed amendment the commission, based upon its decision as to whether the public interest, convenience and necessity so require, shall take one of the following courses of action: 
1.  Recommend to the city council that the requested amendment be granted as requested; or 
2.  Recommend to the city council that the requested amendment be granted in part, or as modified by the commission; or 
3.  Deny the requested amendment. 
B.  The commission's action shall be by resolution, adopted by not less than a majority of its total voting members. Where the commission's action is to deny the requested amendment, such decision shall be final and conclusive in the absence of an appeal, as provided in this chapter. Where the commission's recommendation is made pursuant to subsections A1 and A2, the entire matter requested or initiated shall be considered by the council. 
(Prior code § 9314)  
18.60.060 - Denial—Appeals. 
A.  The decision of the commission in the case of a denial of a proposed amendment shall be final and conclusive in the absence of an appeal taken in the time and manner specified in Section 18.52.120. 
B.  Upon the timely filing of an appeal, together with the payment of a fee in an amount set by the city council, the city clerk-treasurer shall immediately advise the secretary of the commission thereof, who shall thereupon transmit to the city clerk-treasurer the commission files in connection with the matter. 
(Prior code § 9315)  
18.60.070 - Appeals—Council authority. 
In the case of an appeal from a decision of the commission, or upon receipt by the city clerk-treasurer of a commission recommendation relating to an amendment, the city clerk-treasurer shall give the same type of notice of hearing before the planning commission. The council shall conduct a de novo hearing upon such matter, and shall determine whether such amendment is required in whole or in part by the public interest, convenience and necessity. 
(Prior code § 9316)  
18.60.080 - Additional conditions. 
The city council may impose conditions of approval upon the reclassification of any property from one zone classification to another, where it finds that such conditions must be imposed so that such reclassification shall not create problems inimical to the public health, safety and general welfare of the city. 
(Prior code § 9317)  
Chapter 18.62 - NONCONFORMING USES, STRUCTURES AND SITES 
 
18.62.010 - Purpose. 
Nonconforming uses, structures, and sites are inconsistent with a coherent zoning plan and the established standards and regulations set forth in this title and should be eliminated as soon as feasible. The purpose of these provisions relating to the continuation, reconstruction, and abatement of nonconforming uses, structures, and sites is to: 
A.  Bring them into conformance with the development standards and design guidelines of the Zoning Regulations of the city (Title 18 of the Whittier Municipal Code); 
B.  Reduce the occurrence and limit the extent of nonconformance by prohibiting expansion, intensification, reinstatement, alteration, reconstruction after destruction, and reestablishment after abandonment; and 
C.  Phase out nonconforming uses, structures and sites in accordance with the abatement periods set forth below. 
(Ord. 2806 § 11 (part), 2002)  
18.62.020 - Applicability of provisions. 
These regulations shall apply to all nonconforming uses, structures and sites, located within all zones in the city and shall be applicable to all specific plans unless otherwise specifically addressed or exempted by the resolution or ordinance adopting such specific plan. The regulation of nonconforming signs shall be as set forth in Division II of this title (Chapters 18.68 through 18.78). 
(Ord. 2806 § 11 (part), 2002)  
18.62.030 - Continuation and maintenance. 
Nonconforming uses, structures and sites may be continuously utilized and maintained, subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2806 § 11 (part), 2002)  
18.62.040 - Repair. 
Reasonably necessary maintenance and repair of a nonconforming structure or site is permitted, provided that such maintenance or repair does not include reconstruction or replacement of a destroyed structure. Notwithstanding the foregoing, reconstruction or remodeling is permitted under the following circumstances but shall not extend the period of abatement relating to such nonconforming structure or site: 
A.  Where a part of such structure or site is taken for any public use by condemnation, dedication or purchase by any agency having the power of eminent domain provided such reconstruction, alteration or repair shall be limited to that necessary to render the structure or site, reasonably safe for continued use; or 
B.  When approved as part of the city's housing rehabilitation program. 
(Ord. 2806 § 11 (part), 2002)  
18.62.050 - Alteration, expansion, relocation or intensification. 
Any alteration of a nonconforming use, site or structure that would result in an expansion, relocation or intensification of the nonconformity or further deviation from conformance shall be prohibited. Notwithstanding the foregoing, such alteration is permitted under the following circumstances but shall not extend the abatement period of the nonconformity to which the same relates; and, once abated, the nonconformity shall not be reestablished: 
A.  Uses. 
1.  Elimination of Nonconformity. Any alteration that brings the use into conformity with all provisions of this title as of the date of the alteration shall be permitted. 
2.  Legal Compliance. Any alteration required to comply with any law, including, but not limited to, the zoning regulations, shall be permitted. 
3.  Maintenance. The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to place any limitation upon repair or remodeling deemed necessary by the city pursuant to the provisions of this title when the structure and site are conforming but the use thereof is not, provided such maintenance is not for the purpose of, and does not expand, the nonconforming use. 
4.  Multi-Use Development. Where multiple uses located on C-zoned and/or M-zoned lots, which form a single development site under common ownership, are nonconforming solely by reason that one or more of the uses is not permitted in the zone, new uses or structures shall be permitted on such lot(s) provided all of the requirements of this title are complied with as to any such new use or structure. 
B.  Structures. 
1.  Elimination of Nonconformity. Any alteration that brings the structure into conformity with all provisions of this title as of the date of the alteration shall be permitted. 
2.  Legal Compliance. Any alteration required to comply with any law, including, but not limited to, the zoning regulations, shall be permitted. 
3.  New use. Any new use proposed within a nonconforming structure shall comply with all of the regulations contained in this title. 
C.  Sites. 
1.  Elimination of Nonconformity. Any alteration that brings the site into conformity with all provisions of this title as of the date of the alteration shall be permitted. 
2.  Legal Compliance. Any alteration required to comply with any law, including, but not limited to, the zoning regulations, shall be permitted. 
3.  New use. Any new use on a nonconforming site shall comply with all of the regulations contained in this title. 
4.  New Structure. Any new structure proposed to be located on a nonconforming site shall be constructed and/or located on the site in compliance with all of the regulations contained in this title. 
5.  Residential—Nonconforming Parking Facilities. Alteration of residential structures located on a site that is nonconforming solely by reason of a lack of parking facilities, shall be permitted without complying with the off-street parking requirements of this title, provided: 
a.  The alteration does not result in additional units and/or additional bedrooms being constructed upon the lot; and 
b.  Any expansion of the structure does not occupy an area where conforming parking could be established. If adequate space for all or a portion of the required parking exists on the site, such parking shall be installed as part of the expansion and shall be established prior to completion of such expansion. 
c.  The alteration shall comply with all applicable development standards, architectural standards, and design guidelines for the underlying zoning as set forth in this title; 
6.  Residential-Nonconforming Number of Dwelling Units. Alteration of residential structures located on a site that is nonconforming solely by reason of more than the permitted number of units on the site, shall be permitted, provided: 
a.  Any alteration shall comply with the development standards applying to the underlying zoning as set forth in this title; 
b.  Any alteration shall not result in additional units being constructed upon the lot; 
c.  If the alteration results in the addition of bedrooms, the entire site shall be brought into compliance with the off-street parking requirements of Chapter 18.48 at the time of the alteration. 
(Ord. 2806 § 11 (part), 2002)  
18.62.060 - Reconstruction. 
The reconstruction of nonconforming structures damaged or destroyed shall be subject to the following: 
A.  Damaged Structures. A damaged structure may be repaired only if the estimated cost of such repair does not exceed fifty percent of the estimated cost to construct the same structure, determined as of the time that the damage occurs or as of the time applications for permits for such repair are filed, whichever, is higher. Any such repair shall comply with the following requirements. However, if the structure has been ordered to be demolished, it is subject to Subsection 18.62.060C: 
1.  The Building Regulations of the city of Whittier, Title 15 of the Whittier Municipal Code, at the time permits are issued; 
2.  The requirements of Title 18 of the Whittier Municipal Code, at the time permits are issued, to the greatest extent possible, as long as the predamage size, including number of bedrooms, is not exceeded; 
3.  Architectural standards and design guidelines and standards of the city for the zone in which the lot or parcel is located; 
4.  Application for development review pursuant to Chapter 18.56 of this title, for such repair or reconstruction shall be filed within six months of the date of the event causing the damage; 
5.  The building permit for such repair or reconstruction is obtained within one year after the date of the damage and remains valid; 
6.  Reconstruction or repair under a valid building permit must commence within six months of permit issuance; 
7.  Reconstruction or repair must be completed within one year of commencement. 
Damaged buildings determined to be a public nuisance by the city shall be demolished in accordance with the provisions of Title 15 of the Whittier Municipal Code. If permits to reconstruct a damaged building are not obtained within one year of the date the damage occurred, if reconstruction is not commenced within six months of issuance of a building permit for such reconstruction, or if reconstruction is not completed within one year after commencement, and if no extension of reconstruction time has been granted, the building shall be deemed a public nuisance. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the city from requiring earlier demolition under the provisions of this code or other applicable law. 
B.  Extension of time for reconstruction. The owner of property who has received a permit to repair or reconstruct a damaged building, or his authorized agent, may file an application for extension of the time to commence construction under a validly issued building permit, or to complete construction beyond the time permitted by this section. The planning commission may extend the time by approval of an application for extension of reconstruction time in accordance with this chapter if the owner demonstrates reasonable need: 
1.  To receive such extension consideration, the property owner shall request an extension in writing on forms prepared for that purpose, no later than thirty days prior to the expiration of the time period sought to be extended as set forth in this chapter, including a full explanation of the reason why the extension should be granted. 
2.  Applications for extension of reconstruction time shall be filed with the secretary of the planning commission. The secretary of the planning commission, upon receipt of a timely application, including the fee as set by resolution of the city council, shall set the matter for hearing before the planning commission and shall cause notice of the time and place of the hearing upon same to be given and shall cause a hearing on such application to be held as specified in Section 18.62.140 of this chapter. Any decision of the planning commission under this section may be appealed to the city council within ten days of issuance of the written notice specified in Section 18.62.140. In the absence of a timely filing of an appeal of the decision of the planning commission to the city council, the decision of the planning commission shall be final and conclusive as of the date of the adoption of the resolution granting or denying an extension. Any appeal to the city council shall be heard and decided as set forth in Section 18.62.140. 
3.  The hearing body may grant an extension of time for reconstruction of a damaged building only upon making all of the required findings based upon the evidence presented at the hearing. The applicant shall have the burden of proof to show, by relevant evidence, the existence of facts supporting the conclusion that the findings as set forth below can be made: 
a.  Granting an extension of time for reconstruction is necessary as a result of delays beyond the control of the owner of the property and the owner has acted in good faith and with due diligence; 
b.  Granting an extension of time for reconstruction is necessary to avoid unreasonable hardship to the owner(s) of the property; and 
c.  Granting an extension of time for reconstruction will not unreasonably interfere with the use, possession or enjoyment of surrounding properties. 
C.  Destroyed Structures. If a primary structure on any site is destroyed, any nonconforming use, structure and/or site shall be considered to be abated and any replacement development shall comply with the use, development, and design standards applicable to the zoning classification of the lot or parcel of land at the time application for development review approval pursuant to Chapter 18.56 of this title is filed. 
(Ord. 2806 § 11 (part), 2002)  
18.62.070 - Abatement. 
A.  Uses. Nonconforming uses shall be abated and shall not be reestablished, when any of the circumstances listed below are found to apply: 
1.  Abandonment. Whenever a nonconforming use has been abandoned. 
2.  Elimination. When the structure that housed a nonconforming use has been destroyed. 
3.  Change in Use. 
a.  A change from a nonconforming use to a conforming use. 
b.  A change from one nonconforming use to another nonconforming use. However, such change may be permitted only after approval by the planning commission, supported by its findings that the new use is reasonably similar to or less intensive than the previous use and compatible with adjacent uses. Any new nonconforming use permitted by the planning commission shall continue only for the unexpired portion of the abatement period remaining for the original nonconforming use under this title. No change from one nonconforming use to another shall be permitted after the abatement period for the original nonconforming use has expired. 
4.  Expiration of abatement period. Nonconforming uses shall be abated and terminated upon the expiration of the periods of time set forth below. The periods of time shall be as follows, and shall commence to run as of the effective date of the ordinance that resulted in such use first becoming nonconforming: 
a.  A nonconforming nonstructural accessory use, including but not limited to areas used for keeping of animals, vehicular off-street parking facilities, or outside storage: one year. 
b.  A nonconforming use of a structure or site, except single family residential use of buildings intended for residential use: twenty years. 
c.  A nonconforming use of a nonconforming structure or site shall comply with the shortest abatement period established by this chapter for such use, structure or site. 
B.  Structures. Nonconforming structures shall be abated by demolition, removal, relocation, or alteration of the structure to bring it into conformity with all provisions of this title on or before the expiration of the periods of time set forth below. The periods of time shall be as follows, and shall commence to run as of the effective date of the ordinance which resulted in such structure first becoming nonconforming: 
1.  Abandoned nonconforming structures: immediately. 
2.  Nonconforming structures requiring no city building permit, including but not limited to, fences and walls: three years. 
3.  Properties improved only with a nonconforming structure that is accessory to a nonexistent principal structure where no development application for the property has been approved or is pending approval since the time at which the property became nonconforming: one year. 
4.  Nonconforming structures in R-zones designed for, and occupied with, a commercial use: five years. 
5.  Nonconforming structures in commercial and manufacturing zones twenty-five years. 
C.  Sites. A nonconforming site shall be abated by the alteration of the site to bring it into compliance with the development standards and design guidelines of this title, to the greatest extent possible, including but not limited to the requirements for architectural treatments, setbacks, landscaping and irrigation systems, temporary refuse storage areas, parking lot surfacing and striping, outside storage, and signs. Abatement shall be required any time that: 
1.  A nonconforming site is abandoned. 
2.  A nonconforming site is enlarged or altered in such a way as to occupy any part of any structure(s) on the site, or the site itself, which it did not occupy on the effective date of any ordinance codified in this title, or amendment thereto, which caused the site's nonconformance. 
3.  Any structure located on a nonconforming site is moved, removed, enlarged, or significantly altered. 
4.  The primary structure on a nonconforming site is destroyed. 
5.  The use of a nonconforming site is changed in such a way as to increase the discrepancy between existing conditions and the standards set forth in this title. 
6.  To satisfy the purpose and intent of this section, the zoning administrator may approve a reduction in the number of parking spaces required for a nonconforming site, by up to ten percent of then current code requirements. 
(Ord. 2806 § 11 (part), 2002)  
18.62.080 - Abatement—Order. 
When the city finds any of the facts set forth in Section 18.62.070 to exist, or where it is found that the abatement period as to a use, structure or site as set forth in this chapter has expired, a written order of abatement (hereinafter "order") shall be issued and notice given to the owners and persons in possession thereof. Unless the nonconformity has been previously abated, the owner and/or person in possession of the property to which the abatement order relates shall comply within the time and in the manner stated in such order. The provisions of the Whittier Municipal Code relating to public nuisance abatement and/or any other legal method or procedure may be utilized to obtain compliance, where deemed necessary by the city manager. An abatement order may be appealed to the city manager as provided in Section 18.62.140 of this chapter. Any such appeal must be in writing and made within ten days of the date of the abatement order. The city manager's decision on such an appeal shall be final and conclusive.  
18.62.090 - Abatement—Extension. 
The purpose of an extension of the abatement period shall be to provide a reasonable opportunity to amortize the property owners investment in cases of economic hardship while making every effort to insure that the use, structure or site for which the application is submitted, is or will be rendered compatible with other existing and permitted neighboring uses as soon as feasible. The application for extension of abatement provides a process for the city to review the applicant's statement relating to alleged economic hardship arising from abatement of a nonconforming use, structure, or site, the nonconformity's impact on the community and consistency with current city goals and policies, and to provide an opportunity for the owner of such a property to address his plans for the property and the reasons why amortization of the investment involved could not be accomplished in the amortization period provided in this title. 
(Ord. 2806 § 11 (part), 2002)  
18.62.100 - Abatement—Extension application. 
The owner of property to which an order of abatement relates, or his authorized agent, may file an application for extension of the abatement period relating to an order to abate a nonconforming use, structure, or site. Such applications shall be filed and considered pursuant to the following procedures: 
A.  Extensions by Zoning Administrator. The zoning administrator may extend the original abatement period, upon the filing of an application for extension of abatement in accordance with this chapter demonstrating reasonable need, in the following circumstances: 
1.  If a development review application is pending on the property which is the subject of an abatement order; and 
2.  The maximum total extension period that may be granted by the zoning administrator shall be six months. 
B.  Extensions by planning commission. The planning commission may extend the original abatement period by approving an application for extension of abatement, filed by the applicant in accordance with this chapter, where the applicant demonstrates reasonable need for such extension as set forth in this chapter. 
1.  To receive such extension consideration, the property owner shall request an extension in writing on forms prepared for that purpose, no later than ten days prior to the expiration of the abatement period as set forth in this chapter, including a full explanation of the reason why the extension should be granted. 
2.  Applications for extension of abatement shall be filed with the secretary of the planning commission. The secretary of the planning commission, upon receipt of a timely application, including the fee as set by resolution of the city council, shall set the matter for hearing before the planning commission and shall cause notice of the time and place of the hearing upon same to be given and shall cause a hearing on such application to be held as specified in Section 18.62.140 of this chapter. Any decision of the planning commission under this section may be appealed to the city council within ten days of issuance of the written notice specified in Section 18.62.140. In the absence of a timely filing of an appeal of the decision of the planning commission to the city council, the decision of the planning commission shall be final and conclusive as of the date of the adoption of the resolution granting or denying extension. Any appeal to the city council shall be heard and decided as set forth in Section 18.62.140. 
(Ord. 2806 § 11(part), 2002)  
18.62.110 - Abatement—Extension findings. 
The following shall constitute the findings for granting an application for extension of abatement. Except for extensions which may be granted by the zoning administrator as set forth in Section 18.62.100A, the hearing body may grant the extension only upon making all of the required findings based upon the evidence presented at the hearing. The applicant shall have the burden of proof to show, by relevant evidence, the existence of facts supporting the conclusion that the findings as set forth below can be made: 
A.  The property owner or applicant or both will suffer severe economic hardship unless an extension of time to abate the nonconformity is granted; 
B.  The severe economic hardship is not the result of actions undertaken voluntarily by the property owner or applicant; 
C.  The property owner and applicant have taken all reasonable and necessary steps to bring the property into conformity or mitigate the effects of its nonconformity within the abatement period permitted; and 
D.  It is not reasonably feasible to relocate the nonconformity, alter the nonconformity, and/or redesign the site layout to conform to current development standards within the abatement period provided by this chapter because of special circumstances applicable to the property involved, such as size, shape, topography, location or surroundings, which make the approval of the application for extension of abatement necessary in order to facilitate a reasonable use of the property involved; and/or. 
E.  As to nonconforming uses only, it is not reasonably feasible to relocate such nonconforming use. 
No extension of abatement may be granted by the hearing body if the property on which the nonconformity does not have access to streets which are adequate in width and pavement type to carry the quantity and quality of traffic generated by the use; or if the continuation of the nonconformity will unreasonably interfere with the use, possession, or enjoyment of surrounding and adjacent properties, or the harm caused by allowing extension of the abatement period outweighs any demonstrated hardship upon the property owner seeking an extension of the abatement period. 
(Ord. 2806 § 11 (part), 2002)  
18.62.120 - Abatement extension conditions. 
The granting of an application for extension of abatement may be conditioned. The purpose of any such conditions shall be to insure that the continued use of the nonconforming use, structure, or site will be in a manner consistent with the public peace, safety, general welfare and the provisions of this title. 
(Ord. 2806 § 11 (part), 2002)  
18.62.130 - Abatement extension—Period of validity. 
A.  An extension of abatement shall be effective for the period specified in the resolution approving the application for extension of abatement or, if no period is so specified, five years. No more than one extension of abatement may be granted, and no abatement period may be extended by more than five years. 
B.  At the end of the extension period established in the resolution approving the application or as provided above, the approval shall expire and shall no longer be of any force and effect and the nonconforming use, structure, or site shall be abated as originally ordered or as required in this chapter. 
C.  To remain valid, any and all conditions of approval of a resolution granting an extension of abatement shall be satisfied within six months of the date of approval. If the work required by any and all conditions of approval of an extension of abatement is not commenced and completed within said six month period, said approval shall expire and shall no longer be of any force and effect and the nonconforming use, structure, or site shall be abated as originally ordered and/or as required by this chapter. 
(Ord. 2806 § 11 (part), 2002)  
18.62.140 - Appeal procedure. 
A.  Where an appeal is permitted in this chapter, such appeal shall be conducted in the manner prescribed in this section. 
B.  An appeal must be submitted in writing within the time prescribed in the Section permitting an appeal. If not appealed within the prescribed time period, then the determination, decision or order shall be deemed final and conclusive. 
C.  Unless other hearing procedures are specifically provided elsewhere in this chapter, the city manager, which shall include his/her designee throughout this section, shall schedule a hearing to be held within fifteen days after the filing of the appeal. Notice of the date, time, and place of the hearing shall be mailed by first class mail, postage prepaid, at least ten days prior thereto, to the person appealing and the property owner(s). 
D.  The hearing officer/body shall determine, after consideration of all evidence presented at a hearing, whether the determination, decision, or order is proper. The decision of the hearing officer/body shall be made within three days of the conclusion of evidence presented at the appeal hearing. Notice of the decision shall be immediately mailed by first class mail to the person appealing and the property owner(s) and shall refer to any further right of appeal under this chapter and/or to the right of that person to seek judicial review of any final decision pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5. Such notice shall identify the specific findings upon which the decision regarding the grant, conditional grant, or denial of the appeal is based. 
(Ord. 2806 § 11 (part), 2002)  
18.62.150 - Exemptions. 
A.  Structures under construction. Any structure or site development may be completed and utilized notwithstanding the subsequent adoption of any regulations contained in this title or any amendment thereof which would have the effect of rendering the use, structure or site nonconforming ("subsequent regulation"), provided that: 
1.  A valid building permit has been issued or a structure for which no building permit is required is under construction prior to the operative date of any subsequent regulation, and 
2.  Construction is timely commenced and completed in accordance with the plans and specifications upon which any such building permit was issued. 
B.  Public Utilities. The provisions of this title concerning the required abatement of nonconforming uses, structures and sites, and the reconstruction of nonconforming structures damaged or destroyed, shall not apply to public utility structures when such pertain directly to the rendering of the service of a utility, such as, but not limited to, electric distribution and transmission substations, communications equipment buildings, reservoirs, water wells and pumps, natural gas storage and metering and valve control stations; nor shall any provision of this chapter be construed or applied so as to prevent the expansion, modernization or replacement of such public utility structures, equipment and features as are used directly for the delivery of or distribution of the service, provided that this section shall not exempt such uses from the provisions of this chapter covering nonconformity of such structures or uses not immediately related to the direct service to consumers, including, but not limited to, warehouses, storage yards, vehicle maintenance facilities, and abandoned structures. 
C.  Public Acquisition. Whenever the area of a lot is reduced below the applicable minimum, or a structure or site would otherwise be rendered nonconforming within the meaning of this title solely because of dedication to, or purchase by, a public agency for any public purpose; or acquisition in eminent domain proceedings, such structure or site shall not be considered to be nonconforming, provided that, if subsequent to such acquisition, the structures located upon such lot are destroyed, determined as of the time applications for permits for such reconstruction or rehabilitation are filed, no reconstruction or rehabilitation shall take place unless compliance is had with all of the provisions of this title and Title 15 of the Whittier Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 2806 § 11 (part), 2002)  
18.62.160 - Cost estimate. 
Estimated costs required to be determined pursuant to this chapter shall be made by the building official within thirty days of application for development review or building permits for the affected property, in the same manner as building permit valuations are established. Any property owner dissatisfied with the cost estimates made by the city may appeal such decision in compliance with Section 18.62.140 within twenty days of the date of the city's issuance of a cost estimate under this section. Along with a written appeal as required in Section 18.62.40, an appellant shall also submit a written appraisal, prepared by an independent, qualified, construction estimator, relating to the value of such structure. The determination of estimated cost may be appealed to the city manager, who shall conduct a hearing in accordance with the provisions of Section 18.62.140 and whose decision shall be deemed final and conclusive. 
(Ord. 2806 § 11 (part), 2002)  
Chapter 18.64 - YARDS AND LOTS 
 
18.64.010 - Yard requirements generally. 
Except as expressly permitted in this title, every required yard shall be open and unobstructed from the ground to the sky. No yard required for one lot shall be considered as providing a required yard for another lot. 
(Prior code § 9360)  
18.64.020 - Intrusions permitted in required yards. 
The following intrusions and no others may project into any required yard area, but in no case shall such intrusion extend more than forty percent of the width of the required yard or four feet whichever is the lesser unless located in the rear one-third of the lot and except as provided in this title: 
A.  Cornices, eaves, belt courses, sills, buttresses or other similar architectural features; 
B.  Fireplace structures; 
C.  Stairways, balconies, and fire escapes; 
D.  Uncovered porches and platforms; 
E.  Planter boxes or masonry planters; 
F.  Guard railings for safety protection around ramps; 
G.  Bay windows; and 
H.  Water heater enclosures. 
(Ord. 2746 § 3, 1999: Ord. 2610 § 1(Q), 1993: prior code § 9363)  
18.64.030 - Front yard depth. 
The depth of the required front yard on lots facing directly upon the arc of a cul-de-sac shall be measured on an arc parallel to the front property line comprising the arc of the cul-de-sac and being a distance therefrom of the required front-yard depth as prescribed for each zone. 
(Prior code § 9364)  
18.64.040 - Side yards on combined lots. 
When the common boundary line separating two contiguous lots is covered by a building or permitted group of buildings, such lots shall be deemed to be a single lot and the yard area requirements in this title shall apply accordingly. 
(Prior code § 9361)  
18.64.050 - Open corner area on certain lots. 
Corner and reversed corner lots shall maintain, for safety vision purposes, a triangular area within which no building, structure, tree, fence, shrub or other object higher than forty-two inches above the established grade of the lot shall be permitted or maintained. The triangular area shall be formed by the prolongation of the front and side lot lines separating the lot from the streets; the third side of the triangle shall be a straight line connecting the last two mentioned points which are distant fifteen feet from the intersection of the front and side lot lines. 
(Prior code § 9362)  
18.64.060 - Through lots—Front lot line determination. 
The director shall determine, with regard to through lots, which lot line of the lot shall be deemed for all purposes the front lot line, in the manner set forth in Section 18.50.040. 
(Prior code § 9365)  
18.64.070 - Barbed wire, razor wire, concertina wire and other similar materials. 
Notwithstanding any other section of this code, walls and fences shall not be constructed or maintained in a manner or materials which create a hazard to life, health or safety. Fences and walls made of razor wire, barbed wire, concertina wire, nails, glass and similar materials, including electrified fences, are prohibited and shall not be erected, constructed or maintained. However, fences and walls incorporating barbed wire or razor wire may be permitted based on the circumstances outlined under Sections 18.64.070(F), 18.64.070(G), 18.64.070(H) and 18.64.070(I). 
A.  A nonconforming use shall not be relocated, expanded, enlarged, or increased in intensity in any manner whatsoever unless such activity is approved through the issuance of a conditional use permit as provided by this title. 
B.  The use of barbed wire, razor wire, electrified fencing material or similar material in or on fences and walls is strictly prohibited within the city except as noted below. 
C.  Any fencing which is a nonconforming use on the date the ordinance codified in this section becomes effective shall be subject to an amortization period of three years commencing on the date the use becomes nonconforming. Any fence and wall which does not meet the standard of this section but which was legally established prior to the adoption of these standards may be maintained provided such fence or wall upon which barbed wire sits is not less than six feet above the ground and is not expanded nor its nonconformance with these standards otherwise increased. Any fence or wall which is destroyed or damaged to the extent of more than fifty percent of its total replacement value shall not be repaired, rebuilt, or reconstructed except in conformance with these standards. 
D.  Upon the conclusion of the amortization period, the owner of the property upon which the nonconforming use is located shall be required to remove the fencing within thirty days thereafter. 
E.  All walls and fences shall be continuously maintained in good repair. The property owner shall be provided thirty days after receiving notice from the city to repair a wall or fence. 
F.  The director of community development, notwithstanding the prohibitions cited within this section and with recognition that no exemption shall be given for the use of concertina wire, nails, glass, or similar materials, including electrified fencing material of any type, may approve through a development review application the construction and maintenance of barbed wire fencing within non-residential zoning classifications in the city, where there is outdoor storage and/or an outdoor display, if the applicant demonstrates and documents that all of the following conditions exist or can be met: 
1.  The fence or wall upon which the barbed wire or razor is placed shall be located at least three feet from any property line abutting the public right-of-way. 
2.  That the barbed wire fencing will be out of plain view from public streets and properties. 
3.  That the fence or wall upon which the barbed or razor wire is placed is no less than six feet above the ground level and the barbed or razor wire does not exceed two feet above the maximum fence and/or wall height permitted for the property. 
4.  The barbed or razor wire shall be supported by brackets attached at a 45 to 90 degree angle to the face of the wall or fence it is placed on (See Figure Nos. 1 and 2). 
  
  
  
5.  If the fence or wall that is topped with barbed or razor wire is located within the front yard, rear yard, or street side, side yard, which is adjacent to the public right-of-way, the property owner shall provide one of the following: 
A.  A minimum three-foot wide (irrigated) landscape planter shall be provided between the property line and the fence or wall. 
B.  An irrigated landscape trellis shall be installed for the purpose of allowing vines or similar plant material to cover the face of the fence or wall topped with barbed or razor wire. 
C.  A wrought iron, ornamental tubular steel fence, or decorative wall shall be installed in lieu of using chain link fencing material to support the barbed or razor wire. 
D.  An alternative fence and/or wall design provided by the property owner may be used with the approval of a minor conditional use permit. However, the property owner must develop an alternative design that is acceptable to the approval authority and demonstrates that there is compelling reason why the development standards listed above cannot be met. 
6.  The property owner can demonstrate that their lot is at a high risk for criminal activity and substantiate the need for barbed or razor wire on their lot by submitting copies of a formal evaluation with recommendation(s) prepared by a professional security consultant. 
G.  Barbed wire or razor wire fencing may be used in any zoning classification within the city for providing security to unmanned public infrastructure facilities, public utility sites, hazardous material storage, and other similar facilities and sites that are subject to homeland security concerns and/or public safety needs (as deemed necessary (in writing) by the chief of police or any federal law enforcement agency) including, but not limited to other storage facilities that may require a greater level of public safety, subject to the following conditions: 
1.  That reasonable efforts shall be taken to minimize the plain view of such barbed wire or razor wire fencing from streets adjacent and other public views to the property; 
2.  That the fence or wall upon which the barbed wire or razor wire is placed is no less than six feet above the ground level; 
3.  Approval of barbed wire or razor wire fencing shall be subject to the prior review and approval of the director of community development through a development review application. 
H.  Barbed wire or razor wire may be used in any nonresidential zoning classification when it is set back a minimum of three feet from any property line and is completely screened by a solid fence along the property line. 
(Ord. 2881 § 2, 2006) 
(Ord. No. 2975, § 1, 9-13-11)  
Chapter 18.66 - DENSITY BONUS PROGRAM 
 
18.66.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter establishes procedures to implement the state's Density Bonus Law as set forth in Government Code Section 65915. The incentives in this chapter are used by the city as a means of meeting its commitment to encouraging the provision of affordable housing to all economic groups living within the City. 
(Ord. 2911 § 1 (part), 2008)  
18.66.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
"Concessions or other incentives" means a reduction in a site development standard or the modification of a zoning code requirement that results in identifiable, financially sufficient, and actual cost reduction; or, approval of nonresidential land uses in conjunction with the housing project if such other land uses will reduce the cost of the housing development and are compatible with the housing project and the existing or planned development in the area where the proposed housing project will be located; or other concession or regulatory incentive that results in identifiable, financially sufficient, and actual cost reduction, as determined by the city in its sole discretion. A concession or other incentive does not include additional density beyond that allowed in this chapter. 
"Density bonus" means an increase in density above the otherwise maximum allowable residential density under this title and the land use element of the general plan as of the date the development application for the project is deemed complete. 
"Development standard" means any site or construction condition that applies to a residential development pursuant to any ordinance, general plan element, specific plan, charter amendment, or other local condition, law, policy, resolution, or regulation. A development standard subject to waiver under this chapter does not include additional density beyond that allowed in this chapter. 
"Director" means the director of the city of Whittier department of community development or his or her designee. 
"Low-income households" means "lower income households" as that term is defined by Section 50079.5 of the Health and Safety Code. 
"Moderate-income households" means "persons and families of low or moderate income" as that term is defined by Section 50093 of the Health and Safety Code. 
"Very low-income households" means "very low-income households" as that term is defined by Section 50105 of the Health and Safety Code. 
(Ord. 2911 § 1 (part), 2008)  
18.66.030 - Applicability. 
The provisions of this chapter apply only to multifamily residential and mixed-use development projects consisting of five or more dwelling units, not including the units granted as a density bonus. 
(Ord. 2911 § 1 (part), 2008)  
18.66.040 - Density bonus allowance. 
The amount of the density bonus to which the applicant is entitled shall vary according to the amount by which the percentage of affordable dwelling units meets the percentage established in the following section. When calculating the number of density bonus units allowed, any fraction of a residential unit shall be counted as a whole unit. An applicant may elect to accept a lesser percentage of density bonus units. An applicant may not seek a density bonus greater than that provided in this chapter or by state law. 
A.  Density Bonus Requirement. Upon request and application of a developer, the city shall grant a density bonus in accordance with this section if the applicant seeks and agrees to construct one of the following: 
1.  At least five percent of the units are dedicated to very low-income households; 
2.  At least ten percent of the units are dedicated to low-income and very low-income households; 
3.  At least ten percent of the units are dedicated to moderate-income households and are available to the general public for sale; or 
4.  A senior citizen housing development as defined by Section 51.3 of the Civil Code. 
B.  Inclusionary units required by Section 18.11.040 and alternatives to inclusionary units allowed by Section 18.11.050 shall not count toward the minimum number of affordable units required by Section 18.66.050(A) to qualify for a concession or other incentive under. 
C.  Calculation of Density Bonus. 
1.  The density bonus for very low-income units shall be calculated in accordance with the following table: 
Increase in Allowable Density for Very
Low-Income Units
Percentage of Very 
Low-Income Units 
Provided Within the 
Development 	Qualified Density 
Bonus Percentage 
Within the 
Development 
5 	20 
6 	22.5 
7 	25 
8 	27.5 
9 	30 
10 	32.5 
11 	35 
 
2.  The density bonus for low-income units shall be calculated as follows: 
Increase in Allowable
Density for Low-Income Units
Percentage of Low- 
Income Units Provided 
Within the 
Development 	Qualified Density 
Bonus Percentage 
Within the 
Development 
10 	20 
11 	21.5 
12 	23 
13 	24.5 
14 	26 
15 	27.5 
16 	29 
17 	30.5 
18 	32 
19 	33.5 
20 	35 
 
3.  The density bonus for moderate-income ownership units shall be calculated as follows: 
Increase in Allowable Density for
Moderate-Income Units
Percentage of 
Moderate-Income 
Units Provided 
Within the 
Development 	Qualified Density 
Bonus Percentage 
Within the 
Development 
10 	5 
11 	6 
12 	7 
13 	8 
14 	9 
15 	10 
16 	11 
17 	12 
18 	13 
19 	14 
20 	15 
21 	16 
22 	17 
23 	18 
24 	19 
25 	20 
26 	21 
27 	22 
28 	23 
29 	24 
30 	25 
31 	26 
32 	27 
33 	28 
34 	29 
35 	30 
36 	31 
37 	32 
38 	33 
39 	34 
40 	35 
 
4.  The density bonus for a senior citizen housing development, as defined by Section 51.3 of the Civil Code, shall be twenty percent. 
5.  In calculating the number of units required for very low-, low-, and moderate-income households, the density bonus units shall not be included. 
D.  Bonuses not Combined. The bonuses that are available under this section shall not be combined. 
(Ord. 2911 § 1 (part), 2008)  
18.66.050 - Concessions and other incentives. 
A.  Concessions and Other Incentives. An applicant who utilizes the density bonus provisions of this chapter may request one or more concessions or other incentives as follows: 
1.  One concession or other incentive for projects that include at least five percent of the units for very low-income households, ten percent of the units for low-income households, or ten percent of the units for moderate-income households when the units are available for sale to the public. 
2.  Two concessions or other incentives for projects that include at least ten percent of the units for very low-income households, twenty percent of the units for low-income households, or twenty percent of the units for moderate-income households when the units are available for sale to the public. 
3.  Three concessions or other incentives for projects that include at least fifteen percent of the units for very low-income households, thirty percent of the units for low-income households, or thirty percent of the units for moderate-income households when the units are available for sale to the public. 
B.  Inclusionary units required by Section 18.11.040 and alternatives to inclusionary units allowed by Section 18.11.050 shall not count toward the minimum number of affordable units required by subsection A of this section to qualify for a concession or other incentive under. 
C.  Procedure. To obtain concessions or other incentives pursuant to this section, an applicant must apply for an affordable housing concession permit on a form approved by the director. The director shall approve any proposed concessions or other incentives subject to the following findings: 
1.  The concession or incentive is required in order for the designated units to be affordable. This finding need not be made for any of the following concessions: 
a.  A twenty percent reduction in the required front yard setback. 
b.  A twenty percent reduction in the required side yard setback. 
c.  A twenty percent reduction in the required rear yard setback. 
d.  A five percent increase in maximum building height. 
e.  A floor area ratio bonus of five percent. 
f.  A ten percent reduction in the minimum required distance between on-site building and structures. 
2.  The concession or incentive would not have a specific adverse impact on public health, public safety, or the physical environment, and would not have an adverse impact on a property that is eligible for or has been listed on any local, state or federal register of historic resources, and for which there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact(s), without rendering the development unaffordable to low- and moderate-income households. A specific adverse impact is a significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions, as they existed on the date the development application was deemed complete by the city. 
(Ord. 2911 § 1 (part), 2008)  
18.66.060 - Waiver of development standards. 
A.  Waiver of Development Standards. If compliance with a development standard would preclude construction of a residential or mixed-use project utilizing a density bonus or concession or incentive, pursuant to this chapter, the applicant may submit a proposal for waiver or reduction of the development standard. The applicant shall show that the waiver or reduction of the development standard is necessary to make the housing units economically feasible. 
B.  Procedure. To obtain a waiver of development standards pursuant to this section, an applicant must apply for a waiver of development standards permit on a form approved by the director. The director shall approve any proposed waiver of development standards subject to the following findings: 
1.  The waiver or reduction in a development standard is required for construction of the development project at the density to which the project is entitled and with all concessions or other incentives approved for the project; and 
2.  The waiver or reduction in a development standard is necessary to make the housing units economically feasible; and 
3.  The waiver or reduction in a development standard will not have a specific adverse impact on public health, public safety, or the physical environment, and will not have an adverse impact on a property that is eligible for or has been listed on any state or federal register of historic resources, and for which there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact, or adverse impact, without rendering the development unaffordable to low- and moderate-income households. 
(Ord. 2911 § 1 (part), 2008)  
18.66.070 - Floor area bonus and concessions for child day-care center. 
A.  Floor Area Bonus or Concession for Inclusion of Child Day-Care Facility. An applicant for a development project that complies with the density bonus requirement of this chapter and that also includes a child day-care center that will be located on the premises of, as part of, or adjacent to, the project may request one additional bonus or concession from among the following: 
1.  Additional net floor area for housing units that is equal to or greater than the net floor area in the child day-care center; or 
2.  A concession that contributes significantly to the economic feasibility of the construction of the child day-care center, in addition to a concession granted for designated dwelling unit. 
B.  Procedure. To obtain a floor area bonus or concession for inclusion of child day-care facility pursuant to this section, an applicant must apply for a child-care bonus or concession permit on a form approved by the director. The director shall approve any proposed bonus or concession or other incentives subject to the following findings: 
1.  The bonus or concession would contribute significantly to the economic feasibility of the construction of the child day-care center; and 
2.  The bonus or concession would not have a specific adverse impact on public health, public safety, or the physical environment, and would not have an adverse impact on a property that is eligible for or has been listed on any state or federal register of historic resources, and for which there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact, or adverse impact, without rendering the development unaffordable to low- and moderate-income households. A specific adverse impact is a significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions, as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete. 
C.  Conditions of Approval. Child-care bonus or concession permits shall be subject to the following conditions: 
1.  The child day-care center shall remain in operation for a period of time that is equal to or longer than the period during which the designated dwelling units are required to be affordable; and 
2.  Of the children who attend the child day-care center, the children of very low-income households, lower income households, or families of moderate income shall equal a percentage that is equal to or greater than the percentage of dwelling units that are required for very low- or low-income households or families of moderate income. 
D.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the director shall not approve any proposed bonus or concession or other incentives for a child day-care facility if there is substantial evidence that the local community already has adequate child care facilities. 
(Ord. 2911 § 1 (part), 2008)  
18.66.080 - Bonus for donation of land. 
A.  Bonus for Donation of Land. An applicant requesting approval of a tentative tract or parcel map or other residential development approval who donates land to the city shall be entitled to a density bonus for the entire development above the density allowable under this title and the land use element of the general plan. 
B.  Requirements for Bonus. The following requirements must be met to be eligible for a density bonus pursuant to this section: 
1.  The applicant shall donate and transfer the land no later than the date of approval of the final subdivision map, parcel map, or residential development application. 
2.  The developable acreage and zoning classification of the land being transferred shall be sufficient to permit construction of units affordable to very low-income households in an amount not less than ten percent of the number of residential units of the proposed development. 
3.  The transferred land shall be at least one acre in size or of sufficient size to permit development of at least forty units, subject to an appropriate general plan designation, appropriately zoned for development as affordable housing, and served by or will be served by adequate public facilities and infrastructure. The land shall have appropriate zoning and development standards to make the development of the affordable units feasible. No later than the date of approval of the final subdivision map, parcel map, or of the residential development, the transferred land shall have all of the permits and approvals, other than concept design review and building permits, necessary for development of the very low-income housing units on the transferred land. 
4.  The transferred land and the affordable units shall be subject to a deed restriction ensuring continued affordability of the units, consistent with Section 18.66.100. 
5.  The land shall be transferred to the city or to a housing developer approved in writing by the city. 
6.  The transferred land shall be within the boundary of the proposed development or, with approval of the director, within one-quarter mile of the boundary of the proposed development. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the director may agree to the transferred land being more than one-quarter mile of the boundary of the proposed development. 
C.  Density Bonus of Up to Thirty-Five Percent. The density bonus for donation of land for very low-income units shall be calculated as follows: 
Increase in Allowable Density for Donation 
Percentage of Very 
Low-Income Units 	Qualified Density 
Bonus Percentage 
Within the 
Development 
10 	15 
11 	16 
12 	17 
13 	18 
14 	19 
15 	20 
16 	21 
17 	22 
18 	23 
19 	24 
20 	25 
21 	26 
22 	27 
23 	28 
24 	29 
25 	30 
26 	31 
27 	32 
28 	33 
29 	34 
30 	35 
 
D.  Bonuses May be Combined. A bonus for the donation of land may be combined with a bonus granted under Section 18.66.040. 
(Ord. 2911 § 1 (part), 2008)  
18.66.090 - Alternative parking standards. 
A.  An applicant that meets the minimum requirements of Section 18.66.040(A) shall be granted, upon request, the following alternative parking requirements: 
Number of Bedrooms 
per Unit 	On-Site Parking 
Spaces per Unit 
1 	1 
2—3 	2 
4 or more 	2.5 
 
B.  If the total number of parking spaces required for the development is other than a whole number, the number shall be rounded up to the next whole number. A development may provide on-site parking through tandem parking or uncovered parking on the project site. 
C.  Except as expressly provided for in this section or state law, all residential development shall comply with the parking requirements and standards found in Chapter 18.48. 
(Ord. 2911 § 1 (part), 2008)  
18.66.100 - Enforcement of affordability. 
A.  Low and Very Low-Income—Covenant for Thirty Years. A covenant or other document satisfactory to the city attorney shall be recorded before issuance of a building permit, which shall ensure that the low- and very low-income density bonus units are at all times rented or sold to, and remain affordable at, the applicable income level for at least thirty years. 
B.  Moderate-Income—Recapture of Financial Interest. A covenant or other document satisfactory to the city attorney shall be recorded before issuance of a building permit, which shall ensure that the moderate-income density bonus units are initially occupied by persons or families at a moderate-income level. Moderate-income units may be offered for subsequent sale to an above-moderate income purchaser; provided that the sale shall result in a recapture by the city, or its designee, of a financial interest in the unit equal to the sum of: 
1.  The difference between the initial moderate income level sales price and the appraised value at the time of the initial sale; and 
2.  A proportionate share of any appreciation. 
C.  Forfeiture of Funds. Any individual who rents a unit in violation of this chapter shall be required to forfeit all rents above the applicable affordable rate; any individual who sells a unit in violation of this chapter shall be required to forfeit all profits from the sale exceeding the difference between the sale price and the applicable affordable sales price. Recovered funds shall be deposited in to the city's affordable housing trust fund. 
(Ord. 2911 § 1 (part), 2008)  
18.66.110 - Administrative procedures. 
The city manager or her/his designee may adopt administrative procedures for implementation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2911 § 1 (part), 2008)  
Chapter 18.67 - TRANSPORTATION DEMAND MANAGEMENT 
 
18.67.010 - Definitions. 
The following words or phrases shall have the following meanings when used in this chapter: 
A.  "Alternative transportation" means the use of modes of transportation other than the single passenger motor vehicle, including but not limited to carpools, vanpools, bus pools, public transit, walking and bicycling. 
B.  "Applicable development" means any development project that is determined to meet or exceed the project size threshold criteria contained in Section 10.68.030 of this chapter. 
C.  "Buspool" means a vehicle carrying sixteen or more passengers commuting on a regular basis to and from work with a fixed route, according to a fixed schedule. 
D.  "Carpool" means a vehicle carrying two to six persons commuting together to and from work on a regular basis. 
E.  "The California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)," a statute that requires all jurisdictions in the State of California to evaluate the extent of environmental degradation posed by proposed development. 
F.  "Developer" shall mean the builder who is responsible for the planning, design and construction of an applicable development project. A developer may be responsible for implementing the provisions of this chapter as determined by the property owner. 
G.  "Development" means the construction or addition of new building square footage. Additions to buildings which existed prior to the adoption of this chapter and which exceed the thresholds defined in Section 10.68.030 shall comply with the applicable requirements but shall not be added cumulatively with existing square footage; existing square footage shall be exempt from these requirements. All calculations shall be based on gross square footage. 
H.  "Employee parking area" means the portion of total required parking at a development used by on-site employees as specified in the city's zoning code. 
I.  "Preferential parking" means parking spaces designated or assigned, through use of a sign or painted space markings for carpool and vanpool vehicles carrying commute passengers on a regular basis that are provided in a location more convenient to a place of employment than parking spaces provided for single occupant vehicles. 
J.  "Property owner" means the legal owner of a development who serves as the lessor to a tenant. The property owner shall be responsible for complying with the provisions of the chapter either directly or by delegating such responsibility as appropriate to a tenant and/or his agent. 
K.  "South Coast Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD)" is the regional authority appointed by the California State Legislature to meet federal standards and otherwise improve air quality in the South Coast Air Basin (the non-desert portions of Los Angeles, Orange, Riverside, and San Bernardino counties). 
L.  "Tenant" means the lessee of facility space at an applicable development project. 
M.  "Transportation Demand Management (TDM)" means the alteration of travel behavior - usually on the part of commuters - through programs of incentives, services, and policies. TDM addresses alternatives to single occupant vehicles such as carpooling and vanpooling, and changes in work schedules that move trips out of the peak period or eliminate them altogether (as is the case in telecommuting or compressed work weeks). 
N.  "Trip reduction" means reduction in the number of work-related trips by single occupant vehicles. 
O.  "Vanpool" means a vehicle carrying seven or more persons commuting together to and from work on a regular basis, usually in a vehicle with a seating arrangement designed to carry seven or fifteen adult passengers, and on a prepaid subscription basis. 
P.  "Vehicle" means any motorized form of transportation, including but not limited to automobiles, vans, buses and motorcycles. 
(Ord. No. 2939, § 1, 11-10-09)  
18.67.020 - Review of transit impacts. 
Prior to approval of any development project for which an Environmental Impact Report (EIR) will be prepared pursuant to the requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) or based on a local determination, regional and municipal fixed-route transit operators providing service to the project shall be identified and consulted with. Projects for which a notice of preparation (NOP) for a draft EIR has been circulated pursuant to the provisions of CEQA prior to the effective date of this chapter shall be exempted from its provisions. The "Transit Impact Review Worksheet", contained in the Los Angeles County Congestion Management Program Manual, or similar worksheets, shall be used in assessing impacts. Pursuant to the provisions of CEQA, transit operators shall be sent a NOP for all contemplated EIRs and shall, as part of the NOP process, be given opportunity to comment on the impacts of the project, to identify recommended transit services or capital improvements which may be required as a result of the project, and to recommend mitigation measures which minimize automobile trips on the CMP network. Impacts and recommended mitigation measures identified by the transit operator shall be evaluated in the draft environmental impact report prepared for the project. Related mitigation measures adopted shall be monitored through the mitigation monitoring requirements of CEQA. 
Phased development projects, development projects subject to a development agreement, or development projects requiring subsequent approvals, need not repeat this process as long as no significant changes are made to the project. It shall remain the discretion of the lead agency to determine when a project is substantially the same and therefore covered by a previously certified EIR. 
(Ord. No. 2939, § 1, 11-10-09)  
18.67.030 - Transportation demand and trip reduction measures. 
A.  Applicability of Requirements. Prior to approval of any development project, the applicant shall make provision for, as a minimum, all of the following applicable transportation demand management and trip reduction measures. 
This chapter shall not apply to projects for which a development application has been deemed "complete" by the city pursuant to Government Code Section 65943, or for which a notice of preparation for a DEIR has been circulated or for which an application for a building permit has been received, prior to the effective date of this chapter. 
All facilities and improvements constructed or otherwise required shall be maintained in a state of good repair. 
B.  Development Standards. 
(1)  Non-residential development of twenty-five thousand square feet or more shall provide the following to the satisfaction of the city: 
A.  A bulletin board, display case, or kiosk displaying transportation information located where the greatest number of employees are likely to see it. Information in the area shall include, but is not limited to, the following: 
1.  Current maps, routes and schedules for public transit serving the site; 
2.  Telephone numbers for referrals on transportation information including numbers for the regional ridesharing agency and local transit operators; 
3.  Ridesharing promotional material supplied by commuter-oriented organizations; 
4.  Bicycle route and facility information, including regional/local bicycle maps and bicycle safety information; 
5.  A listing of facilities available for carpoolers, vanpoolers, bicyclists, transit riders and pedestrians at the site. 
(2)  Non-residential development of fifty thousand square feet or more shall comply with Section 10.68.030(B)(1) above and shall provide all of the following measures to the satisfaction of the city: 
A.  Not less than ten percent of employee parking area shall be located as close as is practical to the employee entrance(s), and shall be reserved for use by potential carpool/vanpool vehicles, without displacing handicapped and customer parking needs. This preferential carpool/vanpool parking area shall be identified on the site plan upon application for building permit, to the satisfaction of the city. A statement that preferential carpool/vanpool spaces for employees are available and a description of the method for obtaining such spaces must be included on the required transportation information board. Spaces will be signed/striped as demand warrants; provided that at all times at least one space for projects of fifty thousand square feet to one hundred thousand square feet and two spaces for projects over one hundred thousand square feet will be signed/striped for carpool/vanpool vehicles. 
B.  Preferential parking spaces reserved for vanpools must be accessible to vanpool vehicles. When located within a parking structure, a minimum vertical interior clearance of seven feet two inches shall be provided for those spaces and access ways to be used by such vehicles. Adequate turning radii and parking space dimensions shall also be included in vanpool parking areas. 
C.  Bicycle racks or other secure bicycle parking shall be provided to accommodate four bicycles per the first fifty thousand square feet of non-residential development and one bicycle per each additional fifty thousand square feet of non-residential development. Calculations which result in a fraction of 0.5 or higher shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number. A bicycle parking facility may also be a fully enclosed space or locker accessible only to the owner or operator of the bicycle, which protects the bike from inclement weather. Specific facilities and location (e.g., provision of racks, lockers, or locked room) shall be to the satisfaction of the city. 
(3)  Non-residential development of one hundred thousand square feet or more shall comply with Sections 10.68.030(B)(1) and 10.68.030(B)(2) above, and shall provide all of the following measures to the satisfaction of the city: 
A.  A safe and convenient zone in which vanpool and carpool vehicles may deliver or board their passengers. 
B.  Sidewalks or other designated pathways following direct and safe routes from the external pedestrian circulation system to each building in the development. 
C.  If determined necessary by the city to mitigate the project impact, bus stop improvements must be provided. The city will consult with the local bus service providers in determining appropriate improvements. When locating bus stops and/or planning entrances, entrances must be designed to provide safe and efficient access to nearby transit station/stops. 
D.  Safe and convenient access from the external circulation system to bicycle parking facilities on-site. 
(Ord. No. 2939, § 1, 11-10-09)  
18.67.040 - Monitoring. 
Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, final building permit, final inspection approval, and/or business license for any development, the development project shall comply with Section 10.68.030 above and the city engineer and/or city traffic engineer shall inspect and verify the same. 
(Ord. No. 2939, § 1, 11-10-09)  
18.67.050 - Enforcement. 
Enforcement of uses not in compliance with this chapter shall comply with Chapter 18.62 (Non-conforming Uses) of the city of Whittier Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2939, § 1, 11-10-09)  
Division II. - Signs  
Chapter 18.68 - OUTDOOR ADVERTISING STRUCTURES 
Sections: 
 
18.68.010 - Purpose. 
A.  In enacting the provisions of Sections 18.68.010 through 18.68.030, the city council has determined that outdoor advertising structures: 
1.  Are, or may be, incompatible with the surrounding and adjacent uses resulting in a diminution in the value of both improved and unimproved adjacent properties; and 
2.  Require, or may require, the provision of municipal services disproportionate to the tax revenues therefrom; and 
3.  Impair, or may impair, the desirability of adjacent residential and commercial areas, thereby undermining, to some degree, the social and economic stability of the city; and 
4.  Discourage, or may discourage, the location of business and industry within the city, impeding the economic development of the community; and 
5.  Prevent, or may prevent, optimum land utilization, thereby impeding community planning and renewal objectives; and 
6.  Impose, or may impose, social gains resulting therefrom. 
B.  Accordingly, the provisions of Sections 18.68.010 through 18.68.030 are necessary, and are required to protect the public interest, convenience and necessity, in order to eliminate, insofar as possible, the problems above referred to. 
(Prior code § 9370)  
18.68.020 - Outdoor advertising structure defined. 
For the purpose of this chapter, "outdoor advertising structure" means and includes any sign structure which is designed and maintained for the primary purpose of soliciting public support, or directing public attention, to the sale, lease, hire or use of any object, product, service or function the sale, hiring, or use of which is not involved in the primary or principal use of the lot upon which such sign structure is located. Outdoor advertising structure does not mean or include any of the signs referred to in Chapters 18.70 through 18.76, nor shall the definition include any sign erected and maintained by any public agency or political subdivision of the state. 
(Prior code § 9371)  
18.68.030 - Construction prohibited—Abatement of existing signs. 
Notwithstanding any provision of this code to the contrary, no person shall erect, construct or maintain, or permit the erection, construction or maintenance of any outdoor advertising structure on any real property within the city. All outdoor advertising structures existing as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section shall be abated, by removal thereof, within a period of five years, from and after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section. Such abatement shall be processed in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 18.78. 
(Prior code § 9372)  
Chapter 18.72 - ON-PREMISES SIGNS 
Sections: 
 
18.72.010 - Purpose. 
The city of Whittier recognizes and strongly supports the needs of merchants and property owners to identify their businesses through signage and other means of advertisement. 
The city further recognizes that size, placement, number, and design of signs significantly influences the general perception of both the community's visual environment and its economic health. 
The purpose of Chapters 18.73 through 18.78 and this chapter is to balance the advertising needs of merchants with the city's twin goals of improvement of the aesthetic environment within its commercial corridors and of protecting the city's positive image by providing for the following: 
A.  Enhancement of the aesthetic perception of the community and enhancement of the community's property values; 
B.  Preservation and advancement of the quality of life for city residents; 
C.  Promotion of the use of signs that create a high quality visual environment; 
D.  Regulation of signs to ensure designs that are proportionate in scale to surrounding structures and commercial districts; 
E.  Elimination of visual clutter while providing reasonable opportunities for adequate identification of businesses and the goods and services they offer; and 
F.  Regulation to direct the proper design and location of signs to reduce or eliminate potential hazards and promote the safe movement of vehicles and pedestrians throughout the city. 
(Ord. 2900 § 3 (part), 2007)  
18.72.020 - Definitions. 
In addition to the definitions contained in Chapters 18.06 and 18.76, the following words and phrases have the meanings set out in this section, unless it is apparent from the context that another meaning is intended: 
1.  "Abandoned sign" means a sign remaining in place or not maintained for a period of not less than ninety days, whose use has ceased, or which no longer advertises or identifies an ongoing business, product, or service available on the business premises where the sign is located. 
2.  "A-frame sign" means a sign typically hinged at the top, or attached in a similar manner, and widened at the bottom to form a shape similar to the letter "A." 
3.  "Accessory sign" means any sign that is not a main sign (as defined in this section), and which relates to the same business, activity, or event as the main sign. Accessory signs cannot have an aggregate background sign area that exceeds forty percent of the aggregate area of a property's main sign(s). Accessory signs cannot exceed sixty percent of the height of the main sign to which they relate, nor sixty percent of the length of the main sign to which they relate. An accessory sign's background sign area cannot be in addition to the aggregate allowable background sign area for that lot. The limitations imposed by this provision are to ensure that no sign on any property is larger, taller, and/or longer than that property's main sign(s). 
4.  Alteration. See "Modification." 
5.  Amortization Period. See definition in Section 18.78.010(B). 
6.  "Animated sign" means a sign, or a portion of a sign, an integral part of which is in action or motion, or which flashes or changes color electronically. "Animated sign" does not include revolving signs or readerboard signs. 
7.  "Awning" means an appendage extending from the exterior wall of a building, typically used for shading, and composed of nonrigid materials (except for the structural framework). 
8.  "Awning sign" means a sign painted on, or attached to, the surface of an awning. 
9.  "Background sign area" means the area included within the outer dimensions of the sign face containing lettering, writing, representation, or logo, together with any frame, structural, or decorative trim forming an integral part of the display and measured in square feet. Support structures for freestanding signs are not included in the sign area except when designed in a manner to further display logos, text, or lettering pertaining to the subject business. For wall or projecting signs that do not contain a clear and/or rectangular border, the background sign area is calculated by enclosing the entire sign within two sets of parallel lines. 
10.  "Balloon string" means an arrangement of one or more balloons, with or without any text, which are inflated with air or helium and tethered to a fixed location intended to draw attention to a specific location. 
11.  "Banner" means a sign fabricated of plastic, cloth, or similar material attached to a building. 
12.  "Can sign" means a sign constructed of a solid cabinet that is not sculpted to the shape of its contents. 
13.  "Canopy" means a structural or ornamental roof-like appendage attached to a building, including roof overhangs, marquees, and awnings. 
14.  "Canopy sign" means a sign attached beneath or placed upon the structural projection or canopy of a building. 
15.  "Changeable-copy sign" means a sign which is characterized by changeable copy. 
16.  "Channel letter" means an individual sign can for each letter of sign copy. 
17.  "Copy" means any written words, letters, symbols, emblems, designs, figures, and logos used to attract attention to, or identify, a land use. 
18.  "Design review board" means the design review board of the city of Whittier, as provided for in Chapter 2.12 of the Whittier Municipal Code. 
19.  "Directional sign" means on-premises, freestanding, ground, wall, projecting, or awning signs designed and used to guide or direct pedestrian or vehicular traffic to a particular location or business. 
20.  "Director" means the director of community development for the city of Whittier. "Director" shall also include his or her designee. 
21.  Facade, Primary. "Primary facade" means a building facade that faces a public street. 
22.  Facade, Secondary. "Secondary facade" means a building facade that contains a public entrance, but which does not face a public street. 
23.  Fair and Just Compensation—Commercial Signs. See definition in Section 18.78.010(G). 
24.  "Festoon" means decorative material or bunting typically attached to a freestanding light standard, used as a means to draw attention to a business. 
25.  "Flag (commercial)" means any fabric, banner, or bunting used as a means of advertising, which is attached to a building or pole. 
26.  "Freestanding sign" means a sign installed on the ground and detached from any building or wall. Freestanding signs include, but are not limited to, monument, pylon, and pole signs. 
27.  "Height" means the greatest vertical distance measured from the finished grade of the sidewalk or top of a curb, whichever is less, to the top of a sign, a sign structure, or advertising display. 
28.  "Human advertisement" means any person who is located anywhere within the city, and whose intent is to advertise a business or service, by way of his or her actions, including but not limited to, by holding a temporary sign, wearing a costume, or wearing body paint. 
29.  Illegal Sign. See definition in Section 18.78.010(H). 
30.  "Illuminated sign" means a sign which uses an internal or external source of light in order to make readable its copy. 
31.  "Inflatable character" means an inflatable, balloon-like character, character representation, logo, or other design, generally tethered to the ground or to the roof of a structure. 
32.  "Institutional use" means a facility supporting a public service such as a church or other place of worship; an educational institution (public or private); a hospital; and/or a center for public gathering, including any facility used for sporting events. 
33.  "Logo" means a visual symbol, representation, or character identifying the business or service provided, which may be all or a portion of the sign. 
34.  "Main sign" means a permanent sign affixed to the wall of a building or constructed upon the ground, including but not limited to freestanding, wall, canopy, awning, and projecting signs. 
35.  "Maintenance" means replacement of copy, change of color, maintenance, or repair made to a sign. Any change in location or structure is beyond the scope of maintenance for the purpose of these provisions (see Modification). 
36.  "Master sign program" means a comprehensive signage plan specifying the overall sign design, location, placement, and sizes of all signs proposed for a commercial center, as specified under Section 18.75.020 of the Whittier Municipal Code. 
37.  "Modification" means any change in location or structure of a sign. 
38.  "Monument sign" means a freestanding sign designed with its horizontal dimension greater than its vertical dimension and supported by a pedestal base. 
39.  "Mural (commercial)" means a commercial mural is defined as artwork applied to and made an integral part of an exterior wall of a building, public or private, and which directs attention to a business, commodity, industry, or other commercial activity sold, offered, or conducted on the premises upon which such sign is located. 
40.  "Neon lighting and sign" means any electric gas tube lighting and any sign containing argon, neon, krypton, helium, or xenon. 
41.  Nonconforming Signs. See definition in Section 18.78.010(I). 
42.  "On-premises signs" means signs that direct attention to a business, commodity, industry, or other commercial activity sold, offered, or conducted on the premises upon which such sign is located. 
For the purposes of Chapters 18.73 through 18.78 and this chapter, all signs on private property that display noncommercial messages or designs are considered on-premises signs, irrespective of where they are placed. 
43.  "Off-premises signs" means signs that direct attention to a business, commodity, industry, or other commercial activity sold, offered, or conducted elsewhere than on the premises upon which such sign is located. 
44.  "Pennant" means a flag, string of flags, or similar objects used as a means to draw attention to a business, commodity, industry, or other commercial activity. 
45.  "Permanent sign" means and includes all signs referred to in Chapters 18.73 through 18.78 and this chapter, except temporary signs. 
46.  "Pole sign" means a freestanding sign supported by one or more structural columns devoid of architectural detail and lacking integration into the sign background and face. 
47.  "Planning division" means the planning division of the city of Whittier's community development department. 
48.  "Portable sign" means any sign not permanently attached to the ground or to a building. Such signs shall include, but not be limited to, A-frame or sandwich signs, a sign on wheels, a sign that leans against a structure or vehicle, and any other sign that can be moved readily. 
49.  "Projecting sign" means a sign affixed to a building facade, placed at an angle perpendicular to the building's exterior wall, or bisecting the corner of a building. 
50.  "Promotional sign" means a sign, in addition to a permanent sign, installed on a temporary basis and used to promote a special event or product available at the site on which the sign is located. 
51.  "Pylon sign" means a freestanding sign designed with its vertical dimension greater than its horizontal dimension and supported by a single pedestal base or architecturally integrated support posts. 
52.  "Readerboard" means a sign containing, in whole or in part, electrical devices allowing for changing copy, text, or content. Electric time and temperature signs are not considered a readerboard. 
53.  "Roof sign" means any sign that is placed upon or above a roof of a building, and which is attached to the same, not to include signs mounted on the face of a parapet. 
54.  "Sculpted cabinet sign" means a single channel sign cabinet that follows the contours of the sign copy. 
55.  "Sign/sign structure/display" means any writing (including letter, word, or numeral), pictorial presentation (including illustration or decoration), emblem (including device, symbol or trademark), flag (including banner or pennant) or any other device, figure, or similar character which: 
A.  Is a structure or any part thereof, or is attached to, painted on, or in any other manner represented on a building, other structure or device; and 
B.  Is used to announce, direct attention to, or advertise; and 
C.  Is visible from the outside of a building. 
56.  "Sign placement area" means the largest flat and uninterrupted wall plane of either a primary or secondary facade, not including windows. 
57.  "Sign plan" means a completed application for sign development review containing those items listed under Section 18.75.010 of the Whittier Municipal Code. 
58.  Street Frontage, Primary. "Primary street frontage" means the linear dimension of the property line or lot line adjacent to a public street. For lots with more than one street frontage, the primary street frontage is the property line adjacent to the widest public street. 
59.  Street Frontage, Secondary. "Secondary street frontage" means the linear dimension of a street frontage other than the primary street frontage. 
60.  "Temporary sign" means any sign subject to a time limitation or used for a limited time period or purpose; provided, that temporary signs need not be attached to, painted on, or in any other manner represented on a building, other structure or device. "Temporary signs" include promotional signs. 
61.  "Time and temperature sign" means a sign which presents time and temperature information. 
62.  "Vehicle-mounted sign" means a sign attached to, placed within, or placed atop a stationary vehicle for the purpose of providing signage for a fixed use. 
For the purposes of these provisions, a vehicle-mounted sign does not include a sign painted, affixed, etched, or magnetically attached to the door or side of the vehicle, and the vehicle is used in conjunction with the business to which the advertising, e.g., regular use for delivery of business products or obtaining supplies; provided, such a sign must not be attached in a manner that renders the vehicle, or a door, window, hood, trunk, or tailgate of the vehicle unmovable or unusable, or so as to violate any provision of the California Vehicle Code; and provided, the sign is not attached in a manner that renders it unsafe or in danger of detaching. 
63.  "Wall sign" means a sign affixed to or painted on the facade of a building with the sign face parallel to the facade, and which does not project more than twelve inches from the building wall. 
64.  "Window" means a glassed area enclosed within a wooden or metal frame set or affixed in the wall or door of a building. 
65.  "Window sign" means any sign placed upon window glazing or within three feet inside a window, which is visible from the building's exterior. 
(Ord. 2900 § 3 (part), 2007) 
(Ord. No. 2932, § 13, 8-11-09; Ord. No. 3054 , § 12, 8-9-16)  
18.72.030 - Applicability. 
A.  The provisions of Chapters 18.73 through 18.78 and this chapter apply to any on-premises sign, sign structure, or display erected, constructed, attached, affixed, or altered on any private property after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, except within the Uptown Whittier specific plan. Only the signs permitted in the Uptown Whittier specific plan adopted by Resolution No. 5910, as amended from time to time, are allowed on lots within the Uptown Whittier specific plan area. 
B.  The provisions of Chapters 18.73 through 18.78 and this chapter do not apply to outdoor advertising structures (billboards), as defined and regulated by Chapter 18.68 of the Whittier Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 2900 § 3 (part), 2007)  
18.72.040 - Exempt signs. 
Any sign located entirely within a building and not within three feet of a window, and which is not visible from the exterior of the building, is exempt from the requirements of Chapters 18.73 through 18.78 and this chapter. 
(Ord. 2900 § 3 (part), 2007)  
18.72.050 - Substitution clause. 
Any sign authorized under Chapters 18.73 through 18.78 and this chapter can contain noncommercial copy in lieu of any other copy. Signs containing noncommercial speech are subject to the same time, place, and manner regulations as commercial signs, as regulated by Chapters 18.73 through 18.78 and this chapter. 
(Ord. 2900 § 3 (part), 2007)  
18.72.060 - Prohibited signs. 
Construction, installation, or placement of the following types of signs after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter is prohibited: 
A.  Pole signs; 
B.  Balloon strings; 
C.  Roof signs; 
D.  Vehicle-mounted signs; 
E.  Animated signs; 
F.  Signs that produce smoke, sound, or other emissions; 
G.  Any sign containing fluorescent colors; 
H.  Can signs. 
(Ord. 2900 § 3 (part), 2007)  
18.72.070 - State and federal requirements. 
The provisions in Chapters 18.73 through 18.78 and this chapter do not excuse, prevent, materially alter, or restrict any signage requirements under any California or federal statutes. Any provisions in Chapters 18.73 through 18.78 and this chapter that are inconsistent or in conflict with state or federal law, are preempted. 
(Ord. 2900 § 3 (part), 2007)  
Chapter 18.73 - OFF-PREMISES SIGNS—SIGNS IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY—HUMAN ADVERTISEMENTS 
 
18.73.010 - Off-premises signs prohibited. 
A.  All permanent off-premises signs are prohibited in the city of Whittier. 
B.  All temporary off-premises signs are prohibited in the city of Whittier, except as provided in Section 18.73.030. 
(Ord. 2900 § 4 (part), 2007)  
18.73.020 - Signs in the public right-of-way. 
Except as provided in Section 18.73.030, no private person, group, or entity may place any type of sign, temporary or permanent, or any human advertisement, in the public right-of-way. 
(Ord. 2900 § 4 (part), 2007)  
18.73.030 - Exceptions—Temporary directional signs. 
A.  The following temporary signs may be placed in the public right-of-way, without obtaining a permit: signs for any business that provides goods or services that meet one or more of the following criteria: (1) the business is of a transitory or temporary nature; (2) the business does not have a fixed place of business or the goods or services themselves cannot practically be viewed and/or sold out of one business location or any business location. 
B.  Before a business may place its signs in the public right-of-way pursuant to this section, the director must make a finding, in accordance with the procedures in Section 18.73.040, that a particular type of business satisfies the criteria in subsection A of this section. 
C.  Without a prior finding by the director, temporary directional signs for the following goods and services are deemed to satisfy the criteria for the exception in subsection A above: 
1.  Real estate directional signs, directing to properties that are for sale or for rent. 
2.  Yard sale directional signs, including garage sales and estate sales, directing where such sales are to occur. 
D.  Temporary directional signs in the public right-of-way are subject to all of the following limitations: 
1.  Signs shall be temporary signs, and will not be permanently affixed to or in the public right-of-way, but may be anchored or weighed down to or in the public right-of-way to prevent them from falling or being blown into the street or sidewalk. 
2.  Only directional signs are allowed, that is, the purpose of the sign is to indicate in which direction potential buyers or customers should proceed to locate the goods or services. 
3.  Temporary directional signs shall only be placed in landscaped parkways, and shall not be placed on the sidewalk or in the center street median. 
4.  No signs shall be placed on utility poles, light or traffic light poles, traffic signs or traffic sign poles, or street trees. 
5.  No more than seven signs per property for sale or rent, and no more than four signs per yard sale, may be temporarily placed in the public right-of-way at any one time. 
6.  A distance of five hundred feet or more is required between individual temporary directional signs on the same street, which purpose is to direct persons to a particular address or property. This limitation does not apply to signs that pertain to different properties. 
7.  The background sign area shall be no larger than three feet by four feet. 
8.  All signs shall not exceed five feet in height, measured from the highest street grade in contact with the sign to the top of the sign. 
9.  Real estate signs directing persons to a particular property shall be placed in the public right-of-way only during the hours that an open house is occurring at that property, and at which the seller or his/her representative is present. 
10.  Yard sale and estate sale signs must be removed at the conclusion of the sale to which they refer. Such signs may not be placed in the public right-of-way any earlier than the Thursday preceding the sale, and no sooner than forty-eight hours prior to the sale to which they refer. 
11.  No signs shall be placed so as to obstruct pedestrians' and motorists' view of signs erected by a local, state, or federal governmental agency, including but not limited to traffic signs, public directional signs, parking signs, and street address signs. 
12.  No signs shall be placed so as to obstruct or hinder sidewalk or street access by pedestrians and vehicles. 
13.  No signs shall be placed so as to obstruct ingress and egress to any public or private property. 
14.  Temporary directional signs shall only be placed on the public right-of-way Thursday through Sunday for a maximum of eight consecutive hours on each day. 
15.  Temporary directional signs shall not be designed or constructed to cause undue distraction to motorists. For example, temporary signs in the public right-of-way shall not be illuminated, either internally or externally, shall not have flashing lights, shall not have any moving parts, and shall not generate any source sounds (including radio waves), and shall not release steam or smoke. 
16.  Any other reasonable restrictions, or modifications to the above restrictions, which the director finds are necessary to further the purposes of this code, consistent with the type of sign or business. 
E.  This section is subject to the substitution clause articulated in Section 18.72.050 of this code. 
(Ord. 2900 § 4 (part), 2007)  
18.73.040 - Human advertisements. 
All human advertisement is prohibited in the city of Whittier where such advertisement is intended to, or does in fact, attract the attention of passing motorists to a business or service. 
(Ord. 2900 § 4 (part), 2007)  
18.73.050 - Procedure—Exception and appeal. 
A.  The director must make the determination of whether a business falls within the exception in Section 18.73.030(A) within fifteen business days of receipt of a written request by the sign's owner for such determination. The director shall notify the applicant of his or her decision forthwith by U.S. mail. 
B.  In the event that the director denies the request, or fails to make a determination within the time prescribed, the applicant may appeal the director's decision in writing to the city manager, who shall review all relevant evidence relating to the appeal. The city manager shall make a determination within ten business days of receipt of the appeal. The city manager shall notify the applicant of the determination forthwith by U.S. mail. 
C.  In the event that the city manager denies the request, or fails to make a determination within the time prescribed, the applicant may appeal the city manager's decision in writing to the city council, which shall conduct a hearing on the matter within thirty days of receipt of the request. Notice of the time and place of the hearing before the city council shall be given by U.S. mail. At the hearing, the city council shall conduct a de novo review of all relevant evidence relating to the appeal and shall not be bound by the formal rules of evidence. The city council shall make a determination within fifteen business days of the hearing. The city council shall notify the applicant of the determination forthwith by U.S. mail. The city council's determination is final. The time for a challenge to the city council's decision in a court of law is governed by California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8. Notice of the city council's decision shall include citation to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8. 
(Ord. 2900 § 4 (part), 2007)  
Chapter 18.75 - ON-PREMISES SIGN PERMIT REQUIREMENTS AND APPLICATION PROCEDURES 
 
18.75.010 - Permit required. 
A.  No construction, erection, installation, relocation, or alteration of any permanent on-premises sign is permitted prior to obtaining the applicable permit. 
B.  Any individual or business must obtain any and all applicable permits and/or approvals that may be required by other provisions of this code, including but not limited to building permits and electrical permits. 
C.  The following table outlines the type of sign, review procedure, and approval authority: 
Table 1 — Review Procedures 
Sign Type 	Review Procedure 	Approval Authority 
Banners, flags, portable signs, similar displays 	Sign plan review 	Director of community development 
Banners, inflatable characters, and similar sign types for outdoor display uses only 	Promotional sign program reviewed on an annual basis 	Director of community development 
Permanent window signs 	Sign plan review 	Director of community development 
For development with less than 3 tenants: Walls signs, (including painted wall signs), projecting, awning, and freestanding signs in all zones 	Sign plan review 	Director of community development 
For development with 3 or more tenants: Walls signs, (including painted wall signs), projecting, awning, and freestanding signs in all zones 	Sign plan review and compliance with master sign program 	Director of community development 
Signs included in projects requiring development review 	Sign plan review within development review application 	Director of community development 
Signs included in projects requiring a CUP 	Sign plan review within CUP application 	Planning commission 
 
1 The design review board is the approval authority for a master sign program. 
D.  Application Requirements. The following information must be submitted for all sign plan review applications: 
1.  A scaled site plan indicating location of all signs (existing and proposed); 
2.  Elevations indicating placement of all proposed signs, as well as color photographs no smaller than four inches by six inches clearly showing the elevation and placement of all existing signs; 
3.  Written descriptions of proposed colors, font styles, materials, fabrication methods, and letter sizes; 
4.  Any other sign permits issued and/or revoked by the city to the applicant in the three years prior to the permit application, and the type of sign for each such permit; and 
5.  The address where the proposed sign will be located, including the assessor's parcel number. 
E.  Permit Not Required. No permit is required for: (1) the changing of advertising copy or message on a painted or printed sign, or (2) replacing copy in signs specifically designed for the use of replaceable copy, or (3) maintenance of the sign. 
(Ord. 2900 § 5 (part), 2007) 
(Ord. No. 2932, § 14, 8-11-09; Ord. No. 3054 , § 13, 8-9-16)  
18.75.020 - Master sign program—Multi-tenant properties. 
A.  Permits for new signs, or permits for modifications to existing signs, at both existing or proposed commercial centers containing three or more tenants require submission of a master sign program to the planning division for review and approval by the design review board. All individual signs within a master sign program must conform to all applicable standards set within this chapter. 
B.  Each master sign program application must provide the following information: 
1.  Overall sign design, location, placement, and sizes of all signs proposed within the center; 
2.  Fully-dimensioned and detailed site and elevation plans, colored renderings, and written descriptions of each individual proposed sign; 
3.  Each master sign program shall contain the permitted colors, letter, and font designs, sizes, number, and locations of signs and shall be accompanied by colors and materials board. Approved master sign programs will be kept by the planning division and used in the review of any and all sign applications made by the owner or tenants of the subject property; 
4.  For any application involving the revision or addition to a master sign program, the applicant must submit a new master sign program application to include details of the proposed revision as well as a mailing list of the current tenants at the subject site; 
5.  The application must list whether the applicant has other sign permits that were issued or revoked in the three years prior to the year of the permit application. If the application lists such other permits, the list shall include the type of sign for each permit; and 
6.  The application must include the address where the proposed sign will be located, including the assessor's parcel number. 
(Ord. 2900 § 5 (part), 2007) 
(Ord. No. 2932, § 15, 8-11-09; Ord. No. 3054 , § 14, 8-9-16)  
18.75.030 - Permit—Decision to grant or deny. 
A.  The planning division must grant, conditionally grant, or deny an application for a permit under this chapter. 
1.  The planning division must grant a completed sign application that conforms with all applicable provisions in the Whittier Municipal Code for conforming signs, and all applicable planning and building permits have been validly obtained for the property upon which the sign will be erected. 
2.  An application may be granted conditioned upon the modification of the sign plan or master sign plan so as to conform to these provisions, and/or conditioned upon obtaining any other applicable permits for the property upon which the sign will be erected. 
3.  An application will be denied under the following conditions. 
a.  The submitted sign plan or master sign plan provides for signage that exceeds the total allowable background sign area for the property, or one or more of the proposed signs does not conform with the provisions of this chapter; and the applicant has not modified the sign plan or master sign plan to conform with the planning division's guidelines and these provisions. 
b.  The applicant has failed to obtain or maintain all required city, county, and state licenses and permits applicable to and required for the use of the property. 
c.  The applicant has made material misrepresentations or has been intentionally misleading with respect to the requirements of Section 18.75.010(D) or 18.75.020(B). 
d.  The applicant has been convicted of, or has pled guilty or nolo contendere to, violating any of the provisions in Chapters 18.72 through 18.78 (or the earlier enacted version of these provisions) within the twelve months preceding the current application. 
B.  1.  The completeness of an application is determined by the director within twenty-one calendar days of submission to the planning division. If the director determines that the application is not complete, the director must notify the applicant in writing that the application is not complete and the reasons therefor, including any additional information necessary to render the application complete. Such writing shall be deposited in the U.S. mail, postage prepaid, immediately upon determination that the application is incomplete. 
2.  Within twenty-one calendar days following the receipt of an amended application or supplemental information, the director must determine whether the application is complete. If an amended application is not filed with the city within fifteen days of the date of the notice to the applicant that the application is incomplete, then the application is deemed withdrawn. 
C.  The director, planning commission or design review board —as applicable—must consider the application and issue a decision within sixty days of the determination of a complete application for a sign plan review, or within sixty days of the determination of a complete application for a master sign program. 
D.  The director's planning commission's, or design review board's decision must be hand-delivered or mailed to the applicant forthwith. 
E.  The applicant may request additional time beyond that provided for in this chapter or may request a continuance regarding any decision or consideration by the city of a pending application. Extensions of time sought by applicants are not to be considered delay on the part of the city, or constitute failure by the city to provide for prompt decisions on applications. 
F.  Failure by the city to render a decision within the time frames established in any part of this chapter is deemed a grant of the permit application. 
(Ord. 2900 § 5 (part), 2007) 
(Ord. No. 2932, §§ 16, 17, 8-11-09; Ord. No. 3054 , §§ 15, 16, 8-9-16)  
18.75.040 - Permit—Appeal of decision to city council. 
A.  1.  A decision by the director, planning commission, or design review board, as applicable, to conditionally grant, deny, or revoke a sign permit may be appealed to the city council. The applicant must submit a written request for an appellate hearing by the city council within thirty days of the date the city's decision is hand-delivered or mailed, whichever is earliest. The written request must be accompanied by a processing fee, as determined by resolution. A schedule of fees is available at City Hall. Failure to timely appeal a decision to the city council, or submission of a written request without the processing fee, is deemed a waiver of the right to appeal the decision. 
2.  The city council must notify the applicant of an appellate hearing date within ten days of receipt of the written request and processing fee. The hearing date must be within twenty days of the date of mailing of the notice for the hearing. 
B.  Content and Conduct of Hearing. 
1.  Rights of the Parties. The parties (the appellant and the city) have the right to: (i) be present at the hearing; (ii) represent themselves or be represented by counsel; (iii) testify in their own behalf; (iv) call and examine witnesses, regardless of which party first called the witness to testify; and (v) rebut any adverse evidence. 
2.  Admissibility of Evidence. The city council will hear all evidence that is relevant and material to the issues raised by the appeal. Any relevant evidence is admissible if it is the type of evidence on which responsible persons are accustomed to rely on in the conduct of serious affairs, regardless of any common law or statutory rule of evidence that might make admission improper over objection in civil actions in courts of competent jurisdiction in the state of California. All witnesses must be sworn in by the recording secretary prior to giving testimony. 
Relevant hearsay evidence is admissible, but may not be solely relied upon by the city council to reach a determination. 
3.  Degree and Burden of Proof. The city has the burden to prove its case by a preponderance of the evidence, that is, evidence which has more convincing force and the greater probability of truth than the evidence which is offered in opposition to it; evidence which as a whole shows that the fact sought to be proved is more probable than not. 
4.  Decision by the City Council. After all the speakers have been heard and all the evidence has been reviewed, the hearing shall be declared closed. After close of the hearing, members of the city council may publicly discuss the matter before them and may ask questions of persons who have spoken before them. Upon the conclusion of the discussion, a member of the city council will ask for a motion declaring the decision of the board. The motion must be made and seconded, and voted upon by the city council. An appeal is approved if a motion with appropriate findings is carried by a majority vote of the members voting. The failure to carry a motion to approve constitutes denial of the appeal. The city council's written decision and findings must be made within seven days of the hearing. The city council's decision must forthwith be mailed or delivered in person to the appellant. 
(Ord. 2900 § 5 (part), 2007) 
(Ord. No. 2932, § 18, 8-11-09; Ord. No. 3054 , § 17, 8-9-16)  
18.75.050 - Permit—Judicial review of city council's decision. 
The city council's decision is final. The decision is deemed final on the day that it is deposited into the U.S. mail, addressed to the applicant at the address provided on the sign permit application. The notice of decision must provide that the applicant has the right to challenge the city council's decision in a court of law, in accordance with the provisions of Section 1094.8 of the California Code of Civil Procedure. 
(Ord. 2900 § 5 (part), 2007)  
18.75.060 - Permit revocation. 
A.  Any permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by the city on the basis of any one or more of the following: 
1.  One or more of the signs has been constructed or erected in a manner which violates one or more of the conditions imposed upon the issuance of the sign plan or master sign program permit, or fails to conform to the plans described in the application. 
2.  The permittee has failed to obtain or maintain all required city, county, and state licenses and permits. 
3.  The permit is being used to erect a sign relating to an activity or location different from that for which the permit was issued. 
4.  The permittee has misrepresented a material fact in the permit application. 
5.  The business or activity for which the permit was granted has been abandoned or has changed to a different business. 
6.  The applicant is convicted of, or pleads guilty or nolo contendere to, violating any of the provisions in Chapters 18.72 through 18.78 (or the earlier enacted version of these provisions, if applicable). 
(Ord. 2900 § 5 (part), 2007)  
Chapter 18.76 - SIGN CONSTRUCTION AND PLACEMENT REQUIREMENTS 
 
18.76.010 - General standards. 
  
Figure 1—Architectural Compatibility 
The following standards are applicable to the design, construction, and placement of all signs in all zones: 
A.  All signs must incorporate the major architectural design elements of the building or structure to which they relate, such that the design, materials, illumination, lettering, and colors of the signs reflect those used on the building exterior. 
B.  Fluorescent or day-glo colors are prohibited. 
C.  For the purpose of providing adequate emergency services, all main signs must be clearly legible, and must contain the street number and the name of the business in the English alphabet. 
D.  Sculpted cabinet signs designed as logos are encouraged, particularly when they support the architectural style or era of the building. 
E.  All Signs must be Illuminated Internally. This requirement does not apply to sign designs that utilize other forms of illumination such as exposed neon, decorative light fixtures attached to the facade, flexible tubing, and architecturally-integrated uplighting or backlighting. 
F.  The lighting design is approved on the basis of consistency with the architectural design or character of the building to which it relates, as well as with the district or neighborhood in which it is located. 
G.  The scale, size, design, and proportion of an existing sign may not be modified unless integrated through a comprehensive redesign of the original sign. Any modification or alteration of an existing sign requires that a supplemental sign plan or master sign program, as applicable, be submitted for review and issuance of a new permit. 
H.  No signs are allowed other than on a primary or secondary facade (as defined in Section 18.72.020(21), (22). Any side of a building without a public entrance or not facing a public street may not have any signs. 
I.  No signs in either the C or M zone may be made of wood, except as provided in Section 18.76.030. 
J.  Letter types are limited to the following, unless expressly approved by the planning division: 
1.  Cabinet letters with opaque background and dimensional letters; 
2.  Individual letters (may be painted); 
3.  Channel letters; 
4.  Reverse channel letters; 
5.  Sculpted cabinet signs. 
K.  All signs, together with all their supports, braces, guys, and anchors, must be kept in good repair and in the proper state of preservation. All signs for which a permit is required are subject to inspection by the manager of building and safety. All signs containing electrical wiring are subject to the provisions of city electrical regulations, and the electrical components used must bear the label of an approved testing agency. The manager of building and safety may order the removal of any sign that is not maintained in accordance with this code. All signs may be reinspected at the discretion of the manager of building and safety. 
L.  All signs must be designed and constructed to withstand windloads as set forth in Table 23-F of the Uniform Building Code with a minimum design load of twenty pounds per square foot. 
M.  All signs, including structural supports, must be constructed of approved materials. 
(Ord. 2900 § 6 (part), 2007)  
18.76.020 - Wall signs. 
  
Figure 2—Calculating Background Sign Area 
Table 2 — Wall Signs 
	R3 & R4 	C-0 & C-1 	C-2, C-3, & M 
A. Number 	1. 1 sign per business per primary facade; and 
2. 1 sign per business on 1 secondary facade = 50% size primary facade sign. 
B. Location 	1. Attached parallel to and in front of exterior wall. 
	2. May not protrude more than 12? from wall. 
	3. May not project above parapet or eave line, nor below sign placement area. 
	4. Not allowed on freestanding exterior walls or fences. 
	5. May not cover significant architectural details. 
C. Background Sign Area (Fig. 2) 	= 1/3 square foot per lineal foot of facade. 	= 1 square foot per lineal foot of facade. 	= 2 square feet per lineal foot of facade. 
D. Sign Length 	= 75% of horizontal length of facade where sign is placed. 
E. Letter Height 	= 75% of height of sign placement area, and not less than 12?. 
F. Fabrication 	1. Individual letters and sculpted panels must be recessed, framed, or otherwise add relief to design. 
2. No painted wall signs. 
3. Other fabrication methods will be reviewed for consistency with design guidelines of this chapter. 	1. Individual channel letters (including reverse channel letters), sculpted cabinet signs only, no can signs. 
2. Individual letters and sculpted panels must be recessed, framed, or otherwise add relief to design. 
3. No painted wall signs. 
4. Other fabrication methods will be reviewed for consistency with design guidelines of this chapter. 
 
(Ord. 2900 § 6 (part), 2007)  
18.76.030 - Projecting signs. 
  
Figure 3—Architecturally Integrated Support and Accessory Devices 
Table 3 — Projecting Signs 
	R3 & R4 	C-0 & C-1 	C-2, C-3, & M 
A. Number 	Not permitted 	1. 1 sign per primary facade; or 
2. 1 sign per secondary facade for buildings that lack primary facade. 
B. Location 		1. Attached perpendicular to the exterior wall of building or placed to bisect corner of building. 
		2. May not extend above building parapet or roof eave line unless sign is consistent with architectural style of building, as determined by manager. 
		3. May not be supported by devices located on roof nor any area extending above building eave or parapet. 
		4. Must maintain clearance of 8 feet from grade of adjoining public right-of-way. 
		5. Must maintain minimum distance of 10 feet between one another whether on same or separate parcels. 
		6. Must be placed entirely within sign placement area. 
		7. Separate structures/tenant spaces with shared walls: must maintain minimum distance of 5 feet from property/lease line separating structures/tenant spaces. 
		8. Separate structures/tenant spaces with immediately adjacent side walls: must maintain minimum distance of 5 feet from property line separating structures/tenant spaces. 
		9. Freestanding buildings: must maintain minimum distance of 3 feet from edges of building's exterior side wall or primary frontage or secondary frontage unless it bisects the corner of the building. 
		10. Not permitted on freestanding exterior walls, fences, or light fixtures. 
C. Background Sign Area 		1 square foot per lineal foot of either primary or secondary facade. 
D. Sign Length 		= 25% the overall height or vertical distance from roof peak to finished grade of adjacent building frontage. 
E. Fabrication (Fig. 3) 		1. Wood or nonilluminated faces permitted if consistent with architectural style of building. 
		2. Sculpted projecting signs with opaque background and raised/routed lettering as an alternative to prohibited can signs. 
		3. Other fabrication methods must be reviewed by the design review board for architectural consistency with the building. 
		4. Supporting devices must be architecturally integrated with the building. 
F. Illumination 		1. Only external illumination. 
2. Decorative illumination allowed (e.g., exposed neon, decorative light fixtures attached to structure, flexible tubing, architecturally integrated uplighting). 	1. Projecting signs with opaque backgrounds may be internally illuminated. 
2. Decorative illumination allowed (e.g., exposed neon, decorative light fixtures attached to structure, flexible tubing, architecturally integrated uplighting). 
 
(Ord. 2900 § 6 (part), 2007) 
(Ord. No. 2932, § 19, 8-11-09; Ord. No. 3054 , § 18, 8-9-16)  
18.76.040 - Awnings and awning signs. 
  
Figure 4—Awning Signs 
Table 4 — Awnings and Awning Signs 
	All Zones 
A. Number 	1. 1 sign per individual awning. 
	2. No more than 1 line of text and no more than 6 characters per lineal foot of text. 
B. Location 	1. Permitted for businesses located on the ground floor and abutting a public street/walkway (not alleys or service entries). 
	2. Centered directly above a public entry or transparent window on the ground floor of a building. 
	3. Awnings/canopies that complement the architectural style of the building, and that are not illuminated, may extend uninterrupted for the length of building facade with a public entrance or facing a public street. 
C. Background Sign Area 	= 50% of total area of fascia/flap. 
D. Fabrication (Fig. 4) 	1. Must be installed per industry standards, and must conform to the regulations governing their construction and installation, per the Uniform Building Code and the Whittier Municipal Code. 
	2. Must be fabricated of canvas or other similar natural material approved by the director of community development. Vinyl awnings are acceptable only when they are not internally illuminated. 
	3. The shape of the awning or canopy must reflect the architectural style of the building to which it relates. 
E. Maintenance 	1. Must be maintained in good repair. Must be removed and replaced when they become faded, torn, broken, discolored, or have otherwise deteriorated. 
	2. Must be replaced or removed when the business to which the awning sign relates vacates the tenant space. 
	3. New tenants/property owners must replace the awning or canopy fabric prior to including signs displaying their business name. 
	4. An awning fascia replacement is required for a new sign. 
 
(Ord. 2900 § 6 (part), 2007)  
18.76.050 - Permanent window signs. 
Table 5 — Permanent Window Signs 
	All Zones 
A. Number 	1. Maximum 3 signs for windows up to 50 square feet in area. 
	2. Maximum 5 signs for windows up to 100 square feet in area. 
B. Location 	1. Only allowed in transparent windows. 
	2. Opaque windows may not contain either permanent or temporary window signs. 
C. Background Sign Area 	1. Total area of all window signs = 25% of the window area. 
	2. Illuminated neon around the contours of a window, or used to create a frame within a window, constitute a window sign, and are subject to the 25% of the window area limitation. 
D. Fabrication 	Must be professionally constructed and must conform to industry standards. 
E. Maintenance 	1. Must be maintained in good repair. Must be removed and replaced when they become faded, broken, discolored, or have otherwise deteriorated. 
	2. Window signs are abandoned once the business/tenant to which they relate no longer occupies the building/tenant space. 
 
(Ord. 2900 § 6 (part), 2007)  
18.76.060 - Freestanding signs. 
  
Figure 5—Location of Monument Signs (within landscape planter) 
  
Figure 6—Monument Sign 
  
Figure 7—Multi-Tenant 
Pylon Sign 
Table 6 — Freestanding Signs 
	Residential 
Zones 	C-0 & C-1 	C-2, C-3, Lots 
< 2 acres 	C-2 & C-3, Lots 
2 to 30 acres 	C-2, C-3, & M 
Lots > 30 acres 
A. Uses 	1. Conditional use only. 
2. Allowed for buildings that do not already have a projecting sign. 	Allowed for buildings that do not already have a projecting sign. 
B. Number 	2 per lot 	2 per lot 	2 per lot 	3 per lot 	1. No maximum. 
2. Master sign program approval required. 
C. Type of Sign Allowed 	Monument 	Monument 	Monument 	Monument 	Monument or Pylon 
D. Location 	1. Freestanding signs must be located minimum 5 feet from the property line along the primary or secondary street frontage. (Fig. 5) 
	2. Monument signs may extend up to 3 feet into the required 5 foot setback when placed within a landscaped planter area that contains and automatic irrigation system that has been reviewed and approved by the city of Whittier parks, recreation and community services department. (Fig. 5) 
	3. Pylon signs must be located minimum 10 feet from the property line along either the primary or secondary street frontage. 
	4. No freestanding sign may project into the public right-of-way. 
	5. Must be placed minimum 10 feet from any driveway or point of ingress/egress on the property or any adjacent property. 
	6. Must be placed minimum 10 feet from the side lot/shared property line separating 2 independent parcels not part of the same development. 
	7. Minimum 150 feet between freestanding signs on the same lot, or contiguous lots under same ownership. 
	8. Corner lots only: signs located on a secondary street, minimum setback from the corner > 1/3 the total linear distance of the secondary street frontage. 
	9. All setback minimums are subject to maintenance of a line of sight for vehicular traffic, as determined by the city traffic engineer. 
E. Maximum Aggregate Background Sign Area 	24 square feet, subject to conditional use approval 	24 square feet 	½ square foot per lineal foot of street frontage; and no more than 50 square feet 	½ square foot per lineal foot of street frontage 	½ square foot per lineal foot of street frontage 
F. Maximum Aggregate Background Sign Area/Corner Lots 	1. See maximum aggregate background sign area regulations for specifications of allowed sign area per frontage, above. 
2. The aggregate sign area for the primary and secondary frontages must be calculated separately, based upon the dimensions of each individual frontage. A business with both primary and secondary street frontages may not aggregate the allowable sign area from both frontages in order to erect a larger sign than these provisions allow. 
3. Maximum aggregate background sign area is not transferable between street frontages. 
4. Signs placed along the secondary frontage not to exceed 60% of the allowable square footage for signs permitted along the primary frontage. 
G. Maximum Sign Height 	48 inches, subject to conditional use approval 	48 inches 	6 feet 	25 feet 	40 feet 
H. Business Identification 	1. All freestanding signs must include the numerical street address designed with Arabic numerals, and the name of the business the sign relates to in English characters, both a minimum of 6 inches in height. The purpose of this requirement is to make the business or property easy to find for emergency personnel. 
2. Street numbers and business name to complement the style and font used for the main lettering on the sign. 
I. Business Identification/Multi-Tenant Signs (Fig. 7) 	1. Content: limited to the names of the center and of the individual tenants, with the optional addition of a logo, character representation, or other decorative feature. The content restriction for multi-tenant signs is to ensure that emergency crews and customers can easily identify tenant businesses located in multi-tenant lots. 
	2. Minimum 8 inch letter height for the name of the center. 
	3. Minimum 6 inch letter height for the names of the tenant businesses. 
	4. When designed with removable plexiglass panels for individual tenants, standard panel length, height, font, and background color must be established for the freestanding sign design, unless otherwise expressly approved in the master sign program. 
	5. The purpose of the provisions regulating multi-tenant signs is to achieve design continuity in multi-tenant pylon sign designs, but also to allow for individual businesses to display their distinctive logo, or to allow display of creative signage, as approved by the planning division. 
J. Fabrication 	1. Only monument or pylon signs. No pole signs permitted. 
	2. All copy on freestanding signs must be of individual channel letters, routed push-through letters or logos, sculpted cabinets with opaque background material, or other three-dimensional designs as approved by the planning manager. Approval of copy type and design not listed above shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
	3. All freestanding signs must have a base element. The base elements of monument or pylon signs consist of materials that reflect the architectural style and materials of the buildings to which they relate. 
	4. The pedestal base element of monument signs must be designed to "ground" the sign through materials, including but not limited to, rock, masonry, or wood, or through decorative treatment consistent with that on the associated building. Base materials and colors must differ from those materials used for the background area of the sign. 
	5. Any other fabrication methods of freestanding signs, including but not limited to wires, brackets, or any other kind of exposed hardware, must be reviewed for consistency with the architecture of the subject building and the design guidelines found within this chapter. 
K. On-Premises Directional Signs 	Directional signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet in background sign area and shall not exceed six (6) feet in height. 
L. Off-Premises Directional Signs 	Off-premises directional signs are prohibited. 
 
(Ord. 2900 § 6 (part), 2007) 
(Ord. No. 2958, § 6, 10-12-10)  
18.76.070 - Readerboard and changeable copy signs. 
A.  Institutional Uses Only. Readerboard signs are limited to institutional land uses, as defined in Section 18.72.020(32). 
B.  Readerboards may not be used for commercial advertising. 
C.  Changeable copy signs are subject to all the provisions of this code regarding permanent signs. 
D.  Readerboard and changeable copy signs may not display neon or day-glo colors. 
(Ord. 2900 § 6 (part), 2007)  
18.76.080 - Temporary on-premises signs. 
Table 7 — Temporary On-Premises Signs 
	Residential Zones 	C-0, C-1, C-2, C-3, & M Zones 
A. Permit 	1. No temporary on-premises signs may be erected without a permit. 
	2. Temporary sign permits may be obtained at the building division, and are issued pursuant to an expedited permit process. Permits for temporary signs that are in conformance with the applicable provisions of this chapter will be issued within 2 business days of application. 
	3. Temporary sign permit applications must contain all the following information: 
	 a. Proposed sign dimensions, fabrication, colors, and fonts. 
	 b. Number of temporary signs per business. 
	 c. Proposed placement of temporary signs. 
	 d. Proposed time duration of sign placement. 
B. Permissible Temporary Signs 	The following types of signs are only permissible for institutional uses: 	The following types of signs are only permissible for nonresidential uses in all commercial zones: 
	1. Banners and pennants (institutional uses only) 	 1. Banners; 
		 2. Portable signs; 
		 3. Painted window signs. 
C. Temporary Outdoor Displays 		Only on lots > 75,000 square feet 
		 1. Banners; 
		 2. Festoons (no text); 
		 3. Pennants or pennant strings; 
		 4. Inflatable characters; 
		 5. Portable signs; 
		 6. Painted window signs; 
		 7. Commercial flags. 
D. Maximum Sign Area; Number; Location 	1. Unless otherwise specified, temporary signs that have an area larger than 4 square feet are subject to all the provisions regulating permanent signs, including the permit requirements. 
	2. Temporary signs may not exceed 1 such sign per ¼ of an acre of property, in all zones. 
	Residential Zones 	C-0, C-1, C-2, C-3, & M Zones 
	3. All temporary signs must maintain a setback of at least 5 feet from the public right-of-way. The setback requirement is subject to maintenance of a line of sight for vehicular traffic, as determined by the city traffic engineer. 
E. Prohibited Temporary Signs 	1. Balloon strings, with or without text. 
	2. Vehicle-mounted signs, as defined in Section 18.72.020(62). This provision is not applicable to advertising displays on or in vehicles that provide mass transportation, whether publicly or privately owned or run. 
F. Time Limitations 	1. Temporary signs may not be displayed for longer than 30 consecutive days, as long as the sign remains in good condition throughout the period and is in compliance with any and all applicable provisions, nor for more than 4 such periods during any calendar year. Signs displayed for longer than permitted are not temporary signs and are therefore subject to all permanent sign regulations and permit requirements. Except as modified in Chapter 18.76.080, Section F. (Time Limitations) Section 3 below. 
2. The intent of this provision shall not be evaded by the intermittent placement and removal of temporary signs or by the placement of the same or effectively similar signs by different persons or entities, or in any other manner so as to avoid the time limitations and thus the permit requirements of this chapter. Intermittent means that less than 60 days pass between removal of a sign and placement of the same or effectively similar sign in the same place or area. Except as modified in Chapter 18.76.080, Section F. (Time Limitations) Section 3 below. 
3. Not withstanding the provisions above, temporary banner signs may be displayed for up to 12 days per month to the end of the 2011-12 fiscal year, June 30, 2012. This provision shall also apply to temporary banner permits issued between July 1, 2011, and the date Ordinance No. 2977 becomes effective. This provision of the ordinance shall expire on June 30, 2012. 
G. Temporary Sign Removal 	Removal of temporary signs is the responsibility of the owner of the property on which the temporary sign is located. Failure to timely remove a temporary sign is subject to an administrative citation per sign removed, to offset the cost of removal by the city. Administrative citation amounts are determined by resolution of the city council. Property owners who can demonstrate by a preponderance of the evidence that they lacked actual knowledge of the presence of the temporary sign on their property will not be held to have violated the provisions of this section. 
H. Banners 	1. Must be constructed of plastic, vinyl, canvas, or other weather resistant material. Banners may not be constructed of paper, cardboard, clear plastic, or similar material. 
2. May not be used in lieu of a permanent sign. 
3. Must be located entirely within the subject property and may not project over property lines or into the public right-of-way. 
4. Must be attached to an exterior building wall, located below the eave or roof parapet. No banners are allowed above the eave or roof line, on freestanding light fixtures, ancillary buildings, vehicles, landscape features, or plant materials. 
5. Temporary banners may not exceed ½ square foot per each lineal foot of street frontage. 
6. For multi-tenant commercial or manufacturing development, temporary banners may not exceed 1 square foot per lineal foot of street frontage for each tenant or unit space. 
7. Must be clean and properly maintained. Torn, faded, sagging, or detached banners must be immediately removed, replaced, or repaired. 
I. Window Signs 		1. Only allowed within translucent windows or glazing of a building. Opaque windows may not contain window signs. 
2. Must be located on windows along the facade directly adjacent to the street frontage of the lot. 
3. The aggregate area of temporary window signs in each individual window may not exceed 25% of the area of that window or glazing panel. 
J. Portable Signs (Fig. 8) 		1. All portable signs must be professionally designed, and constructed of wood, fiberglass, or similar material, as approved by the planning division. 
2. Text, script, logos, or other information must be painted or applied in a manner consistent with the purpose and intent of this chapter to require quality signs. 
3. Portable signs may not extend into the public right-of-way or adjacent properties. 
4. Portable signs may not be placed within any required parking areas, parking lots, or planters. This restriction does not apply to portable signs placed upon one's person. 
5. Portable signs may not be located within required public access areas, which include on-site private walkways or sidewalks. Portable signs may be placed within building recesses or in a manner as not to obstruct pedestrian flow. 
6. Portable signs may not exceed 12 square feet in area. 
7. Portable signs may not exceed 4 feet in height. 
K. Pennants/Pennant Strings 		1. Only allowed for outdoor display uses located on lots 75,000 square feet or greater. 
2. Must be entirely located within the subject lot. Pennant strings may not extend beyond perimeter property lines and may not be attached to structures located on adjacent properties. 
3. May not contain any text or image. 
4. Installation is subject to the promotional sign program approval process per Section 18.76.090. 
L. Festoons 		1. Only allowed for outdoor display uses located on lots 75,000 square feet or greater. 
2. May be placed on light standards or other vertical elements located on the subject property, located over the outdoor display area of the subject lot. 
3. May project into the public right-of-way a maximum 12 inches with a minimum clearance of 8 feet from the adjacent sidewalk. 
4. May not contain any text or images intended to convey a message or information. 
5. Installation is subject to the promotional sign program approval process per Section 18.76.090. 
M. Inflatable Characters (Fig. 9) 		1. Only allowed for outdoor display uses located on lots seventy-five thousand square feet or greater, and subject to the following standards: 
 a. Inflatable characters must be located on and anchored to the ground, and in no event may be placed on the roof of any structure on the lot. 
 b. Inflatable characters must not contain any text or images intended to convey a message or information. 
 c. Inflatable characters, and their installation, are subject to the promotional sign program approval process, per Section 18.76.090. 
N. Commercial Flags 		1. Commercial flags may only be displayed for special events or promotions. 
2. Flag poles may be 1.5 times the height of the building, but not more than 50 feet tall. 
3. Commercial flags may not contain any text, but may contain a corporate logo or representation. 
O. Maintenance of Temporary Signs in Nonresidential Zones 		Temporary signs must be properly maintained at all times. Any faded, torn, ripped, detached, defaced, or otherwise damaged temporary sign must be promptly repaired, replaced, or removed. 
P. Seasonal or Holiday Displays 		1. Seasonal or holiday displays may include painted window signs, twinkle or holiday lights, light standard decorations, flags, or other similar ornamentation approved by the planning division. 
2. Seasonal or holiday displays, other than window signs, do not require a permit. 
3. Seasonal or holiday display window signs require a permit, pursuant to Section 18.76.090(D) and this section. 
4. Window signs used as seasonal or holiday displays are subject to the size limitations of temporary window signs, per Section 18.76.090(D). 
5. No seasonal or holiday display may extend into the public right-of-way, adjacent properties, or public street or alley. 
6. No seasonal or holiday display may be placed so as to obstruct visibility of ingress or egress to the site. 
7. Seasonal or holiday displays may not be exhibited longer than 90 consecutive days. 
8. Seasonal or holiday displays may not extend into the public right-of-way, adjacent properties, or public street or alley. 
Q. Temporary Noncommercial Signs 	Refer to Chapter 16.10.020 (Temporary Non-commercial Signs) 
 
  
Figure 8—Portable "A" Frame Sign (see Section 18.76.080(J)—Portable Signs) 
  
Figure 9—Inflatable Character (for businesses with permitted outdoor commercial promotion) 
(Ord. 2900 § 6 (part), 2007) 
(Ord. No. 2930, § 2, 7-28-09; Ord. No. 2955, § 2, 6-27-10; Ord. No. 2960, § 1, 1-11-11; Ord. No. 2977, § 2, 7-26-11; Ord. No. 3042, § 3 , 8-11-15)  
18.76.090 - Promotional sign program. 
A.  Annual Review. The purpose of the promotional sign program is to ensure the appropriate use, placement, and maintenance of temporary signs for unique land uses requiring outdoor commercial promotion due to a lack of indoor display areas for products sold on the premises. The promotional sign program requires annual review of all proposed plans for promotional and temporary signage: applicants must submit a promotional sign program application on an annual basis. 
B.  Minimum Requirements. 
1.  Promotional sign programs may only be approved for outdoor commercial promotion for individual businesses located on lots seventy-five thousand square feet or greater in area. Shopping centers or complexes, or individual tenants within a shopping center or complex, may not apply for the promotional sign program. 
2.  Promotional sign programs may be approved only for outdoor commercial promotion on lots located within the C-2, C-3, or M zones. 
3.  All other uses are limited to temporary signage under Section 18.76.080. 
C.  Application Required. 
1.  An application for the promotional sign program may be obtained in the planning division. 
2.  A completed promotional sign program application contains the following information: 
a.  Scaled site plan; 
b.  Color illustrations of proposed signs, including accurately depicted font styles and sizes; 
c.  Proposed number of signs; 
d.  Proposed location of all signs; 
e.  Proposed schedule of installation and removal of signs; 
f.  Proposed maintenance plan for all signs; 
g.  Name and current contact information of the person who is responsible for maintaining and repairing the sign throughout the promotional period, and who is responsible for removing the sign upon the termination of the promotional period, as outlined in the promotional sign program permit. 
4.  Modifications to an approved promotional sign program require review and approval by the planning division. 
5.  All temporary signs permitted through the promotional sign program must be properly cleaned and maintained at all times. Any sign that is torn, faded, defaced, or otherwise damaged must be promptly removed, replaced, or repaired. Failure to remove, replace, or repair a torn, faded, defaced, or damaged promotional sign will result in administrative citations. 
(Ord. 2900 § 6 (part), 2007)  
18.76.100 - Landmark signs. 
If a sign is determined to have historical or artistic significance to the city of Whittier, its designation as a landmark sign will allow legal nonconforming signs to remain, which would otherwise be required to be removed or altered within the amortization period. 
Upon adoption of this chapter, the establishment of criteria and the review process for designating landmark signs is the responsibility of the city of Whittier historic resources commission. 
(Ord. 2900 § 6 (part), 2007)  
18.76.110 - Murals. 
Commercial murals are subject to the following standards: 
A.  The mural must be of a permanent material to be durable against graffiti, vandalism, fading, and weather, in order to require a low level of maintenance. 
B.  The mural should be designed and executed by persons experienced in the production of murals. 
C.  The mural must be permanently affixed to the property. 
D.  The mural must be maintained by the property owner in a safe, neat and orderly manner acceptable by the city. 
(Ord. 2900 § 6 (part), 2007)  
18.76.120 - Illumination—Neon signs. 
A.  Signs must be designed, installed, and maintained in such a manner that the spillover of any sign illumination onto residential property shall not exceed two foot candles above ambient light levels, and the spillover of glare produced by the illumination of signs must not negatively impact any surrounding properties. 
B.  Signs illuminated with exposed neon and/or flexible tubing must meet the following standards: 
1.  Illumination must not exceed thirty milliamps. 
2.  Signs placed such that any portion of the sign is less than twelve feet above the adjacent ground level must be encased with plexiglass and/or covered to protect that glass tubes. 
3.  Wall-mounted and detached exposed neon tube signs require noncombustible backing where attached to structures with a facing of wood or other flammable material. 
4.  Exposed electrode housings are prohibited, except in the case of installations directly onto a noncombustible solid wall, such as a tilt-up cement wall. 
(Ord. 2900 § 6 (part), 2007)  
18.76.130 - Drive-through menu boards. 
Menu boards for drive-through businesses may only be placed next to or above the speakers at the entrance of the business's drive-through lane, and the maximum height for menu boards is eight feet from the highest grade upon which the sign is placed. 
(Ord. 2900 § 6 (part), 2007)  
18.76.140 - Institutional signs. 
Table 8 — Institutional Wall Signs 
	Sign(s) Fronting on a Local Street(s) 	Sign(s) Fronting on a Collector Street(s) 	Sign(s) Fronting on a Major or Minor Arterial Street(s) 
A. Number 	1. 1 sign per business or building use identification per primary facade; and 
2. 1 sign per business or building use identification on 1 secondary facade = 50% size primary facade sign. 
B. Location 	1. Attached parallel to and in front of exterior wall. 
2. May not protrude more than 12? from wall. 
3. May not project above parapet or eave line, nor below sign placement area. 
4. Not allowed on freestanding exterior walls or fences. 
5. May not cover significant architectural details. 
C. Background Sign Area (Fig. 2) 	= 1/3 square foot per lineal foot of facade. 	= 1 square foot per lineal foot of facade. 	= 2 square feet per lineal foot of facade. 
D. Sign Length 	= 75% of horizontal length of facade where sign is placed. 
E. Letter Height 	= 75% of height of sign placement area, and not less than 12?. 
F. Fabrication 	1. Individual letters and sculpted panels must be recessed, framed, or otherwise add relief to design. 
2. No painted wall signs. 
3. Other fabrication methods will be reviewed for consistency with design guidelines of this chapter. 	1. Individual channel letters (including reverse channel letters), sculpted cabinet signs only, no "can" signs. 
2. Individual letters and sculpted panels must be recessed, framed, or otherwise add relief to design. 
3. No painted wall signs. 
4. Other fabrication methods will be reviewed for consistency with design guidelines. 
 
Table 9 — Institutional Freestanding Signs 
	Residential 
Zones 
(R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4) 	C-0 
and 
C-1 	C-2, C-3, 
Lots ;lt; 2 acres 	C-2 and C-3, 
Lots 2 to 30 Acres 	C-2, C-3, and M Lots ;gt; 30 Acres 
A. Approval 	Conditional use only when in a Residential Zone 	Same as shown in Table 6, Section "A." 
B. Number 	One sign per street frontage for each lot that is part of the same development. 	Same as shown in Table 6, Section "B." 
C. Type of Sign Allowed 	Monument 
(single or double face) 	Same as shown in Table 6, Section "C." 
D. Location 	1. Freestanding signs shall be set back a minimum of 5 feet from the property line along the primary or secondary street frontage. (Fig. 5). 
2. Monument signs may extend up to 3 feet into the required 5 foot setback when placed within a landscaped planter area that contains and automatic irrigation system that has been reviewed and approved by the City of Whittier's Parks/Recreation/Community Services department. (Fig. 5). 
3. No setback is required for directional signage, except as may be required by the City Traffic Engineer for vehicular sight distance visibility. 
4. No freestanding sign may project into the public right-of-way. 
5. Must be placed a minimum of 10 feet from any driveway or point of ingress/egress on the property or any adjacent property. 
6. Must be placed a minimum of 10 feet from any other sign located on the side lot/shared property line separating two independent parcels not part of the same development. 
7. Minimum 150 feet between freestanding signs (except for directional signage) on the same lot, or contiguous lots under the same ownership. 
8. All setback minimums may be increased, as necessary, subject to maintenance of a line-of-sight for vehicular traffic, as determined by the City Traffic Engineer. 	1. Same as shown in Table 6, Section "D." 
2. No setback is required for directional signage, except as may be required by the City Traffic Engineer for vehicular sight distance visibility. 
E. Maximum Aggregate Background Sign Area 	1. Maximum sign area of 24 square feet per each sign face for each monument sign on a local street, regardless of lot size. 
2. Maximum ½-square foot per linear foot of street frontage, up to 50 square feet per each sign face, for each monument sign that is placed on a lot (or an overall development) that is less than 2 acres and situated along a collector, minor arterial or arterial street. 
3. Maximum of ½-square foot per each lineal foot of street frontage, up to 120 square feet of sign area per sign face, for each monument sign that is placed on a lot (or an overall development) that is over 2 acres and located on a collector, minor arterial or arterial street. 	Same as shown in Table 6, Section "E." 
F. Maximum Aggregate Background Sign Area/Corner Lots 	1. See maximum aggregate background sign area regulations for specifications of allowed sign area per frontage, above. 
2. The aggregate sign area for the primary and secondary frontages must be calculated separately, based upon the dimensions of each individual frontage. A use with both primary and secondary street frontages may not aggregate the allowable sign area from both frontages in order to erect a larger sign than these provisions allow. 
3. Maximum aggregate background sign area is not transferable between street frontages. 
4. Unless required otherwise, signs placed along the secondary frontage shall not to exceed 60% of the allowable square footage for signs permitted along the primary frontage. 
G. Maximum Sign Height 	1. For projects with one or more contiguous lots forming part of the same development, the following sign heights are permitted as follows: 
 a) Maximum 4 feet along a designated local street. 
 b) Maximum 6 feet when adjacent to a designated collector or secondary street 
 c) Maximum 8 feet when adjacent to a major or minor arterial street. 
2. Maximum sign height may be exceeded by 12-inches to allow for architectural features or pedestal base only. 	Same as shown in Table 6, Section "G." 
H. Business Identification 	1. All freestanding signs must include, at a minimum, the numerical street address designed with Arabic numerals, and the name of the business the sign relates to in English characters, both a minimum of 6-inches in height. The purpose of this requirement is to make the business or property easy to find for emergency personnel. 
2. Street numbers and the business name shall complement the style and font used for the main lettering on the sign. 
3. Content may also include the name of an accessory use or building use, with the optional addition of a logo, character representation, or other decorative feature. 
4. Minimum 8-inch letter height for the name of the institutional use. 
5. Minimum 6-inch letter height for the name(s) of any secondary, accessory use, associated with the primary institutional use on-site (example: daycare facility, etc.) 
6. Minimum 4-inch margin of blank space between sign copy and edge of sign panel. 
7. When designed with removable plexiglass panels, standard panel length, height, font, and background color must be established for the freestanding sign design, unless otherwise expressly approved as part of any master sign program. 	3. Same as shown in Table 6, Items 2 through 5." 
4. Minimum 4-inch margin of blank space between sign copy and edge of sign panel. 
I. Fabrication 	1. Only monument signs are permitted. There shall be no pylon or pole signs permitted. 
2. All copy on freestanding signs must be of individual channel letters, routed push-through letters or logos, sculpted cabinets with opaque background material, or other three-dimensional designs as approved by the planning manager. Approval of copy type and design not listed above shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
3. All freestanding signs must have a base element. The base elements of a monument sign shall consist of materials that reflect the architectural style and materials of the buildings to which they relate. 
4. The pedestal base element of monument signs must be designed to "ground" the sign through materials, including but not limited to, rock, masonry, or wood, or through decorative treatment consistent with that on the associated building. Base materials and colors must differ from those materials used for the background area of the sign. 
5. Any other fabrication methods of freestanding signs, including but not limited to wires, brackets, or any other kind of exposed hardware, must be reviewed for consistency with the architecture of the subject building and the design guidelines found within this chapter. 
J. Sign 
Illumination 	1. External, low-profile, floodlighting is permitted. 
2. Internal illumination of sign copy is permitted. 
3. Internal illumination of sign background is prohibited along local streets. 
4. The use of backlit (halo lighting) letters is encouraged. 
5. Exposed neon is prohibited. 
6. Exposed raceways are prohibited. 
K. Reader- 
board Signs and Changeable Copy Signs 	1. Permitted along a minor or major arterial street only. However, only one readerboard/changeable copy sign shall be permitted for the entire development. 
2. A readerboard/changeable copy sign may comprise up to a maximum of 30 square feet per each sign face. 
3. All readerboard/changeable copy sign shall be maintained in good operating condition at all times. 
4. All readerboard/changeable copy signs shall display each message for a minimum of five seconds. Fading in or out, or scrolling of text shall be permitted as message transitions. 
5. The electronic message display shall not be operated between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. if the reader board sign is located within any residential zone. 
6. Readerboard/Changeable copy signs are limited to institutional land uses, as defined in Section 18.72.020(32). 
7. Readerboards/changeable copy signs may not be used for commercial advertising. 
8. Readerboard/Changeable copy signs are subject to all the provisions of this code regarding permanent signs, unless specified otherwise. 
9. Readerboard/Changeable copy signs shall not do any of the following: display neon or day-glo colors, incandescent lighting, or any illumination resulting in light spillover or excessive glare. Signs shall not display any flashing or blinking messages, or lights, nor create sound. 
10. All readerboards shall have night time dimmer capabilities, which may be controlled and adjusted at the request of the City, to ensure appropriate sign intensity levels. 
11. The intensity level (brightness level) of any new LED reader board signs shall require the review and approval by the Director of Community Development prior to the finalization of any building permit. 
L. On-Premises Directional Signs 	1. Directional signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet in background sign area and shall not exceed six (6) feet in height. 
2. Directional signs may include the name/logo of the institutional use it serves. However, any sign or logo may not exceed a maximum of 50 percent of the sign area containing the directional information (i.e., "enter," "exit," "parking," a "display arrow," etc.). 
M. Off-Premises Directional Signs 	Off-premises directional signs are prohibited. 
 
(Ord. No. 2960, §§ 2, 3, 1-11-11)  
Chapter 18.78 - NONCONFORMING AND ILLEGAL SIGNS 
Sections: 
 
18.78.001 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this section is to provide procedures for the eventual removal of existing signs: (1) not in conformity with the newly established regulations of Chapters 18.72 through 18.76, and (2) rendered nonconforming by prior versions and amendments to provisions regulating the placement of commercial signs within the city. Removal of nonconforming signs is equally important to the goal of improving the aesthetic value of the community areas as is the regulation of new signs. 
(Ord. 2900 § 7 (part), 2007)  
18.78.010 - Definitions. 
The following shall have the meanings set forth in this section: 
A.  "Abandoned sign" means a sign remaining in place or not maintained for a period of ninety days, whose use has ceased, or which no longer advertises or identifies an ongoing business, product, or service available on the business premises where the sign is located. 
B.  "Amortization period" means fifteen years from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter that resulted in a sign first becoming nonconforming. 
C.  "Appellant" means the person who files any appeal pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
D.  "Commission" means the planning commission. 
E.  "Council" means the city council. 
F.  "Director" means the director of community development for the city of Whittier. "Director" shall also include his or her designee. 
G.  "Fair and just compensation" means: 
1.  Fair and just compensation consists of the fair market value of an on-premises sign that has been designed, constructed, created, intended, or engineered to have a useful life of fifteen years or more, at the time that the city requires its removal. The fair market value of a sign is determined according to Section 5492 or 5493 of the California Business & Professions Code. 
2.  Compensation is calculated as of the date the sign is removed. 
H.  "Illegal sign" means any sign erected without first complying with all ordinances and regulations in effect at the time of its construction and erection or use. 
I.  "Nonconforming" means a sign that was lawfully established prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, and which conforms with a building permit, conditional use permit, or sign plan review approval issued prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, but does not conform to all the applicable regulations in Chapters 18.72 through 18.76 and this chapter. 
J.  "Notice" means where notice is required under this chapter, other than notice of a hearing decision, the date of the giving of such notice shall be the date of personal service thereof, or the date of its deposit in the course of transmission in the United States Postal Service. 
K.  "Order" means an order of abatement, issued by the director. 
L.  "Owner" means: (i) the person who is the record owner of the fee interest in the property to which an order relates, as shown on the latest assessor's roll, or as shown in a title report issued by a qualified title company; (ii) any person who is entitled to possession of such property; (iii) any person who is legally responsible for the business to which an order relates; or (iv) any person who is legally responsible for the sign to which an order relates. 
(Ord. 2900 § 7 (part), 2007)  
18.78.020 - Applicability—Exception—Purpose. 
A.  The provisions of this chapter apply exclusively to the abatement of all signs rendered nonconforming by reason of the application of Chapters 18.72 through 18.76 and this chapter. 
B.  Exception. Exemption from the amortization provisions in this chapter exists if application of these provisions would unconstitutionally interfere with the investment backed expectations of the business to which the sign relates. 
C.  Burden of Proof. Sign owners must show, by clear and convincing evidence, that the exception applies. "Clear and convincing evidence" means evidence of such convincing force that it demonstrates, in contrast to the opposing evidence, a high probability of the truth of the fact(s) for which it is offered as proof. The sign owner seeking the exception must also show, by clear and convincing evidence, the actual useful life of the sign at the end of which period the sign will be removed or brought into compliance with all the applicable provisions of this code. 
D.  Procedure. Sign owners seeking an exception under this section must file an application with the zoning administrator for a minor variance at least ninety days prior to the termination of the amortization period of fifteen years from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, according to the procedures articulated in Chapter 18.58 (Zoning Administrator) of this code. 
E.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide sign owners with a procedure to seek an exception only where unique circumstances exist, which make the application of this chapter unreasonable. An application should only be submitted when a sign owner has sufficient evidence to demonstrate that the exception applies. 
F.  Effect of Exception. Any exception will apply to a particular sign until the expiration of the period shown, by clear and convincing evidence, to be the useful life of the sign beyond the amortization period set forth in this chapter. When that additional period expires, the sign must be removed or brought into compliance with all applicable codes. No further exception as to that sign shall be granted. 
(Ord. 2900 § 7 (part), 2007)  
18.78.030 - New signs on lots with existing nonconforming signs. 
Where any sign located upon any lot in the city rendered nonconforming by reason of the application of Chapters 18.72 through 18.76 and this chapter, the following regulations apply to the construction and installation of any new sign upon such lot. 
A.  Residential Zones. No new sign shall be installed on any lot classified in zones R-E, R-1, R-2, R-3 or R-4, if any nonconforming sign is located upon such lot. 
B.  Accessory Signs in C and M Zones. Notwithstanding the existence of a nonconforming sign on any lot classified in the C or M zones, new accessory signs may be located upon any such lot, provided that such accessory signs comply, in all respects, with the provisions of Chapters 18.72 through 18.76 and this chapter. 
C.  Main Signs in C-O and C-1 Zone. Where a nonconforming main sign is located upon any C-O- or C-1-zoned lot, the following regulations shall apply to the construction and placement of any new main sign thereon: 
1.  Freestanding Signs. If a nonconforming freestanding sign is located upon such lot, no new freestanding sign is permitted there. If any other nonconforming sign exists, but no freestanding sign, one freestanding sign may be permitted, provided it complies with the provisions of Chapters 18.72 through 18.76 and this chapter, including but not limited to, Section 18.76.060. 
2.  Wall Signs. New wall signs may be permitted upon a C-1-zoned lot where nonconforming main signs exist; provided, that such new wall signs conform to the provisions of Chapters 18.72 through 18.76 and this chapter. 
D.  Main Signs in Zones C-2, C-3, and M. On lots in the C-2, C-3, or M zones with existing nonconforming main signs, the following regulations govern the location of new main signs upon such lots: 
1.  Freestanding Signs. New freestanding signs may be erected if the total background sign area of all existing freestanding and proposed freestanding signs does not exceed the maximum allowable background sign area, as set forth in Section 18.76.060(A), and the new freestanding sign complies with the provisions of Chapters 18.72 through 18.76 and this chapter. 
2.  Wall Signs. New wall signs may be placed on any such lot if the total background sign area of all existing and proposed signs does not exceed the maximum allowable background sign area, as set forth in Section 18.76.020(B), and the new wall sign otherwise complies with the provisions of Chapters 18.72 through 18.76. 
3.  Projecting Signs. New projecting signs may be erected if: 
a.  No roof sign exists above the same building proposed for the projecting sign; and 
b.  The background sign area and the location and height of the proposed new projecting sign comply with the provisions of Section 18.76.030(C); and 
c.  The total number of projecting signs existing and proposed will not exceed the maximum number permitted pursuant to Section 18.76.030(A). 
E.  Window Signs. No new window signs are permitted in any building in a C-O-zoned, C-1-zoned, C-2-zoned, C-3-zoned or M-zoned lot unless the aggregate sign background area of the proposed window sign, in addition to all other window signs in the building, equals twenty-five percent or less of the gross area of the window where located. 
F.  No person may erect or install any sign on any lot after the use to which it relates has been removed, discontinued, or abandoned. 
(Ord. 2900 § 7 (part), 2007)  
18.78.040 - Amortization period and procedures. 
A.  All permanent on-premises signs that have been designed, constructed, created, intended, or engineered to have a useful life of fifteen years or more, and which are rendered nonconforming by the enactment of these provisions, must be rendered conforming or be removed entirely within fifteen years of the effective date of these provisions. 
B.  In the event that the director, upon notice, requires abatement of a nonconforming sign designed, constructed, created, intended, or engineered to have a useful life of fifteen years or more prior to the expiration of the amortization period, the director must provide the owner with fair and just compensation for the value of the sign. 
C.  Upon the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the amortization period for all signs rendered nonconforming by the enactment of this chapter begins to run. Publication of this chapter constitutes notice of the start of the amortization period. The director may, at his or her sole discretion, provide additional written notice of the above to individual owners of on-premises signs. Under no circumstances does the failure by the director to provide written notice to individual advertising display owners extend the amortization period in any way whatsoever. 
D.  Any on-premises sign permit and/or conditional use permit issued by the director, or by any other official or department, at any time prior, or subsequent, to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter does not extend the amortization period in any way whatsoever. 
E.  Owners of existing on-premises signs may request a determination of nonconforming status from the planning division. Such determinations must be requested within three months of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. Each request must contain the same information required for a permit application, as outlined in Sections 18.75.010 and 18.75.020. The planning division must make its determination within thirty days of receipt of the completed request. 
F.  A determination of nonconforming status may be appealed following the procedures outlined in Sections 18.78.120 through 18.78.160, below. Such an appeal must be filed within sixty days of the planning division's notice of determination. Failure to timely request a determination of nonconforming status or to timely appeal such a determination conclusively waives these rights. 
G.  Neither the request for determination of nonconforming status, nor the appellate process that may result therefrom, extends or tolls the amortization period in any way whatsoever. 
H.  Owners of on-premises signs are responsible to ensure that all nonconforming signs are entirely removed or rendered conforming by the date the amortization period expires. Every day thereafter that a nonconforming sign continues to be displayed may make the owner of the sign subject to administrative citation, the amount of which shall be determined by the director, based upon the size of the sign, but in no event to exceed five hundred dollars per day. Administrative citation fees may be applied retroactively to the first day following the expiration of the amortization period. 
I.  In the event the nonconforming sign is not removed or rendered conforming by the expiration of the amortization period, upon notice the director has the authority to remove, or to require the removal of, the sign within seven days of such notice. The owner of the sign is responsible for the cost of removal, as well as for any administrative citations incurred after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(Ord. 2900 § 7 (part), 2007)  
18.78.050 - Removal without compensation. 
A.  The director, at his or her sole discretion and upon notice, may require the removal, without compensation, of any sign, as follows: 
1.  An illegal sign, as defined in Section 18.78.010(G). 
2.  All permanent on-premises signs that the director finds have not been designed, constructed, created, intended, or engineered to have a useful life of fifteen years or more must be rendered conforming or be removed entirely upon notice by the city or within one year of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, whichever comes first. 
3.  A sign which was lawfully erected anywhere within the territorial boundaries of the city but whose use has ceased, or the structure upon which the sign stands has been abandoned by its owner, for a period of not less than ninety days. 
4.  Any sign which has been more than fifty percent destroyed, and the destruction is other than facial copy replacement, and the sign cannot be repaired within thirty days of the date of its destruction. 
5.  Any sign whose owner, outside of a change of copy, requests permission to remodel and remodels that advertising display, or expands or enlarges the building or land use upon which the advertising display is located, and the display is affected by the construction, enlargement, or remodeling, or the cost of construction, enlargement, or remodeling of the advertising display exceeds fifty percent of the cost of reconstruction of the building. 
6.  Any sign whose owner seeks relocation thereof and relocates the sign. 
7.  Any sign for which there has been an agreement between the sign's owner and the director, for its removal as of any given date. 
8.  Any sign that is or may become a danger to the public or is unsafe. 
9.  Any sign that constitutes a traffic hazard not created by relocation of streets or highways or by acts of the city or the county. 
B.  The director, at his or her sole discretion and upon notice, may require the removal, without compensation, of any sign which meets all of the following criteria: 
1.  The sign is located within an area shown as residential or agricultural on a local general plan as of the date the display was lawfully erected. 
2.  The sign is located within an area zoned for residential or agricultural use on the date the display was lawfully erected. 
3.  The sign is not required to be removed because of an overlay zone, combining zone, special sign zone, or any other special zoning district whose primary purpose is the removal or control of signs. 
4.  The sign is allowed to remain in existence after March 12, 1983, for a period of fifteen years from the date of adoption of the ordinance or regulation. For purposes of this subsection only, every sign has a useful life of fifteen years. Fair and just compensation for signs required to be removed during the fifteen-year period and before the amortization period has lapsed shall be entitled to fair and just compensation which is equal to one-fifteenth of the duplication cost of construction of the display being removed multiplied by the number of years of useful life remaining for the sign as determined by this subsection. 
C.  Costs incurred in removing a sign pursuant to this section may be charged to the owner of the sign. 
(Ord. 2900 § 7 (part), 2007)  
18.78.060 - Compliance with sign code as condition of permit approval. 
A.  Any existing legal nonconforming sign may be required to be brought into compliance with current applicable code requirements, or removed as a condition of approval of any redevelopment, building, conditional use, or other permit or approval required under any provision of the Whittier Municipal Code for the same property where the nonconforming sign is located, so long as a nexus exists between the permit or approval and the sign that must be removed or brought into compliance. 
B.  1.  No city department or division shall deny, refuse to issue, or condition the issuance of a business license or a permit to construct a new legal on-premises advertising display upon the removal, conformance, repair, modification, or abatement of any other on-premises advertising display on the same real property where the business is to be or has been maintained if both of the following apply: 
a.  The other display is located within the same commercial complex which is zoned for commercial occupancy or use, but at a different business location from that for which the permit or license is sought. 
b.  The other display is not owned or controlled by the permit applicant, and the permit applicant is not the agent of the person who owns or controls the other display. 
2.  The permit applicant shall receive fair and just compensation for any nonconforming sign that was designed, constructed, created, intended, or engineered to have a useful life of fifteen years or more if the city requires such sign to be removed or upgraded as a condition of permit approval for any new sign on the property, when the amortization period for the legal nonconforming sign has not yet expired. 
C.  Except as provided for in subsection (B)(1) of this section, any existing legal nonconforming sign may be required to be removed or rendered compliant with current applicable code requirements, as a condition of approval of a permit for a new legal permanent on-premises sign or for modifications of an existing on-premises sign, at the discretion of the director or of the commission, as applicable. 
(Ord. 2900 § 7 (part), 2007)  
18.78.070 - Existing nonconforming signs—Compliance. 
Any nonconforming sign which is removed, destroyed, or relocated at any time after the effective date of this ordinance, may not be replaced, reconstructed, or relocated except in compliance with the provisions of Chapters 18.72 through 18.76 and this chapter. ;hn0;(Ord. 2900 ;s; 7 (part), 2007) 
(Ord. No. 2932, § 22, 8-11-09)  
18.78.080 - Repair and maintenance—Conditions. 
A.  Ordinary Repair and Maintenance. The ordinary repair and maintenance of a nonconforming sign or sign structure is permitted; provided, that the cost thereof shall not exceed, in any consecutive twelve-month period, an aggregate total equal to twenty-five percent of the then replacement value of the sign structure, as estimated by the manager. 
B.  Eminent Domain. The repair, reconstruction, or remodeling of any sign or sign structure is not permitted where a part of such structure is taken for any public use by condemnation, dedication, or purchase by any agency having the power of eminent domain, unless such repair, reconstruction, or remodeling will result in such sign and/or sign structure complying with the provisions of Chapters 18.72 through 18.76 and this chapter. 
C.  Partial Destruction. Where any nonconforming sign is damaged or partially destroyed by any casualty, the same may be restored to the condition in which it existed immediately prior to the occurrence of such casualty. A nonconforming sign may not be replaced or restored to its nonconforming status if it has been more than fifty percent destroyed, and the destruction is other than facial copy replacement, and the display cannot be repaired within thirty days of the date of its destruction. 
D.  Portable and Temporary Signs. Repair, maintenance, and/or reconstruction of portable or temporary signs or sign structures are not permitted. 
(Ord. 2900 § 7 (part), 2007)  
18.78.090 - Abatement period not extended by certain work. 
Accomplishment of any work on a nonconforming sign or sign structure allowed under this chapter does not extend the amortization period for that sign or sign structure in any way whatsoever. 
(Ord. 2900 § 7 (part), 2007)  
18.78.100 - Abatement procedure. 
A.  Where the director finds that the amortization period has expired with respect to a nonconforming sign that has been designed, constructed, created, intended, or engineered to have a useful life of fifteen years or more, the director shall issue a written order of abatement, and give notice thereof. Alternatively, the director may issue an order at any time prior to the expiration of the amortization period for such a nonconforming sign, and the notice shall inform the owner that he or she is entitled fair and just compensation for the value of the sign. 
B.  Notice. Upon issuance of an order, the director must forthwith give written notice of the order by depositing a copy of the order with the United States Postal Service, addressed to the person in possession of the property to which the order relates, postage prepaid to the address provided in the appeal. Alternatively, the director may personally serve such person with copies of the order. 
C.  The order must contain a description of the property affected, the names of the owners and/or persons in possession thereof, the basis for the order, and the time within which the usage must terminate. 
D.  The order is deemed final thirty days after the date of the notice, unless an appeal is filed. 
E.  The nonconforming sign that is the subject of the order must be removed within the time specified in the order, which may not exceed sixty days from the date the order is placed in the U.S. mail. 
F.  If the sign is not removed within the time provided for by the order, the director will arrange for its removal, and the owner or person(s) responsible for the sign shall bear the cost of the sign's removal. 
(Ord. 2900 § 7 (part), 2007)  
18.78.110 - Appeal—Standing—Timeliness—Fees. 
The owner of property to which an order relates has standing to file an appeal pursuant to this chapter, either in propria persona or through his or her authorized agent. No such appeal is effective for any purpose unless it is timely filed. In addition, an appeal is not valid unless, contemporaneously with the filing of the appeal, a filing and processing fee is paid to the city clerk-treasurer, in a sum which is set by city council resolution. A copy of the schedule of fees may be obtained at City Hall, city clerk-treasurer. 
(Ord. 2900 § 7 (part), 2007)  
18.78.120 - Appeal to commission from director's abatement order. 
A.  Within ten calendar days of the date an order becomes final, the owner of the property to which the order relates may file an appeal thereto, in writing, with the secretary of the commission. Failure to timely appeal to the commission constitutes a waiver of the right. 
B.  The secretary of the commission, upon receipt of a timely appeal, must set the matter for a de novo hearing before the commission and must give notice of the time and place of the hearing, as specified below. 
C.  At the hearing, the commission must hear evidence relating to whether the sign and/or sign structure has lost its legal nonconforming status pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and any other matter the commission deems relevant for a just resolution. The commission may hear any and all matters that it deems relevant, and is not be bound by rules of admissibility of evidence. The commission may hear relevant hearsay evidence, but may not base its findings and decisions on hearsay evidence alone. 
D.  The commission must make a decision within fourteen days of the hearing. The date the decision is made is the effective date of that decision. The decision of the commission is deemed final ten days after the effective date, unless a timely appeal is made to the city council. 
E.  Notice. Upon a decision by the commission either affirming or vacating an order, the secretary of the commission shall forthwith give written notice of the same. The notice shall contain a description of the property affected, the names of the owners and/or persons in possession thereof, the basis for the decision reached, and the time in which the usage must terminate. The notice of such decision must be given in the same manner as set forth in Section 18.78.100(B). 
(Ord. 2900 § 7 (part), 2007)  
18.78.130 - Appeal to city council from a commission decision. 
A.  An appeal to the council from a commission decision upholding an order may be filed with the city clerk-treasurer by the appellant, within ten calendar days after the effective date of the commission's decision. Failure to timely appeal the commission's decision to the council waives the right to do so. The city clerk-treasurer, upon receipt of a timely appeal, must set the matter for a de novo hearing before the council and must give notice in writing of the time and place of the hearing, such notice to be personally served or deposited in the U.S. mail. At the hearing, the council will determine whether the sign has lost its legal nonconforming status pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. The city council must issue a written decision within seven calendar days of the de novo hearing. 
B.  Notice. Upon the adoption by the council of a commission decision affirming an order, or upon the council vacating the order, the city clerk-treasurer shall forthwith give the appellant written notice of the same. The notice must contain a description of the property affected, the names of the owners and/or persons in possession thereof, the basis for the decision reached, and the time in which the usage must terminate. The notice of such decision must be given in the same manner as set forth in Section 18.78.100(B). 
(Ord. 2900 § 7 (part), 2007)  
18.78.140 - Judicial review of city council's decision. 
The city council's decision is final. The decision is deemed final on the day that it is deposited into the U.S. mail, addressed to the applicant at the address provided on the appeal. The notice of decision must provide that the losing party has the right to challenge the city council's decision in a court of law, in accordance with the provisions of Section 1094.8 of the California Code of Civil Procedure. 
(Ord. 2900 § 7 (part), 2007)  
18.78.150 - Hearing—Determination by council and/or commission. 
A.  At hearings held pursuant to this chapter, before either the commission or the council, the appellant will have a reasonable opportunity to be heard. Any applicable staff report relating to such matter must be considered. 
B.  In each proceeding, the commission and/or council will consider: 
1.  The date the sign was constructed; 
2.  The sign's original cost; 
3.  Whether the sign's original cost has been or could have been recovered by the owner under generally acceptable accounting practices; and 
4.  The degree of difficulty and cost to replace the sign with a sign that conforms with all the provisions of this chapter. 
C.  Based upon such evidence the commission and/or council must determine whether the abatement period specified by the order is reasonable. If, based upon the facts presented, the commission and/or council determine that the abatement period outlined in the order is unreasonable, they may extend the abatement period accordingly. In the event the commission or the council determine that the sign complies with these provisions, the commission and the council have the authority to vacate the order. 
(Ord. 2900 § 7 (part), 2007)  
Division III. - Condominiums  
Chapter 18.80 - CONDOMINIUM CONVERSIONS 
 
18.80.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the provisions of this chapter is to provide, with respect to properties which change tenancy from rental to condominium units, the assurance that: 
A.  There are procedures which will upgrade lower-priced housing; 
B.  Adequate parking space is provided to meet the additional demands of the owner-type tenancies; and 
C.  Potentially adverse effects resulting from a lack of single and centralized management do not cause undesirable effects upon the public health, safety and general welfare of the community. 
(Prior code § 9540)  
18.80.020 - Definitions. 
In addition to the definitions contained in Chapter 18.06, the following words and phrases shall, for the purposes of this chapter, be defined as follows, unless it is clearly apparent from the context that another meaning is intended: 
A.  "Community apartment" means one residential unit within a community apartment project. 
B.  "Community apartment project," as defined in Section 11004 of the California Business and Professions Code, means the development of real property in which an undivided interest in the land is coupled with the right of exclusive occupancy of a designated apartment located thereon or therein. 
C.  "Condominium conversion" means the process or effect of transferring ownership of a building from rental units to a condominium in accordance with appropriate law. 
D.  "Residential condominium" means an estate in real property consisting of an undivided interest in common in a portion of a parcel of real property together with a separate interest in space in a residential complex located on such real property. A residential condominium may include, in addition, a separate interest in other portions of such real property. Such estate may, with respect to the duration of its enjoyment, be either: 
1.  An estate of inheritance or perpetual estate; 
2.  An estate for life; or 
3.  An estate for years, such as a leasehold or a subleasehold. 
For the purposes of this section, "residential condominium" includes community apartment project. 
E.  "Residential condominium project" or "project" means the entire parcel of real property divided or to be divided into condominiums including all structures located thereon. 
F.  "Residential condominium unit" or "unit" means the same as dwelling unit. 
(Prior code § 9541)  
18.80.030 - Conversion—Conditions generally. 
The following criteria and information shall be met or provided before any tentative tract and/or final map is approved for a condominium conversion: 
A.  The tentative tract map shall be dimensioned and drawn to scale to show the following: location of buildings, floor plan of each unit within the building, square footage of each unit, location of pools, recreation rooms, trash areas or any other amenities within the project, driveways and parking stalls, open space, including patios and balconies, and any other pertinent information as may be deemed necessary by the planning director. 
B.  The subdivider shall provide a statement indicating whether water, gas and electricity are currently provided separately to each unit, and whether these utilities are metered individually for each unit. 
C.  If the tract map is approved, the subdivider shall provide the city with an affidavit that he has met the provisions of Section 66427.1 of the State Subdivision Map Act (notification of tenants). 
D.  A copy of the "Supplemental Questionnaire for Apartments Converted to Condominium Projects" Form RE 639, California Department of Real Estate, shall be provided as part of the application. 
E.  A copy of the proposed conditions, covenants and restrictions (CC & Rs) will be provided as part of the application. 
(Prior code § 9544)  
18.80.040 - Conversion—Existing condominiums. 
Existing residential condominiums or tentative or final tract maps approved before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter which do not comply with the provisions of this title will not be deemed to have acquired a nonconforming status provided that: 
A.  No additional dwelling units are established; 
B.  No expansion or enlargement of any dwelling unit is undertaken; 
C.  No additional parking area is provided upon the site which would reduce usable open space. 
(Prior code § 9542(2))  
18.80.050 - Conditions—R-2, R-3, R-4, C-0 and C-1 zones. 
Conversions of rental units to condominiums may be permitted in the R-2, R-3, R-4, C-0 and C-1 zones, provided that: 
A.  At least four years have elapsed since the date of issuance of the certificate of occupancy of the building containing the dwelling units proposed to be converted to condominiums; 
B.  A conditional use permit for such conversion is obtained pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 18.52. 
(Prior code § 9542(1))  
18.80.060 - Development standards. 
To achieve the purpose of this section, all condominium conversions shall conform to the following development standards. These are minimum standards; others may be imposed as part of the conditional use permit process: 
A.  Off-Street Parking. Parking shall comply with the parking provisions contained within Section 18.48.020(1)(B) of the Whittier Municipal Code. 
B.  Plumbing Shutoff Valves. Separate full-way shutoff valves shall be provided to each dwelling unit. 
C.  Utility Meters. Each utility that is controlled by and consumed within a dwelling unit shall be separately metered in such a way that the unit owner can be separately billed for its use. 
D.  Open Space. Existing open space shall not be used to meet parking requirements unless the planning commission and/or city council finds that conversion of such area will not be detrimental to future residents of the project or surrounding area. 
E.  Trash Areas. Refuse storage areas shall be provided and maintained in accordance with the provisions of Section 18.10.030(E). 
(Ord. 2899 § 2, 2007: prior code § 9543)  
Chapter 18.82 - RESIDENTIAL CONDOMINIUM PROJECTS 
 
18.82.010 - Purpose. 
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to: 
A.  Promote the development of a diversity of housing types in the city in order to achieve and maintain a balance between rental and owner accommodations, in an effort to meet the housing needs of all economic segments of the community, including the elderly, families with children, and low- and moderate-income households; 
B.  Insure that new condominium projects, as an alternative to single-family detached housing, provide some of the same amenities of single-family living; 
C.  Insure that new condominium projects do not become a negative factor in the community's housing stock; 
D.  Avoid the management and special land use problems that frequently beset residential condominium projects. 
(Prior code § 9545)  
18.82.020 - Definitions. 
In addition to the definitions set forth in Chapter 18.06, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them as set forth in this section: 
A.  "Association" means the organization of persons owning the individual condominiums within a condominium project. 
B.  "Condominium" means an estate in real property consisting of an undivided interest in common in a portion of a parcel of real property, together with a separate interest in space in a residential building on such real property, such as an apartment, including exclusive rights of occupancy of space within a community apartment project or a stock cooperative. A condominium may include in addition a separate interest in other portions of such real property. The term "dwelling unit" or "unit" as used in this chapter shall mean the same as condominium. 
C.  "Condominium project" means and includes the following: 
1.  A condominium project, as defined in Section 1351 of the California Civil Code, containing two or more residential condominiums, as defined in Section 783 of the California Civil Code; 
2.  A community apartment project as defined in Section 11004 of the Business and Professions Code, containing two or more rights of exclusive occupancy; 
3.  A cooperative apartment, or a stock cooperative, as defined in Section 11003.2 of the California Business and Professions Code, containing two or more rights of exclusive occupancy. 
"Condominium project" shall not include the conversion of existing apartments to condominiums. 
D.  "Density" means the number of residential dwelling units occupying a given unit of land expressed in terms of number of square feet of net lot area required for each dwelling unit. 
E.  "Developer" means the owner or subdivider with a controlling proprietary interest in the condominium project, or the person or organization making application under this chapter. 
F.  "Net lot area" means the total area included within the boundaries of a condominium project exclusive of existing and proposed public or private alleys and streets and other necessary public sites when included within a proposed condominium project. 
G.  "Organizational documents" mean the declaration of restrictions, articles of incorporation, bylaws, budgets and any contracts for the maintenance, management or operation of all or any part of a condominium project. 
H.  "Parking management plan" is a statement of the rules and regulations governing the use and assignment of the parking areas and includes the method of enforcement of those restrictions. The parking management plan shall be established in the conditions, covenants and restrictions (CC & Rs) in a form acceptable to the city. 
I.  "Project" means an entire parcel of real property, including all structures thereon, all or part of which is proposed to be divided, as land or air space, into two or more lots, parcels, units or rights of exclusive occupancy. 
(Ord. 2577 §§ 36, 37, 1992; prior code § 9546)  
18.82.030 - Application—Information required. 
No application for approval of a condominium project will be accepted unless accompanied by an application for site plan review, pursuant to Section 18.56.030, and the following: 
A.  Tentative tract map prepared in accordance with state and city guidelines therefor; and 
B.  Site plans including fully dimensioned drawings showing all existing or proposed structures, parking areas, public improvements, amenities such as pools and other recreation areas, required open space, fencing, etc.; and 
C.  Preliminary landscape plans; and 
D.  Environmental review checklist; and 
E.  Preliminary title report; and 
F.  A copy of the proposed conditions, covenants and restrictions (CC & Rs) which shall include a parking management plan (PMP); and 
G.  Conceptual drawings of the exterior elevations and typical floor plans. 
(Ord. 2289 § 1, 1982: prior code § 9549)  
18.82.040 - Application—Processing. 
Applications shall be submitted by the director to the various departments as necessary for comments and recommendations. All reports and recommendations shall be submitted to the planning commission with the planning department staff analysis. The planning commission shall determine if the design of the condominium project conforms to the purpose and intent of the development criteria in Section 18.82.070, and whether the tentative map meets the provisions of Section 66474 of the Government Code. 
(Ord. 2289 § 3(part), 1982: prior code § 9550)  
18.82.050 - Plans—Approval conditions. 
A.  No condominium project shall be approved unless the planning commission determines: 
1.  That the project is consistent with the general plan or applicable specific plan; 
2.  That the design of the project is consistent with the purpose and intent of these regulations; and 
3.  That the site is physically suitable for the type and density of the project. 
B.  In addition to those conditions imposed on the tentative map, a site plan may have imposed only those conditions which the commission and/or the city council deemed necessary to insure compliance with the provisions of Section 18.82.070. 
C.  The commission's action on the site plan shall be final and conclusive unless appealed to the city council in the manner set forth in Section 18.40.080. 
(Ord. 2289 § 3(part), 1982: prior code §§ 9551 and 9553)  
18.82.060 - Plans—Duration of approval. 
A site plan approved pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be valid and in effect for a period of six months after approval thereof. The director may for good cause extend the time for a reasonable period, not to exceed six months. 
(Ord. 2289 § 3(part), 1982: prior code § 9552)  
18.82.070 - Development standards—Criteria for consideration. 
There are considerations relative to each condominium project which do not lend themselves to specific development standards. Therefore, the following criteria shall apply to condominium projects proposed pursuant to the provisions of Sections 18.82.010, 18.82.020 and 18.82.080 through 18.82.210. These criteria shall serve as a basis for the evaluation of each condominium project relative to the use of accepted and appropriate planning, design and architectural techniques to achieve the purpose of these regulations. In addition to the standards set forth in Section 18.82.080, each condominium project must: 
A.  Be a comprehensive and integrated plan which provides adequate and convenient open space, off-street parking and amenities for contemporary single-family living; 
B.  Provide harmony and continuity of design both within the project and between the project and the surrounding community and environment; 
C.  Show a reasonable effort to conserve street, driveway, utility and other public and quasi-public improvements to provide maximum amounts of open space and minimize consumption of natural resources; 
D.  Show a reasonable effort toward preservation of the natural topography, large and mature trees and the general environment; and 
E.  Establish, with the use of structures and landscaping, a perceptible spatial transition from the public street through the semiprivacy of the common areas, to the privacy of each condominium. 
(Ord. 2289 § 2, 1982: prior code § 9548)  
18.82.080 - Development standards—Applicability. 
In addition to all other provisions of this chapter, the standards set forth in Sections 18.82.090 through 18.82.210 shall apply to each condominium project. 
(Prior code § 9547(part))  
18.82.090 - Lot size. 
A condominium project shall not be permitted unless it is to be located on a lot which has: 
A.  A net lot area of not less than thirteen thousand five hundred square feet; and 
B.  A lot width of not less than eighty feet. 
(Prior code § 9547(2))  
18.82.100 - Density. 
The density of a condominium project shall not exceed the following: 
A.  Projects located on parcels with a net lot area of forty thousand square feet or greater (condominium projects)
B.  Projects located on parcels with a net lot area of less than forty thousand square feet: one unit for each two thousand one hundred seventy-eight square feet of net lot area or the density allowed by the zone classification of the lot upon which the project is to be located, whichever is the lesser density. 
(Prior code § 9547(1))  
18.82.110 - Separation of buildings. 
In addition to and where applicable in context, in place of the requirements of subsection C of Section 18.10.030, buildings in a condominium project shall observe the following court and setback requirements: 
A.  For condominiums fronting on an interior court, the minimum distance between facing condominiums shall be twenty-five feet; 
B.  For condominiums fronting on the rear or end of an adjacent building on the same lot, the minimum distance shall be fifteen feet; 
C.  For condominiums rear to rear, the minimum distance shall be twelve feet except, where there is required private open space at the rear of the condominiums, the minimum distance shall be sixteen feet; 
D.  Where a condominium fronts on a driveway or parking area, the minimum distance from the front of the condominium to the driveway or parking area shall be fifteen feet; 
E.  Where a condominium fronts on a property line, the condominium shall be a minimum of ten feet from the line; and 
F.  Where a project is located contiguous to an R-2 (PD) or more restrictive zone, no building wall, balcony or deck above the first floor may be closer than fifteen feet to the common property line. 
(Prior code § 9547(3))  
18.82.120 - Open space. 
Each condominium project shall have and maintain on the lot upon which it is located, a minimum of four hundred square feet of usable open space for each condominium located and of dimensions in accordance with the following: 
A.  Private Open Space. Each condominium shall be provided with a minimum of two hundred square feet of private open space which shall be located and maintained immediately adjacent to the unit served thereby with direct access thereto from a living, dining, family or bedroom, except that such private open space for units located entirely above the ground floor need only be one hundred fifty square feet. 
B.  Common Open Space. Each condominium project shall have and maintain on the lot upon which it is located a minimum of two hundred square feet of common open space for each condominium unit, except that units located entirely above the ground floor shall have common open space equal to the difference between the private open space provided per subsection A of this section, and the total open space required. In no case shall such common open space be less than two hundred square feet. 
C.  Minimum Dimensions. The minimum dimension of required usable open space shall be five feet except as follows: 
1.  Private open space shall not be less than eight feet in any dimension and shall have a minimum area of not less than one hundred square feet except for balconies, which shall have a minimum dimension of six feet by ten feet; 
2.  Where open space is contiguous to a required yard, the minimum dimension shall be two feet; 
3.  Where a condominium faces a required side yard, that portion of the required yard in excess of five feet shall be allowed to contribute to open space. 
(Prior code § 9547(5))  
18.82.130 - Off-street parking. 
The parking provisions contained within Sections 18.48.020 and 18.48.070 of the Whittier Municipal Code shall apply to the development of all new condominium and other ownership units within the city. 
(Ord. 2899 § 3, 2007)  
18.82.140 - Utilities. 
A.  Plumbing Shutoff Valves. Separate full-way shutoff valves shall be provided for each condominium. 
B.  Utility Meters. Each utility except water and trash that is controlled by and consumed within the condominium shall be separately metered in such a way that each condominium owner can be separately billed for its use. 
C.  Water Systems. The water system for each condominium in a condominium project wherein two or more condominiums are served by the same water meter shall be connected directly to a manifold located immediately behind the water meter. 
D.  Circuit Breakers. Each condominium shall have an electrical circuit breaker panel within the condominium. 
(Prior code § 9547(8))  
18.82.150 - Water heaters. 
Each condominium shall have a separate water heater located within the condominium or within an attached garage. 
(Prior code § 9547(10))  
18.82.160 - Laundry facilities. 
Each condominium shall have laundry facilities located within the condominium or within an attached garage. 
(Prior code § 9547(11))  
18.82.170 - Landscaping. 
A.  A minimum of fifty percent of the common area in a condominium project, excluding driveways and parking areas, shall be landscaped, including a permanent irrigation system. Such landscaping shall be dispersed throughout the project and shall include a minimum of one tree per unit of at least fifteen-gallon size, and one-third of which must be specimen-size trees, a minimum thirty-six-inch box. 
B.  All landscape plans shall be submitted to the park department for approval. 
(Prior code § 9547(12))  
18.82.175 - Refuse storage areas. 
Each project shall be provided with facilities for the storage of refuse containers, as follows: 
A.  Location. A refuse storage area shall be placed on the same lot as the project it serves. Such area may be located on any portion of a lot where a building or accessory building may be placed; provided that, on properties served by an alley the refuse storage area shall be located within a distance not to exceed five feet of the right-of-way line of the alley. The director of public works or his/her designated representative, may waive the requirement for an on-site refuse storage area when a property is located in an automated refuse collection area and is served by off-site containers. 
B.  Size. Refuse storage areas shall have a minimum area of thirty square feet, with minimum interior dimensions of five feet by six feet. The public works director or his/her designated representative, may require greater or lesser dimensions, where it is determined that such adjustments will increase the efficiency of solid waste disposal operations. 
C.  Design. Refuse storage areas shall be completely enclosed by a view-obscuring wall, not less than six feet in height. The enclosure shall include a closeable, view-obscuring gate, with a minimum five-foot wide unobstructed access point. On properties served by an alley, the gate shall be located adjacent to the alley to accommodate refuse collection. Such wailed enclosure shall be finished to match the color and facade material of the building it serves and shall incorporate landscape screening when possible. 
D.  Maintenance. The property owner shall ensure that all refuse storage areas are regularly cleaned and maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. 
E.  Director. The public works director or his/her designated representative, shall approve the specific locations of refuse storage areas to ensure that they are conveniently adjacent to the units served, and placed to facilitate efficient collection of refuse. When located in an automated refuse collection area, the director of public works or his/her authorized representative, may allow or require the removal, modification or relocation of existing refuse storage areas that do not meet the minimum location, size, and/or design requirements necessary for automated service. 
(Ord. 2755 § 2 (part), 1999)  
18.82.180 - Sound insulation. 
A.  Wall and floor/ceiling assemblies shall conform to the sound insulation performance criteria promulgated in Title 25, California Administrative Code, Section 1092, or its successor. 
B.  All permanent mechanical equipment, including domestic appliances, which are determined by the building official to be a source or potential source of vibration or noise, shall be shock-mounted, isolated from the floor and ceiling, or otherwise installed in a manner approved by the building official to lessen the transmission of vibration and noise to adjacent condominiums. 
(Prior code § 9547(9))  
18.82.190 - Security. 
Each project shall provide and maintain for a minimum of security and safety purposes the following: 
A.  Exterior Lighting. A lighting system shall be provided in the common areas and parking areas. 
1.  Such lighting shall maintain an illumination level on the ground of not less than: 
a.  0.5 footcandles along walkways and open common areas, 
b.  0.5 footcandles in open parking areas and driveways; 
c.  1.0 footcandles on the deck and water surface of swimming pool. 
2.  All such lighting shall be directed away from adjacent properties or shielded to prevent excessive light from falling on the properties. 
B.  Security Hardware. Each condominium shall be provided with exterior doors which meet the following criteria: 
1.  Solid-Core Construction. All doors other than sliding glass doors shall be of solid-core construction not less than one and three-eighths inches thick. 
2.  Dead Bolts on Doors. A single swinging door, the active leaf of a pair of doors, and the bottom leaf of Dutch doors shall be equipped with a dead bolt and a deadlocking latch. Sliding glass doors shall be equipped with a hookshaped or expanding-lug dead bolt with a minimum throw of three-fourths inch. Straight dead bolts shall have a minimum throw of one inch and embedment shall not be less than five-eighths inch into the holding device. The inactive leaf of a pair of doors or the upper leaf of Dutch doors shall be equipped with a dead bolt as described. 
3.  Dead Bolts on Windows. The moveable portion of each window shall be equipped with a permanently installed dead-bolting mechanism in addition to the window-latching device. 
(Prior code § 9547(13))  
18.82.200 - Accessory storage area. 
At least two hundred cubic feet, with a minimum horizontal surface area of twenty-five square feet of enclosed, weatherproofed, lockable storage space shall be provided for each dwelling unit. Such storage space shall be in addition to that ordinarily contained within a unit as cabinets, pantries and clothes closets and shall not be divided into two or more locations. 
(Prior code § 9547(7))  
18.82.210 - Fences and walls. 
A.  Each condominium project shall have and maintain solid masonry walls of a height of not less than four feet nor more than six feet, in and along each lot line of that lot upon which it is located, except in the required front yard area; and 
B.  All private open spaces serving a condominium project located on the ground or on the roof of a subterranean garage shall be enclosed by a view-obscuring fence or wall not less than four feet in height. 
(Prior code § 9547(4))  
Division IV. - Historic Resources  
Chapter 18.84 - HISTORIC RESOURCES  
Article I. - Introduction 
 
18.84.010 - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known as the Whittier Historic Resources Ordinance. 
(Ord. 2785 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
18.84.020 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare through the following measures: 
A.  Safeguard the heritage of the city by protecting resources that reflect its cultural, historical and architectural legacy; 
B.  Promote public understanding, appreciation and involvement in the unique heritage of the city; 
C.  Foster civic pride in the beauty and notable accomplishments of the past; 
D.  Protect and enhance the city's attractions to residents and visitors and to support and stimulate business and industry; 
E.  Enhance the visual and aesthetic character of the city; 
F.  Promote the use of historic resources; and 
G.  Protect and safeguard the property rights of the owners whose property is declared to be a historic resource. 
(Ord. 2785 Exh. A (part), 2001: Ord. 2389 § 1 (part), 1986)  
18.84.030 - Applicability. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all historic resources and structures that are at least fifty years old within the city. 
(Ord. 2785 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
18.84.040 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases shall be defined as set forth in this section, for the purpose of this chapter. 
A.  "Alteration" means any exterior change or modification to the character-defining or significant, physical improvements or architectural features of a historic resource. 
B.  "Architectural feature" means an exterior design element of a historic resource embodying the style thereof, including, but not limited to, the kind, color, texture of building materials; tile and iron work; the type, style, and arrangement of windows, doors, lights, signs and other fixtures appurtenant to such structure; and, on a larger scale, includes siting, composition and massing (the number, placement and size of improvements). 
C.  "Certificate of appropriateness" means certification that the commission, or council upon appeal, has made the necessary findings to approve plans to alter, restore, rehabilitate, remove, relocate, add on to, or demolish, in whole or in part, a historic resource. 
D.  "Certificate of economic hardship" means certification that the commission, or council upon appeal, has made the necessary findings to permit the proposed work due to extreme financial privation or adversity. 
E.  "Commission" means the historic resources commission of the city. 
F.  "Contributing resource" means any improvement that adds to the historical, architectural, or cultural significance of a historic district. 
G.  "Historic district" means a specific geographic area that contains a number of historic resources that has been designated as such pursuant to this chapter. 
H.  "Historic landmark" means any singular historic resource that has been designated as such pursuant to this chapter. 
I.  "Historic resource" means any improvement, historic landmark or district, or other object of cultural, architectural or historical significance to the citizens of the city, the region, the state or the nation, which is designated or eligible for designation and determined to be appropriate for historic preservation by the commission, or by the council upon appeal, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
J.  "Improvement" means any structural elements, architectural feature, plaque, light standard, light fixture, street furniture, porch and steps, structure, sign, fence, wall, mature tree or other specified object constituting a physical feature of real property. 
K.  "Mills Act agreement" means the property contract between the city and property owner that provides for reduced property taxes in return for the rehabilitation, restoration and preservation of a qualified historical property pursuant to California Government Code Section 50280 et. seq. 
L.  "Non-contributing resource" means any improvement that does not add to the historical, architectural or cultural significance of a district. 
M.  "Secretary" means the secretary to the historic resources commission. 
N.  "Work" means any construction, reconstruction, rehabilitation, restoration, remodeling or demolition of a historic resource. 
O.  "Work permit" means a permit issued pursuant to this title, allowing work to be done on a historic resource. 
(Ord. 2785 Exh. A (part), 2001: Ord. 2598 § 1(B), 1993; Ord. 2389 § 1 (part), 1986)  
Article II. - Designation of Historic Landmarks and Districts 
 
18.84.050 - Designation criteria for historic landmarks. 
A historic resource shall be designated a historic landmark if the council finds that it meets the criteria for listing on the National Register of Historic Places or the California Register of Historical Resources; or meets one or more of the following criteria: 
A.  It is particularly representative of a distinct historical period, type, style, region or way of life; 
B.  It is connected with someone renowned, important, or a local personality; 
C.  It is connected with a use that was once common, but is now rare; 
D.  It represents the work of a master builder, engineer, designer, artist or architect whose individual genius influenced his age; 
E.  It is the site of an important historic event or is associated with events that have made a meaningful contribution to the nation, state or city; 
F.  It exemplifies a particular architectural style; 
G.  It exemplifies the best remaining architectural type of a neighborhood; 
H.  It embodies elements of outstanding attention to architectural or engineering design, detail, material or craftsmanship; or 
I.  It has a unique location, singular characteristic or is an established and familiar visual feature of a neighborhood, community or the city. 
(Ord. 2785 Exh. A (part), 2001: Ord. 2598 § 1(C), 1993; Ord. 2389 § 1 (part), 1986)  
18.84.060 - Designation criteria for historic districts. 
A neighborhood consisting primarily of historic resources, or the thematic grouping of same, shall be designated a historic district if the council finds that it meets one or more of the following criteria: 
A.  It meets the criteria for a historic landmark; 
B.  It contributes to the architectural, historic or cultural significance of an area, being a geographically definable area possessing a concentration of historic resources or a thematically related grouping of structures which contribute to each other and are unified by plan, style or physical development; or 
C.  It reflects significant geographical patterns, including those associated with different eras of settlement and growth, particular transportation modes or distinctive examples of a park landscape, site design or community planning. 
(Ord. 2785 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
18.84.070 - Application for nomination. 
Any person or group, including the city, may nominate a historic resource(s) for designation as a historic landmark or district by submitting an application to the planning department. Applications shall include, but are not limited to, submittal of the following: 
A.  Documentation indicating how the nominated resource satisfies the designation criteria; 
B.  Any other information determined to be necessary for review of the proposed work; and 
C.  Required filing fees, as set by council resolution. City initiated nominations are not subject to filing fees. 
(Ord 2785 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
18.84.080 - Eligibility for designation. 
A.  Any improvement surveyed and identified by the city, in conformance with state survey standards and guidelines, and/or found to be worthy of consideration for designation by the majority vote of the commission and/or council at public hearing, shall be placed on the city's list of historic resources and shall be eligible for nomination. 
B.  The secretary may remove a resource from the eligibility list when he or she finds that it has lost all historical, architectural and/or cultural significance due to catastrophe, demolition or extensive alterations performed after the property was initially surveyed. Any request for removal from the eligibility list that does not meet the criteria listed in this subsection shall require review by the commission. 
(Ord. 2785 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
18.84.090 - Nomination procedures—Commission hearings. 
A.  Each application or city initiated proceeding for designation shall be considered by the commission at a public hearing. The secretary shall set the time and place of such hearing. Any such hearing may be continued from time to time. 
B.  Notice of the time, place and purpose of such hearing shall be given in writing by the secretary to the owners and occupants of the subject and adjacent properties. To include all properties within one hundred feet of the property boundary, and at a minimum, fourteen properties surrounding the project, whichever is greater: 
1.  For typical lots, two properties on either side of a subject parcel, five properties behind and five properties across the street from a project. 
2.  For corner lots, two properties on interior side of a subject parcel, three properties in front and behind and five properties across the opposite street from a project. 
3.  For unusual circumstances, the director of community development shall have the ability to modify the notification requirements. 
C.  Following the hearing, the commission shall recommend to the council approval or disapproval of the proposal for designation. 
(Ord. 2785 Exh. A (part), 2001) 
( Ord. No. 3019, § 4 , 3-25-14)  
18.84.100 - Designation procedures—Council hearings. 
The sole authority to designate a historic resource as a historic landmark or district shall be vested in the council, in accordance with the following: 
A.  Within ten days of the recommendations, the secretary shall send a copy to the clerk. The clerk shall set a hearing at which the council shall consider the recommendation of the commission. The applicant and owner of the property shall be given notice of the time and place of the council hearing at least ten days prior to the hearing date, together with a copy of the commission's recommendation to the council. 
B.  Following the hearing referred to in Section 18.84.100, the council shall adopt or reject the designation recommended by the commission. In the alternative, the council may continue its consideration of the matter, or refer the proposed designation to the commission for further consideration within a period of time designated by the council. 
C.  Adoption of the designation of a historic resource shall be made by resolution. 
D.  Within ten days of the council's decision, notice thereof shall be mailed by the clerk to the applicant and record owner of the property proposed for designation. 
(Ord. 2785 Exh. A (part), 2001: Ord. 2598 § 1(C), 1993; Ord. 2389 § 1 (part), 1986)  
18.84.110 - Local official register. 
Resolutions adopting designations of historic resources shall collectively be known as the local official register of historic resources. the local official register shall be kept on file with the secretary, who shall transmit copies to the clerk, the director of building and safety, the director of public works, the executive director of the city of Whittier Museum, the president of the Whittier historical society, and the main branch of the city of Whittier library. 
(Ord. 2785 Exh. A (part), 2001: Ord. 2389 § 1 (part), 1986)  
18.84.120 - Deletion of demolished resource. 
When a listed historic resource has been demolished pursuant to the provisions of this code, the secretary, upon notice thereof, shall cause such structure to be deleted from the local official register. upon such deletion, the provisions of this chapter shall have no further application to such property. 
(Ord. 2785 Exh. A (part), 2001: Ord. 2389 § 1 (part), 1986)  
18.84.130 - Public agencies. 
The commission shall take appropriate steps to notify all public agencies and public utilities which own or may acquire property, including easements and public rights-of-way in the city, of the existence of historic landmarks and historic districts. 
(Ord. 2785 Exh. A (part), 2001: Ord. 2389 § 1 (part), 1986)  
18.84.140 - Redevelopment project areas. 
The provisions of a disposition and development agreement or owner participation agreement, approved and entered into by the city of Whittier redevelopment agency, may contain provisions superseding the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2785 Exh. A (part), 2001: Ord. 2389 § 1 (part), 1986)  
Article III. - Certificate of Appropriateness— Economic Hardship 
 
18.84.150 - Certificate of appropriateness requirements. 
A certificate of appropriateness process is established to ensure that any alteration to a historic resource is in keeping with the historic character of the resource. 
No permit shall be issued for work on a historic resource until a certificate of appropriateness or waiver has been issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
A certificate of appropriateness shall be required for any: 
A.  Alteration, addition, restoration, rehabilitation, remodeling, demolition or relocation of a historic resource. approval of such work shall be required even if the city requires no other permits. 
B.  Work to the exterior of any non-contributing resource within a historic district. reasonable efforts shall be made to produce compatibility with the character of the district, and in no event shall there be a greater deviation from existing compatibility. 
C.  Infill construction within a historic district. 
D.  New improvements within a historic district. 
Once a certificate of appropriateness has been issued, the secretary shall, from time to time, inspect the work to ensure that the work complies with the approved certificate of appropriateness. 
(Ord. 2785 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
18.84.160 - Certificate of appropriateness application. 
All applications shall be filed with the planning department. The applicant is encouraged to confer with the planning department prior to application submittal. 
All applications shall include: 
A.  Plans and specifications showing the proposed exterior appearance; 
B.  Materials and colors to be used on the exterior of the resource; 
C.  Relationship of the proposed work to the surrounding environment, if necessary; 
D.  Relationship to the existing scale, massing, architectural style, site and streetscape, landscaping and signage for new construction in historic districts; 
E.  Any other information determined to be necessary for review of the proposed work; and, 
F.  Required fee(s), as set by council resolution. 
(Ord. 2785 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
18.84.170 - Certificate of appropriateness review. 
The secretary shall review all proposed work on any historic resource to determine if a certificate of appropriateness is required. 
A.  If the secretary determines the proposed work is consistent with the historic preservation guidelines set forth in this chapter, a waiver shall be issued. 
B.  If the secretary determines the proposed work is not consistent with the historic preservation guidelines, a certificate of appropriateness shall be required. 
C.  Determinations by the secretary shall be made within thirty days of submittal of a complete application. 
D.  Appeal of the secretary's action shall be made in writing to the planning director within ten days of said determination. 
(Ord. 2785 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
18.84.180 - Certificate of appropriateness waiver. 
When alterations, restorations, rehabilitations, remodeling and additions to historic resources are accomplished in substantial accord with the guidelines set forth in this section, as determined by the secretary, a certificate of appropriateness from the commission is not required prior to issuance of a building permit. Those alterations may include, but are not limited to, the following, if no significant change in appearance occurs or the proposed change restores period features: 
A.  Roofing; 
B.  Foundation; 
C.  Chimney; 
D.  Construction, demolition or alteration of side and rear yard fences; 
E.  Demolition, alteration or reconstruction of front yard fences; 
F.  Landscaping, unless the landmark designation specifically identifies the landscape, layout, features, or elements as having particular historical, architectural, or cultural merit; 
G.  Demolition or alteration of non-contributing signs; and 
H.  Accessory structures or additions under five hundred square feet, when not visible from a public right-of-way, if the new construction is accomplished in accordance with the historic preservation guidelines set forth in this section, and respective design guidelines and does not destroy any significant architectural features of the resource. 
(Ord. 2785 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
18.84.190 - Certificate of appropriateness procedure. 
If a certificate of appropriateness is required for a historic resource, the following procedures shall apply: 
A.  The secretary shall review all applications. 
B.  The secretary shall determine the completeness of the application within thirty days. 
C.  Once an application is determined complete, it shall be scheduled for the next commission meeting, allowing for public noticing requirements in conformance with Section 18.84.090. 
D.  The secretary shall make a recommendation in writing that includes findings of fact relating to the criteria established in this section. The secretary shall transmit its recommendation to the commission, the property owner(s), and the applicant. 
E.  The commission, within thirty days of receipt of the recommendation, shall approve or disapprove the application citing the findings of fact that constitute the basis for its decision. 
F.  The applicant shall be notified of the commission's decision by mail within ten days. 
(Ord. 2785 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
18.84.200 - Certificate of appropriateness standard findings of fact. 
The following findings shall be made for all certificate of appropriateness applications other than those involving demolition, which shall adhere to Section 18.84.21. 
The proposed alteration, restoration, relocation or construction, in whole or in part, will not: 
A.  Detrimentally change, destroy or adversely affect any significant architectural feature of the resource; 
B.  Detrimentally change, destroy or adversely affect the historic character or value of the resource; 
C.  Be incompatible with the exterior features of other improvements within the district; 
D.  Adversely affect or detract from the character of the district. 
(Ord. 2785 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
18.84.210 - Certificate of appropriateness demolition findings of fact. 
A certificate of appropriateness for demolition of a historic resource may be issued upon the commission's finding that it, in whole or in part, is necessary because: 
A.  All efforts to restore, rehabilitate, and/or relocate the resource have been exhausted; 
B.  Restoration/rehabilitation is not practical because the extensive alterations required would render the resource not worthy of preservation; 
C.  Failure to demolish the resource would adversely affect or detract from the character of the district; or 
D.  The applicant has obtained a certificate of economic hardship, in accordance with Section 18.84.220. 
(Ord. 2785 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
18.84.220 - Certificate of economic hardship requirement. 
A certificate of economic hardship process is established to ensure that denial of a certificate of appropriateness does not create any undue hardship upon the owner of a historic resource. No action shall be taken to demolish a historic resource for a period thirty days following the issuance of a certificate of economic hardship. 
(Ord. 2785 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
18.84.230 - Certificate of economic hardship application. 
All applications shall be filed with the planning department. The applicant is encouraged to confer with the planning department prior to application submittal. 
All applications shall include: 
A.  Cost estimate of the proposed construction, addition, alteration, demolition or relocation; 
B.  Cost estimate of the additional cost(s) that would be incurred to comply with the recommendations of the commission for issuance of a certificate of appropriateness; 
C.  A rehabilitation report from a licensed engineer or architect with expertise in rehabilitation as to the structural soundness of any structures on the property and their suitability for rehabilitation; 
D.  The estimated market value of the property in its current condition; 
E.  The estimated market value of the property after completion of the proposed construction, alteration, demolition or relocation; 
F.  The estimated market value of the property after any condition recommended by the commission; 
G.  In the case of demolition, the estimated market value of the property after renovation of the existing property for continued use; 
H.  In the case of demolition, an estimate from an architect, developer, real estate consultant, appraiser or other real estate professional with experience in rehabilitation as to the economic feasibility of rehabilitation or reuse of the existing structure on the property; 
I.  For income-producing properties, information on annual gross income, operating and maintenance expenses, tax deductions for depreciation and annual cash flow after debt service, current property value appraisals, assessed property valuations and real estate taxes; 
J.  Remaining balance on any mortgage or other financing secured by the property and annual debt service, if any, for the previous two years; 
K.  All appraisals obtained within the previous two years by the owner or applicant in connection with the purchase, financing or ownership of the property; 
L.  The amount paid for the property if purchased within the previous thirty-six months, the date of purchase and the party from whom purchased, including a description of the relationship, if any, between the owner of record or applicant and the person from whom the property was purchased, and any terms of financing between the seller and buyer; 
M.  Any listing of the property for sale, rent, price asked and offers received, if any, within the previous two years; 
N.  Any other information considered necessary by the commission to determine whether or not the property does or may yield a reasonable return to the owners; 
O.  Required fee(s), as set by council resolution. 
(Ord. 2785 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
18.84.240 - Certificate of economic hardship procedure. 
If a certificate of economic hardship is required for a historic resource, the procedure for a certificate of appropriateness shall apply, with the exception that the previous requirement for findings be substituted with the following certificate of economic hardship findings of fact requirement. 
(Ord. 2785 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
18.84.250 - Certificate of economic hardship findings of fact. 
The following findings shall be made for approval of all certificate of economic hardship applications. 
A.  Denial of the application will diminish the value of the subject property so as to leave substantially no value. 
B.  Sale or rental of the property is impractical, when compared to the cost of holding such property for uses permitted in this zone. 
C.  An adaptive reuse study has been conducted and found that utilization of the property for lawful purposes is prohibited or impractical. 
D.  Rental at a reasonable rate of return is not feasible. 
E.  Denial of the certificate of appropriateness would damage the owner of the property unreasonably in comparison to the benefit conferred on the community. 
F.  All means involving city sponsored incentives, such as transfer of development rights, tax abatements, financial assistance, building code modifications, changes in the zoning ordinance, loans, grants and reimbursements, have been explored to relieve possible economic disincentives. 
(Ord. 2785 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
18.84.260 - Certificate of appropriateness—Economic hardship extension. 
A certificate of appropriateness or economic hardship shall lapse and become void one year from the date of approval, unless a building permit (if required) has been issued and work authorized by the certificate has commenced prior to such expiration date and is diligently pursued to completion. 
Upon request of the property owner, the secretary may extend a certificate for an additional period of one year. The secretary may approve, approve with conditions, or deny any request for extension. 
(Ord. 2785 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
18.84.270 - Certificate of appropriateness—Economic hardship revocation. 
A certificate of appropriateness or economic hardship may be revoked or modified due to: 
A.  Noncompliance with any terms or conditions of the certificate; 
B.  Noncompliance with any provision in this chapter; or 
C.  A finding of fraud or misrepresentation used in the process of obtaining the certificate. 
(Ord. 2785 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
18.84.280 - Certificate of appropriateness—Economic hardship revocation procedures. 
The following revocation proceedings may be initiated by any member of the commission. 
A.  Once revocation proceedings have been initiated, work being done relative to the certificate shall be immediately suspended until a final determination by the commission can be made. 
B.  Once revocation proceedings have been initiated, it shall be scheduled for the next commission meeting, allowing for public noticing requirements in conformance with Section 18.84.090. 
C.  The certificate holder shall have an opportunity to be heard at the commission revocation meeting. 
D.  The commission, within sixty days of initiation of the proceedings, shall act to revoke or continue the certificate. 
E.  The applicant shall be notified of the commission's decision by mail within ten days. 
F.  Upon revocation, all activity shall cease, and associated permits shall be revoked. 
(Ord. 2785 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
18.84.290 - Appeal procedure. 
A.  Any decision denying an application for a certificate/work permit may be appealed to the council not later than fifteen days following the giving of notice of decision. Such appeal shall be taken by filing a written notice of appeal with the clerk, along with an appeal fee as set by council resolution. 
B.  The clerk shall cause the appeal to be set for hearing before the council within thirty days of receipt of the notice of appeal. The clerk shall give the appellant and all persons requesting the same at least ten days' written notice of the time and place of the appeal hearing. 
C.  Following its de novo consideration of the appeal, the council shall approve, approve with modifications, or disapprove the application. 
(Ord. 2785 Exh. A (part), 2001: Ord. 2389 § 1 (part), 1986)  
Article IV. - Mills Act Agreement 
 
18.84.300 - Mills Act agreement requirements. 
A Mills Act contract process is established to provide economic incentives for the preservation of a designated historic landmark or contributing structure within a designated historic district. 
All designated historic landmarks, contributing structures in designated historic districts and properties listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the California Register of Historic Resources are eligible for Mills Act contracts, pursuant to the provisions of Article 12, Section 50280 through Section 50290, Chapter 1, Part 1, Title 5, of the California Government Code, or any successor statutes. 
All Mills Act contracts shall comply with the provisions listed in Section 50281 of the California Government Code, which includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
A.  The term of the contract shall be for a minimum of ten years. 
B.  The owner shall comply with the U.S. Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Treatment of Historic Properties with Guidelines for Preserving, Rehabilitating, Restoring and Reconstructing Historic Buildings and the State Historic Building Code. 
C.  The owner shall agree to periodic inspections to determine the owner's compliance with the contract. 
D.  The agreement shall be binding upon, and insure to the benefit of, all successors in interest of the owner. 
E.  The secretary shall send notice to the State Office of Historic Preservation within six months of entering into the contract. 
(Ord. 2785 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
18.84.310 - Mills Act agreement application. 
All applications shall be filed with the planning department. The applicant is encouraged to confer with the planning department prior to application submittal. 
All applications shall include: 
A.  A copy of an updated title report for the property; 
B.  A rehabilitation plan/maintenance list of the work to be completed within the ten year contract period, including cost estimates and the year in which the work will be completed; 
C.  A financial analysis form showing current property taxes and estimated taxes for the property under a Mills Act agreement; and 
D.  Required fee(s), as set by council resolution. 
(Ord. 2785 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
18.84.320 - Mills Act agreement procedure. 
A.  The secretary shall review all applications. 
B.  The secretary shall determine the completeness of the application within thirty days of receipt of such. 
C.  Once an application is determined complete, it shall be scheduled for the next commission meeting, allowing for public noticing requirements in conformance with Section 18.84.090. 
D.  The commission shall make a recommendation in writing and transmit such to the council, the property owner(s), and the applicant. 
E.  The council, within sixty days of receipt of the recommendation from the commission, shall approve or deny the application. 
F.  The applicant shall be notified of the council's decision by mail within ten days. 
(Ord. 2785 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
18.84.330 - Mills Act agreement non-renewal. 
A Mills Act contract shall be a perpetual ten year contract that automatically renews annually. Either party may file a request for non-renewal by written notice. 
(Ord. 2785 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
18.84.340 - Mills Act agreement cancellation. 
A Mills Act contract may be cancelled or modified if due to: 
A.  Owner's written request to the secretary at any time; 
B.  Noncompliance with any terms or conditions of the contract; 
C.  Noncompliance with any provision in this chapter; or 
D.  A finding of misrepresentation or fraud used in the process of obtaining the contract. 
(Ord. 2785 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
18.84.350 - Mills Act agreement cancellation procedure. 
Cancellation proceedings may be initiated by any member of the commission. 
A.  Once cancellation proceedings have been initiated, it shall be scheduled for the next commission meeting, allowing for public noticing requirements in conformance with Section 18.84.090. 
B.  The commission shall make a recommendation to the council. The commission shall transmit its recommendation to the council, and the property owner(s). 
C.  Council, within sixty days of initiation of the proceedings, shall cancel or continue the contract. 
D.  The property owner shall be notified of the council's decision by mail within ten days. 
(Ord. 2785 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
18.84.360 - Mills Act agreement cancellation fee. 
If a Mills Act contract is cancelled, a cancellation fee equal to twelve and one-half percent of the current fair market value shall be assessed. 
(Ord. 2785 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
Article V. - Maintenance and Demolition 
 
18.84.370 - Duty to keep in good repair. 
The owner, or other person in charge of a historic resource, has a duty to keep in good repair all of the exterior features of such resource and all interior features thereof which, if not maintained, may cause or tend to cause the exterior features of such resource to deteriorate, decay become damaged or fall into a state of disrepair. 
A certificate of appropriateness shall not be issued for the demolition of a historic resource because of the failure of the owner to comply with the provisions of this section. 
It shall be the duty of the director of building and safety to enforce this section with guidance from the commission. 
All historic resources shall be preserved against such decay and be kept free from structural defects through the prompt repair of any of the following: 
A.  Facades that may fall and injure a member of the public or property; 
B.  Deteriorated or inadequate foundation, defective or deteriorated flooring or floor supports, deteriorated walls or other vertical structural supports; 
C.  Members of ceilings, roofs and roof supports or other horizontal members which age, split or buckle due to defective material or deterioration; 
D.  Deteriorated or insufficient waterproofing of exterior walls, roofs, foundations or floors, including broken windows or doors; 
E.  Defective or insufficient weather protection for exterior wall covering, including lack of paint or weathering due to lack of paint or other protective covering; and 
F.  Any fault or defect which renders it not properly watertight or structurally unsafe. 
(Ord. 2785 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
18.84.380 - Ordinary maintenance and repair. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural feature in or on any property covered by this chapter that does not involve a change in design, material, or external appearance thereof. 
(Ord. 2785 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
18.84.390 - Enforcement and penalties. 
A.  Any person who violates a requirement of this chapter or fails to obey an order issued by the commission or comply with a condition of approval of any certificate or permit issued under this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day that such failure continues shall constitute a separate violation. 
B.  Any alteration or demolition of a historic resource in violation of this chapter is expressly declared to be a nuisance and shall be abated by restoring or reconstructing the property to its original condition prior to the violation. Any person or entity that demolishes or substantially alters or causes substantial alteration or demolition of a structure, in violation of the provisions of this chapter, shall be liable for a civil penalty. 
C.  Alteration or demolition of a historic resource in violation of this chapter shall authorize the city to issue a temporary moratorium for the development of the subject property for a period not to exceed twenty-four months from the date the city becomes aware of the alteration or demolition in violation of this chapter. The purpose of the moratorium is to provide the city an opportunity to study and determine appropriate mitigation measures for the alteration or removal of the historic resource, and to ensure measures are incorporated into any future development plans and approvals for the subject property. Mitigation measures as determined by the planning department and/or commission shall be imposed as a condition of any subsequent permit for development of the subject property. 
D.  In the case of demolition, the civil penalty shall be equal to one-half the assessed value of the historic resource prior to the demolition. In the case of alteration, the civil penalty shall be equal to one-half the cost of restoration of the altered portion of the historic resource. Once the civil penalty has been paid, building and construction permits and/or a certificate of occupancy may be issued. 
E.  The city attorney may maintain an action for injunctive relief to restrain a violation or cause, where possible, the complete or partial restoration, reconstruction or replacement of any structure demolished, partially demolished, altered or partially altered in violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2785 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
18.84.400 - Demolition of historic resources. 
Demolition, wholly or partially, of a historic resource without issuance of a certificate of appropriateness is prohibited unless it is determined that an unsafe or dangerous condition exists, in which case, the secretary shall, upon an assessment and recommendation of the director of building and safety, certify to the commission that such a condition exists and cannot be rectified through the use of the California State Historic Building Code. 
In such a case, a certificate of appropriateness shall not be required. 
(Ord. 2785 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
18.84.410 - Demolition of other historical structures. 
For non-listed, eligible or designated structures at least fifty years old, the following procedure shall be completed prior to issuance of a demolition permit. 
A.  The applicant shall submit a request for review to the secretary. 
B.  The secretary shall determine the potential significance of the structures and make one of the following determinations: 
1.  The structure does not qualify for designation eligibility in accordance with the provisions of this chapter; or 
2.  The structure does qualify for designation eligibility and the request is forwarded to the commission for majority consent, a determination of eligibility, or nomination, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2785 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
18.84.420 - Replacement requirements. 
A.  A certificate of appropriateness shall not be issued for the demolition, in whole or in part, of a historic resource unless a plan for a replacement improvement has been approved through the appropriate development review process. 
B.  No permit shall be issued for the demolition, in whole or in part, of a historic resource unless a permit has been issued for a replacement improvement, unless demolition is required in conformance with Section 18.84.400. 
(Ord. 2785 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
18.84.430 - Infill development requirements. 
A.  New improvements constructed within a historic district shall be designed to be compatible with the architectural style, features and historic character of the district. 
B.  New structures shall be compatible with the original style of the contributing resources within a historic district. The design of the new structure shall incorporate the following considerations: 
1.  The design shall incorporate the design features and details of contributing resources. 
2.  The height, width, and length of the new structure shall be consistent with the original characteristic of the contributing resources. 
3.  The average massing, setbacks and arrangement of the contributing resources shall be respected. 
4.  The exterior materials, treatment and application shall be similar to the contributing resources. 
(Ord. 2785 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
Article VI. - Historic Preservation 
 
18.84.440 - State Historic Building Code. 
The California State Historic Building Code (SHBC) provides alternative building regulations for the rehabilitation, preservation, restoration, or relocation of structures surveyed and identified as a historic resource. The SHBC shall be used for any historic resource in the city's building permit procedure. 
(Ord. 2785 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
18.84.450 - Historic preservation easements. 
Preservation easements on the facades of buildings designated as historic resources may be acquired by the city, or on the city's behalf, by a nonprofit group designated by the city through purchase, donation, or condemnation pursuant to California Civil Code 815. 
(Ord. 2785 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
18.84.460 - Historic preservation guidelines. 
In order to ensure that the city's historic resources are preserved for future generations, the following guidelines have been developed to assist owners in the preservation, rehabilitation, protection and maintenance of their historic resources. The guidelines are adapted from the United States Department of the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties with Guidelines for Preserving, Rehabilitating, Restoring and Reconstructing Historic Buildings. 
Additions 
Using the existing structure. 
Conversions of basements and attics to habitable space are the most preferred way of adding square footage. Dormers shall be introduced, where appropriate, to facilitate conversions. Small bays if strategically spaced and in keeping with the overall design of the house, can accommodate more habitable space while maintaining the integrity of the overall design. 
New construction. 
All new construction shall be consistent with the existing structure. Large additions should be placed at the rear or side of structures to minimize visual impacts. New additions should be handled in one of two ways: 
A seamless addition that forms a new dominant structure mass consistent with the historic style and uses materials and architectural designs indistinguishable from what exists; 
An accented addition that expresses a new structure projection as an additive element, reinforcing the identity of the original structure, and is made from compatible, but not necessarily identical, materials. 
New construction along the front of a structure should generally maintain the proportion and arrangement of openings, projections, and other features. 
Upper-story additions are discouraged unless they are consistent with the original design and character of the house style. 
The architectural style shall be consistent with the original structure and shall use material similar to those used on the main structure, including siding treatment, windows, doors, trim, roof pitch, etc. 
Details on the addition shall match the architectural details on the original structure, such as lattice work, projecting beams, etc. 
Garages and other Accessory Structures 
Garages and other accessory structures shall be consistent with the historic character of the main structure. 
The architectural style shall be consistent with the main structure and shall use material similar to those used on the main structure, including siding treatment, windows, doors, trim, roof pitch, etc. 
Details on the accessory structure shall match the architectural details on the main structure such as lattice work, projecting beams, etc. 
Garages shall be located to the rear of the property and detached from the main structure. 
Wood Siding and Architectural Details 
Preservation. 
All original wood siding and architectural details should be identified, retained and preserved. 
All wall coverings that hide original wood siding and architectural details should be removed. 
Protection. 
All causes of wood siding and architectural detail deterioration should be identified, evaluated and treated. Causes include: 
Faulty flashing 
Leaking gutters 
Breaks and cracks 
Open joints 
Deteriorated caulking and sealants 
Insect or fungus infestation 
Deteriorated coating, such as paint or stain 
Cleaning. 
All deteriorated paint or stain should be removed by the gentlest method possible: 
Hand scraping 
Hand sanding 
Hot air heat guns 
Chemical strippers 
Paint shall not be removed by the following methods: 
Propane butane torches 
Sandblasting 
Water blasting 
All wood surfaces that have had paint or stain removed shall be given new coatings to protect the wood. 
Repairs. 
All deteriorated wood elements that cannot be repaired shall be removed. 
All removed wood elements shall be replaced with new wood details that match the size, shape and profile of the original element. 
  
Craftsman Style Home 
Concrete Walls 
Preservation. 
All original finish materials and coatings that have been applied should be identified, retained and preserved. 
All original finish materials and coatings that have been applied should be identified. 
Protection. 
All causes of concrete deterioration should be identified, evaluated and treated. Causes include: 
Exposed steel reinforcing members or metal ties that are rusting 
Cracked broken concrete 
Flat surfaces that permit water to penetrate concrete 
Faulty flashing 
Leaking gutters 
Cleaning 
All concrete walls shall be cleaned with gentle methods that will not damage the plaster finish or concrete surface: 
Water and detergents applied with natural bristle brushes 
Low water pressure 
After adequate testing, the following cleaning methods may be permitted: 
Liquid chemical cleaners that do not damage the concrete or cause ecological damage 
High pressure water 
Paint removal strippers 
The following cleaning method is not permitted: 
Sandblasting 
Repairs 
All rusted steel reinforcing and metal ties shall be removed. 
All broken and loose concrete shall be removed. 
All concrete shall be patched using appropriate repair procedures. 
All original finish materials shall be repaired. 
Replace Missing Concrete Details 
All missing or broken concrete details shall be replaced with new details that match the size, shape, color and texture of the original detail. 
  
Victorian Style Home 
Masonry Walls 
Preservation 
All original exterior masonry walls should be identified, retained and preserved. 
All finish materials and coatings that have been applied should be identified. 
Protection 
All causes of concrete deterioration should be identified, evaluated and treated. Causes include: 
Deteriorated roofs 
Insufficient drainage 
Deferred pointing 
Application of coatings and finish materials 
Faulty flashing 
Leaking gutters 
Cleaning 
All concrete walls shall be cleaned with gentle methods that will not damage the masonry or mortar: 
Water and detergents applied with natural bristle brushes 
Low water pressure 
After adequate testing, the following cleaning methods may be permitted: 
Liquid chemical cleaners that do not damage the masonry or mortar or cause ecological damage 
High pressure water 
Paint removal strippers 
The following cleaning methods are not permitted: 
Sandblasting 
Acid wash on limestone and marble 
Metal bristle brushes 
Prior to initiating the work, all cleaning procedures should be tested to ensure that the masonry will not be damaged. 
Pointing Repair 
Deteriorated pointing will be repaired when it is identified. 
Deteriorated mortar will be removed using hand tools. 
Power tools shall not be used to remove deteriorated pointing. 
The new mortar should match the strength of the original. 
The new mortar should match the color, texture and style of the original mortar. 
The new pointing shall match the width and profile of the original. 
Repairing the Masonry 
Masonry units shall be replaced with new masonry units that match the size, texture and color of the original material. 
Broken masonry units should be patched rather than replaced. 
Replacing Masonry 
All missing or broken masonry units that cannot be repaired shall be replaced with masonry units that match the size, shape, color and texture of the original detail. 
Architectural Metals 
Preservation 
All original metal architectural features should be identified, retained and preserved. 
Metal architectural features that are important in defining the historic character of the historic resource shall not be removed. 
Protection 
All causes of metal corrosion should be identified, evaluated and treated. Causes include: 
Exposing bare metal to water and moisture 
Deterioration of protective coatings 
Galvanic action between two incompatible metals 
Cleaning Non-Ferrous Materials and Alloys 
The type of metal material shall be identified in order to determine the type of cleaning to be used. 
Non-ferrous metals (lead, tin, copper, zinc) whose natural patina should be preserved shall be identified. 
Non-ferrous materials with a natural patina shall be cleaned using gentle methods in order to clean the surface without damaging the patina or coating. 
Alloys that may require protective coatings shall be identified. 
A gentle cleaning method that will not abrade the protective coating shall be used. 
Cleaning Ferrous Metals 
The type of ferrous material (cast iron, wrought iron, steel) shall be identified. 
The type of coating and condition of metal shall be determined. 
Hand scraping shall be used to remove corrosion and deteriorated paint. 
Low pressure grit blasting may be used to remove corrosion and coatings when hand scraping is ineffective. 
Cleaned ferrous metals should be painted immediately with a corrosive resistant coating. 
Repair 
Metal features that are broken or dented shall be repaired. 
Metal features that are broken or dented shall not be replaced. 
Replacement 
Metal features that are too deteriorated to be repaired should be replaced. 
The original metal feature shall be used as a model for the new feature. 
Missing features shall not be replaced with details that do not convey the same visual appearance. 
  
Spanish/Mediterranean Revival Style Home 
Exterior Plaster (Stucco) 
Preservation 
All original exterior plaster features should be identified, retained and preserved. 
Original exterior plaster features that are important in defining the overall historic character of the historic resource shall not be removed. 
Technologically advanced paints and finishes that preserve cracked or damaged plaster shall be used when the original plaster is salvageable. 
Protection 
All causes of plaster deterioration should be identified, evaluated and treated. Causes include: 
Leaking roofs 
Faulty flashing 
Leaking gutters 
Broken concrete substrate 
Deteriorated or rusted metal lath 
Deteriorated wood members 
Cleaning 
All plaster shall be cleaned with gentle methods that will not damage the plaster: 
Water and detergent 
Soft natural bristle brushes 
The following cleaning methods are not permitted: 
Sandblasting 
High pressure water 
Repairs 
All types of deterioration shall be identified: 
Spalling plaster 
Broken plaster 
Cracked plaster 
Missing plaster details 
All deteriorated substrate material shall be removed. 
All plaster shall be patched using industry approved repair procedures and materials. 
Where a large area of plaster needs to be replaced, the adjacent panel should be completely replaced in order to avoid a patched appearance. 
  
Half-timbered Tudor Style House 
Roofs 
Preservation 
All original character defining features of the roof should be identified, retained and preserved. 
Shape 
Slope 
Roofing materials 
Decorative details 
Any original defining features that have been removed or altered should be identified. 
The character defining features of the roof shall not be altered. 
Sound character defining features of the roof should be preserved. 
Protection 
All causes of roof deterioration should be identified, evaluated and treated. Causes include: 
Blocked drains and gutters 
Moisture condensation 
Faulty flashing 
Overhanging tree limbs 
Insect and fungus infestation 
Deteriorated roofing material 
Faulty application of roof fasteners 
Deteriorated fasteners 
Repairs 
All features shall be repaired with similar materials. 
Replacement 
All features that are not repairable shall be replaced. 
The deteriorated elements of the roof should be replaced with new material that preserves the overall shape and slope of the roof. 
Materials that do not convey the visual appearance of the original roof shall not be used. 
Additions to Buildings 
Roofs over additions should retain the character defining features of the original roof. 
Additions to Original Roofs 
Mechanical or solar collection should be installed so that they are not visible from the public right-of-way 
Downspouts 
Unless an original decorative feature on a house, downspouts should be located in an inconspicuous place, such as the corner, side or back of a building. 
Doors 
Preservation 
All original character defining features of doors should be identified, retained and preserved. 
Frames 
Jambs 
Door 
Transoms 
Sills 
Trim 
Screen door 
Fan lights and sidelights 
Doors that are important in defining the overall historic character of the building shall not be removed or radically changed. 
The pattern of the door shall not be changed. 
The historic appearance of doors shall not be changed through the use of inappropriate design, materials, finishes or color. 
Original fittings on doors shall not be stripped. 
Protection 
All causes of deterioration should be identified, evaluated and treated. Causes include: 
Weathering due to paint deterioration 
Rusting due to paint deterioration 
Sealant and caulking deterioration 
Repairs 
Original broken door detail should be repaired. 
When repair of material or missing parts is appropriate, the entire door shall not be replaced. 
Replacement 
When a door can no longer be repaired, or is missing, it should be replaced with a new door that matches the original. 
Character defining doors should not be replaced with new doors that do not convey the same visual appearance of the original. 
Doors in Additions to the Original Structures 
New doors in additions to the original structures should be compatible with the overall design of the original structures, but need not duplicate the pattern of the original doors. 
Windows 
Preservation 
All original character defining features of windows should be identified, retained and preserved. 
Frames 
Heads 
Sills 
Trim 
Jambs 
Muntins 
Shutters 
Awnings 
Sash 
Glazing 
Blinds 
Screens 
Windows that are important in defining the overall historic character of the structure shall not be removed or radically changed. 
  
California Bungalow Style Home 
The number, location, size or glazing pattern of windows shall not be changed. 
The historic appearance of windows shall not be changed through the use of inappropriate design, materials, finishes or color. Window trim should not be obscured with other materials. 
Original fittings on windows shall not be stripped. 
Protection 
All causes of deterioration should be identified, evaluated and treated. Causes include: 
Water penetration 
Weathering due to paint deterioration 
Rusting due to paint deterioration 
Sealant and caulking deterioration 
Repairs 
Original broken window features should be repaired. 
When repair of material or missing parts is appropriate, entire windows shall not be replaced. 
Replacement 
When a window can no longer be repaired, or is missing, it should be replaced with a new window that matches the original. 
Character defining windows should not be replaced with new windows that do not convey the same visual appearance of the original. 
Windows in Additions to the Original Structures 
New windows in additions to the original structures should be compatible with the overall design of the original structures, but not duplicate the fenestration pattern and detailing of the original windows. 
Entrances and Porches 
Preservation 
All original entrances or porches, including doors, entablatures, columns, balustrades and stairs should be identified, retained and preserved. 
If replacement is necessary, the proportion and composition of original design should be retained, preferably by using traditional moldings and balusters. 
An entrance or porch shall not be removed in order to reorient the structure for a new use. 
Columns and railings for porches, stoops and front steps should be substantial looking and not be replaced with pipes, wrought iron or "ranch-style" members. 
Brick stairs are rarely appropriate; wood stairs are most appropriate to late victorian and classical revival houses. 
New entrances shall not be cut into the primary façade. 
Utilitarian or service entrances shall not be altered so they appear to be the formal entrance. 
Protection 
All causes of deterioration should be identified, evaluated and treated. Causes include: 
Water penetration 
Weathering due to paint deterioration 
Rusting due to paint deterioration 
Sealant and caulking deterioration 
Repairs 
The historic materials used in the character defining features should be repaired. 
Original materials should be used for repairs or substitute materials that are compatible. 
Substitute materials or features that do not convey the visual appearance of the original features shall not be used. 
Replacement 
When an entrance or porch can no longer be repaired, or is missing, it should be replaced with a new entrance or porch that conveys the same visual appearance. 
A New Entrance or Porch on Additions to the Original Structure 
A new entrance or porch should be designed to be compatible to the original structures. 
Storefronts 
Preservation 
All original storefronts should be identified, retained and preserved. 
Bulkhead 
Window frame 
Door transom 
Recessed ceiling 
Lighting 
Wall material Display window 
Door 
Awnings 
Recessed paving 
Parapets 
The original features of the storefront shall not be removed. 
The location of the storefront main entrance shall not be changed. 
The original configuration of the storefront shall not be altered. 
Inappropriate materials shall not be added over original ones. 
Protection 
All causes of deterioration on the storefront should be identified, evaluated and treated. Causes include: 
Water penetration 
Weathering due to paint deterioration 
Rusting due to paint deterioration 
Sealant and caulking deterioration 
Historic materials shall not be stripped from the storefront. 
Repairs 
The historic materials used in the character defining features of the storefront should be repaired. 
Original materials or substitute materials that are compatible should be used for repair. 
Materials or features that do not convey the visual appearance of the original features should not be substituted. 
Replacement 
If there is insufficient information about the original appearance of the storefront, it should be rebuilt using a new design whose size, scale, style, detail and color are compatible with the original appearance. 
When a storefront can no longer be repaired, or is missing, replace it with a reconstructed storefront based on the available historical, pictorial and physical documentation of that storefront or similar storefront, if no such documentation is available. 
A new design that is incompatible in size, scale, material, style and color with the original appearance is not allowed. 
Significant Interior Space Features and Finishes 
Preservation of Interior Spaces 
A floor plan or significant interior spaces that are important in defining the overall historic character of the structure should be identified, retained and preserved. 
Size 
Proportions 
Configuration 
Relationship of rooms 
Individual room or space 
Relationship of features to spaces or rooms 
The floor plan or significant interior spaces that are important in defining the overall historic character of the structure shall not be radically changed. 
Interior space should not be altered or destroyed by inserting floors, cutting through floors, lowering ceilings, or adding or removing walls. 
A feature should not be relocated so that a historic relationship between the feature and the related interior space is altered. 
Preservation of Interior Features and Finishes. 
Interior features and finishes that are important in defining the overall historic character of the historic resource should be identified, retained and preserved. 
Features and finishes that are important in defining the overall historic character of the historic resource shall not be removed or radically changed. 
New features or finishes that obscure the character defining features of the historic resource should not be applied. 
Protection. 
All causes of deterioration should be identified, evaluated and treated. Causes include: 
Surface dirt; 
Moisture penetration from the exterior; 
Insect and fungus infestation; 
Excessive moist or dry air; 
Vandalism; 
Improper cleaning procedures; 
Excessive use. 
The original features and finishes should be protected from inappropriate changes: 
Removal of original features; 
Replacement of original features; 
Repainting of original finishes; 
Introduction of new mechanical, plumbing and electrical systems that cause damage when they are installed. 
Repairs. 
Deteriorated features or finishes should be repaired using the same or compatible materials. 
Repairs shall not be made with incompatible materials. 
Replacement. 
Unrepairable features or finishes should be replaced with new features or finishes that match the original. 
Features or finishes should not be replaced with new features or finishes that do not convey the same visual appearance of the original. 
(Ord. 2785 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
Article VII. - Modification, Expiration and Extensions 
 
18.84.470 - Certificate of appropriateness application, Mills Act agreement, and demolition permit approval—Period of validity—Extensions. 
The period of validity for any certificate of appropriateness application, recordation of a city authorized Mills Act agreement or demolition permit approval shall be as set forth in Section 18.04.110. Time extension(s) of the period of validity for any certificate of appropriateness application, Mills Act agreement or demolition permit approval shall be granted only in accordance with Sections 18.04.120 and 18.04.130. 
(Ord. 2909 § 11 (part), 2008)  
18.84.480 - Certificate of appropriateness application, Mills Act agreement, and demolition permit approval—Modification conditions. 
Conditions may be modified, eliminated, or new conditions added to any certificate of appropriateness application, Mills Act agreement or demolition permit approval, in compliance with Section 18.04.120. 
(Ord. 2909 § 11 (part), 2008)  
18.84.490 - Adaptive reuse of historic resources. 
Any building or structure that was formerly operating as a legal commercial use within a residential zone that has been officially deemed eligible or designated as a local, state or federal historic landmark may be adaptively re-used with a non-residential land use that is identified as permitted and/or conditionally permitted in the C-2, C-1 or C-0 zones to facilitate historic preservation subject to the approval of a conditional use permit by the planning commission if the following findings can be met: 
1.  The site proposed for the use is adequate in size, shape and topography; and 
2.  The site proposed for the use has sufficient access to streets which are adequate, in width and pavement type, to carry the quantity and quality of traffic generated by the proposed use; and 
3.  The proposed use will not unreasonably interfere with the use, possession and enjoyment of surrounding and adjacent properties; and 
4.  The proposed use will, as to location, operation and design, be compatible with the permitted uses of surrounding and adjacent properties. 
Should there be any changes and/or modifications to the exterior of a building and/or structure considered for adaptive reuse, a certificate of appropriateness application shall be required in accordance with Chapter 18.84 of the Whittier Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 3074 , § 3, 9-26-17)  
Chapter 18.86 - EARLHAM HISTORIC DISTRICT 
 
18.86.010 - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this chapter is to protect and preserve the historic integrity of the Earlham historic district. 
(Ord. No. 2966, § 1, 4-12-11)  
18.86.020 - Historic district defined. 
A.  Earlham Historic District Boundaries. The physical boundaries of the Earlham historic district shall consist of the properties addressed as: 13416, 13420, 13504, 13510, 13518, 13522 Earlham Drive and 13521 Penn Street, as shown in the boundary map below: 
  
B.  Significance. The period of historic significance for the Earlham historic district shall be from 1903 to 1940. The important attributes that convey the historic significance of the district shall be identified, retained and preserved based on: 
1.  Historic context. The existing properties within the Earlham historic district were created through a subdivision by J.C. Hiatt known as the College Villa Tract . The boundaries of the historic district include portions of the original tract and represent an early Whittier College neighborhood with many existing architectural examples of early 20 th century homes, structures and objects from 1903—1940. Many of the homes were also associated with Whittier College administrators and faculty. 
2.  Character defining features and development attributes of the district. The district consists of an early 20 th century residential neighborhood with original buildings, structures, objects and landscape features that would be associated with a residential setting in the Whittier College neighborhood between 1903—1940. Many of the existing buildings, structures and objects within the boundaries of the historic district still reflect their era of development through their physical placement, architectural design, material cladding and method of construction. 
3.  Contributing resources. A contributing resource refers to any building, structure, object, landscape feature or site that retains sufficient individual integrity to convey and add to the historic significance, understanding, and integrity of the overall historic district in a manner that is consistent with the historic context and period of significance identified for the district (1903—1940). The list of contributing resources within the Earlham historic district shall be those identified and maintained within the City's Local Official Register of Historic Resources, as adopted under the enabling city council resolution declaring local landmark status for the Earlham historic district. 
4.  Non-contributing resources. A non-contributing resource refers to any building, structure, object, landscape feature or site that does not meet one or more of the following findings: 1) posses sufficient individual historic integrity of the important historic attributes or features that characterize and convey the historic significance of the historic district and/or; 2) does not add to the historical significance, understanding, or overall integrity of the historic district based on the adopted historic context; and/or, 3) the age (or construction date) of the resource falls outside of the period of significance identified for the Earlham historic district (1903—1940). 
(Ord. No. 2966, § 1, 4-12-11)  
18.86.030 - Permitted uses. 
The land uses permitted in the Earlham historic district shall be those permitted in the underlying zoning classification for each property within the district provided, the construction or operation of such use is compatible with the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2966, § 1, 4-12-11)  
18.86.040 - Development standards. 
No plan for development, alteration, expansion or construction on properties located in the Earlham historic district shall be approved unless the same complies with all applicable provisions of the Whittier Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2966, § 1, 4-12-11)  
18.86.050 - Certificate of appropriateness required. 
A.  No person shall perform any work involving: grading, demolition, removal, construction, alteration, relocation, or changing the physical appearance of any building, structure, object or site within the Earlham historic district without the prior review and approval of a certificate of appropriateness, unless: 
1.  A certificate of appropriateness waiver is granted pursuant to Section 18.84.180 of the Whittier Municipal Code; 
2.  The work solely involves the repair, demolition or removal of a documented non-contributing resource within the Earlham historic district only. In such cases, a certificate of appropriateness waiver may be granted administratively. 
(Ord. No. 2966, § 1, 4-12-11)  
18.86.060 - Procedures. 
A.  An application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be filed in accordance with Section 18.84.160 (Certificate of appropriateness application) of the Whittier Municipal Code. 
B.  Procedures for processing a certificate of appropriateness shall be in accordance with Section 18.84.190 (Certificate of appropriateness procedure) of the Whittier Municipal Code. 
C.  Except as may be required elsewhere within this chapter, a certificate of appropriateness waiver may be issued by the Secretary of the Historic Resources Commission for necessary repairs and modifications to any designated historic resource, eligible historic resource or contributing historic resource (i.e., a building, structure, object, site, landscape feature etc.) within the Earlham historic district, as described within Section 18.84.180 (Certificate of appropriateness wavier) of the Whittier Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2966, § 1, 4-12-11)  
18.86.070 - Required findings. 
Before a certificate of appropriateness is approved, the Historic Resources Commission shall make the findings of fact contained within Section 18.84.200 (Certificate of appropriateness standard findings of fact) of the Whittier Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2966, § 1, 4-12-11)  
18.86.080 - Validity and expiration of permits. 
A certificate of appropriateness issued pursuant to this chapter shall be valid for the time period identified within Sections 18.04.110 (Period of validity), 18.04.120 (Modifications of conditions) and 18.04.130 (Finding required for approval of time extensions) of the Whittier Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2966, § 1, 4-12-11)  
18.86.090 - Demolition and relocation of structures. 
A.  Any request to demolish a designated landmark historic resource, eligible historic resource or contributing historic resource (i.e., any building, structure, object, site, landscape feature etc.) within the Earlham historic district shall be subject to all applicable provisions contained within Sections 18.84.210 (Certificate of appropriateness demolition findings of fact), 18.84.400 (Demolition of historic resources), 18.84.410 (Demolition of other historical structures), and 18.84.420 (Replacement requirements) of the Whittier Municipal Code. In no case shall the approval of a demolition permit adversely impact or compromise the historic integrity of the Earlham historic district. 
B.  Prior to the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness for demolition or the physical removal of a designated landmark historic resource, eligible historic resource or contributing historic resource (i.e., any building, structure, object, site, landscape feature etc.) within the Earlham historic district, the applicant shall provide to the Secretary of the Historic Resources Commission, at the applicant's sole cost, archival quality photo-documentation of the exterior and interior of the historic resource to be demolished or removed. 
(Ord. No. 2966, § 1, 4-12-11)  
18.86.100 - Unsafe or dangerous conditions. 
None of the provisions of this chapter shall be construed to apply to any work or demolition necessary to correct or eliminate an immediate hazard or dangerous condition that threatens the public's health, safety or welfare, as determined by the director of community development pursuant to provisions contained within Chapters 8.08 (Property Maintenance) and 15.04 (Building Codes) of the Whittier Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2966, § 1, 4-12-11)  
18.86.110 - Replacement building, structures, objects and landscape features. 
A.  No permit to demolish a building, structure, object or landscape feature that is a contributing resource within the Earlham historic district may be issued unless plans for a replacement to the building, structure, object or landscape feature to be demolished (in accordance with Section 18.84.420 (Replacement requirement) of the Whittier Municipal Code) has been reviewed and approved by the historic resources commission except if: 
1.  Demolition is determined to be necessary by the director of community development pursuant to the provisions contained in Section 18.89.100 (Unsafe or dangerous conditions) of this chapter, and/or; 
2.  The demolition is associated with a non-contributing resource within the historic district and/or has been previously evaluated and determined ineligible for individual designation on the City's Local Official Register of Historic Resources. 
B.  Any applicant requesting a demolition permit may apply to the historic resources commission to be exempted from this section. Exemption shall be permitted if the commission finds that a replacement building, structure, object or landscape feature for that being demolished or removed will not result in a significant adverse impact to the historic integrity and visual character of the Earlham historic district. 
(Ord. No. 2966, § 1, 4-12-11)  
18.86.120 - New buildings, structures, objects and move-ons located on vacant and occupied lots. 
A.  No existing building, structure or object may be moved into the Earlham historic district without the prior review and approval of a certificate of appropriateness by the historic resources commission for the purpose of ensuring that it is compatible with, and does not diminish, the historic integrity and visual character of the district. 
B.  Any vacant or occupied lot within the Earlham historic district that is developed or re-developed with a new or moved-on building, structure, object or landscape feature shall automatically be deemed a non-contributing resource within the district and shall be documented accordingly by the Secretary of the Historic Resources Commission. In addition, all new improvements shall be architecturally and physically compatible with the other improvements within the district that are deemed contributing resources. 
C.  Any existing building, structure or object proposed to be moved into the Earlham historic district shall be certified by a licensed structural engineer as being free of structural defects and in good repair. Existing wood buildings, structures and objects shall also be certified by a professional extermination company as having been fumigated for termites within sixty days prior to being moved into the historic district. 
D.  When any potential historic resource (i.e., a building, structure, object, landscape feature etc.) that was not previously identified or known is discovered within the Earlham historic district that is (or appears to be) over fifty years old, the historic resources commission shall make a recommendation to the city council for determining whether or not the potential resource is to be listed in the City's Local Official Register of Historic Resources as a "contributing" or "non-contributing" resource within the Earlham historic district. Alternatively, the council may decided if the discovered resource qualifies individually as an eligible or local landmark resource, independent of the historic district. All historic determinations shall be made solely by the city council prior to the issuance of any demolition, grading or building permits for the property on which the discovered potential historic resource is located. 
(Ord. No. 2966, § 1, 4-12-11)  
18.86.130 - Appeals—Effective date and procedures. 
The historic resources commission's determination on a project shall become final and effective fifteen days following the decision, unless appealed by any interested party or the city council during this period. Appeal procedures shall be followed pursuant to Section 18.84.290 (Appeal procedure) of the Whittier Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2966, § 1, 4-12-11)  
Chapter 18.87 - HADLEY/GREENLEAF HISTORIC DISTRICT 
 
18.87.010 - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of the provisions of this chapter is to preserve and enhance the architectural and historic integrity of the Historic District No. 1, also known as the Hadley/Greenleaf historic neighborhood, and to ensure that any new development or alterations to existing structures in the district are compatible with the historic fabric of the district. 
(Ord. 2723 § 3 (part), 1998)  
18.87.020 - Historic district defined. 
The following characteristics define Historic District No. 1: 
A.  Boundaries. The boundaries of the historic district are defined as follows: 
On the east: lots fronting onto Painter Avenue along the east side of the street, south to the north side of Hadley Street and north to the south side of Broadway, as illustrated in the accompanying map. 
On the west: the east side of Greenleaf Avenue, extending south to the north side of Hadley Street and extending north to the south side of Broadway. 
On the north: the south side of Broadway extending west to the east side of Greenleaf Avenue, and extending east to the properties fronting along the east side of Painter Avenue. 
On the south: the north side of Hadley Street extending west to the east side of Greenleaf Avenue, and extending east to those lots fronting the east side of Painter Avenue. 
B.  Historic Characteristics: The features of the Historic District No. 1 which define its historic significance and the character of the area to be preserved include: 
1.  Land Use. Historic District No. 1 is a residential neighborhood. Originally, the area was a single-family residential neighborhood, and many of the original single-family homes remain. Some have been converted to multifamily use, and some older homes have been replaced with new multifamily structures. However, the land use in the area is predominantly residential. 
2.  Architectural Styles. Historic District No. 1 includes examples of a variety of architectural styles, including Victorian cottages (see Exhibit 1), Spanish or Mediterranean revival (Exhibit 2) and modern structures. However, the predominant style is the craftsman bungalow (Exhibits 3 and 4). This style is characterized by buildings with gabled rather than flat roofs, extended eaves with exposed rafters, use of natural materials (wood, stone, brick) and an effort to tie the interior space to the environment through the inclusion of many windows, wide doors or French doors, porches and balconies, and extensive landscaping. 
3.  Scale. The scale of the structures which are over fifty years old is smaller than the more modern buildings. Buildings are generally two stories or less, and cover less than half of the lot on which they are located. There is a substantial amount of landscaped open space between structures. Exhibit 5 shows the scale of development on a typical street, and Exhibit 6 shows typical street landscaping. 
4.  Landscaping. The landscaping of both private property and public rights-of-way is extensive and mature. The impression is of a wooded area with buildings tucked into the landscaping. Landscaping plans are informal and imitate nature, as was common in the era when craftsman bungalows were constructed. Exhibit 7 is an example of the lush landscaping common in the area. 
5.  Public Improvements. Public improvements in the area include paved local streets with curbs, gutters and sidewalks separated from the street by a landscaped median. Each street has a mixture of street trees, rather than a single type. Older streetlight fixtures remain along Painter Avenue, but the rest of the area is served by lights attached to utility poles. Exhibit 8 illustrates the older streetlight style. 
(Ord. 2723 § 3 (part), 1998)  
18.87.030 - Permitted uses. 
Land uses permitted in the Historic District No. 1 shall be those permitted in the underlying zone, provided the construction or operation of such use is compatible with the requirements of this chapter. In addition to such principal permitted uses, accessory uses permitted by the underlying zone classification shall also be allowed. 
(Ord. 2723 § 3 (part), 1998)  
18.87.040 - Development standards. 
No plan for development, alteration, expansion or construction on properties located in the historic district shall be approved unless the same complies with the following development standards: 
A.  Site and Setting. If a property owner or a developer intends to utilize a historic resource as part of a development, he should consider the context of the resource's original site and the importance of the setting in the proposed development. 
1.  In some instances, a resource will occupy the full site and limit development opportunities to rehabilitation, renovation or restoration for adaptive reuse. 
2.  In instances where a resource occupies less than the full site, greater flexibility will be available for new development that incorporates the resource into the project, except that all new development, alteration or expansion of existing structures shall maintain the required lot coverage and setbacks of the underlying zone. 
B.  Building Height. All new development or alteration or expansion of existing structures shall comply with the height limits of the underlying zone. Height of all structures at street level should be visually compatible with adjacent buildings. Use of setbacks at upper levels may be permitted to achieve maximum utilization of a property compatible with the appearance of the area. 
C.  Density and Intensity of Development. The maximum dwelling unit density or building intensity permitted in the historic district shall be that permitted by the underlying zone, so long as the resulting development is appropriate to the neighborhood. The apparent physical size, scale and height of all structures should relate to existing resources without overwhelming them. Exhibit 5 illustrates the range of height and scale existing in the area. 
D.  Off-Street Parking. The off-street parking requirements for all development in historic district shall be those established for the underlying zone. 
E.  Design Guidelines. In considering whether a proposed development is compatible with the historic character of Historic District No. 1, property owners, developers, city staff, historic resources commission and council members shall be guided by the following: 
1.  Proportion of Openings. The width and height of windows, doors and entries should be visually compatible with buildings, structures, public ways and places in the surrounding area. A long unbroken facade or small, widely-spaced windows is not appropriate. Wooden double-hung or casement windows are typical of the area, often placed in groups of two or more. Examples of the types of windows and doors and their placement in the facade can be seen in Exhibits 1, 2, 3, 4, 9 and 10. The relationship of solid spaces (i.e., walls) to voids (i.e., windows and doors) in the facade of a building or structure should be visually compatible with buildings, structures and public ways in the surrounding area. 
2.  Rhythm of Spacing of Buildings or Structures on the Street. The relationship of a building or structure to the open space between it and adjoining buildings or structures should respect the surrounding environment. The building mass of large architectural projects can be varied in form using setbacks for open space and landscaping when appropriate to provide necessary visual transitions between a lawn, new building and the adjacent historic resources. See Exhibits 5 and 6. 
3.  Porches and Entryways. The relationship of entrances and other projections to sidewalks should be designed with the street scene provided by existing buildings, structures and public ways as a guide to ensure that they are visually related. Examples of the types of porches and entries typical to the historic district are shown in Exhibits 1, 2, 3, 4, 11 and 12. 
4.  Relationship of Materials, Texture and Color. The relationship of materials, texture and color of the facade of a building or structure should be chosen with the predominant materials used in existing buildings or structures in mind. Paint colors are exempt from review, however, colors of natural materials should be considered. The choice of exterior colors and material textures should be tempered by the predominant colors and textures of the surrounding area. In general, the use of manmade materials (metal, plastic) in facades should be limited because the majority of the historic structures in the historic district use natural materials, and specifically wood, brick or stone. Simplicity in the use of materials, textures and colors is preferable. Exhibits 13, 14 and 15 illustrate typical wood shingles and siding found on homes in the area. 
5.  Roof Shapes. The roof shape of a building is a major distinguishing visual element. In most cases, a simple roof form similar to that of the existing historic resources in the area should be used. Most homes in the area have pitched rather than flat roofs and the typical roofing material is composition shingle. Examples of rooflines typical of the area are shown in Exhibits 1, 2, 3, 4, 16, 17 and 18. Notice that the roofline is frequently broken by dormers. 
6.  Design of Accessory Structures. The proposed project should take into account the compatibility of landscaping, fences and walls, parking facilities, utility and service areas, walkways and other accessory structures. These should be designed with the overall environment in mind and should be in visual keeping with related buildings, structures and places. 
7.  Landscaping. All mature trees removed to make way for new construction or alteration of an existing structure should be replaced with large box size trees of a type typical to the area and similar in form to the tree removed. Landscaping should be similar in design and type of plants used to that which occurs typically in the area. Exhibits 6 and 7 illustrate typical planting configurations in the area. 
(Ord. 2723 § 3 (part), 1998)  
18.87.050 - Certificate of appropriateness required. 
Upon adoption of the Historic District No. 1, no person shall perform any work requiring a building permit to demolish, remove, construct, alter, move or change the appearance of any structure or portion of a structure without first having applied for and been issued a certificate of appropriateness. 
(Ord. 2723 § 3 (part), 1998)  
18.87.060 - Procedures. 
A.  An application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be filed with the planning department, and shall contain the following data: 
1.  A clear and comprehensive statement of the proposed work; 
2.  Plans describing the size, height and appearance of the proposed work; 
3.  A site plan showing all existing buildings and structures and indicating the location of the proposed work; 
4.  Where the application involves demolition, a statement of justification for the necessity of demolition shall be submitted to the historic resources commission. 
5.  Color photographs of the exterior of all structures located on the site where the work is proposed, and a view of structures on adjoining lots from public streets or ways; 
6.  Samples of the materials proposed for use on the subject project; 
7.  Such other materials as the planning director may deem necessary to permit the evaluation of the impact of the proposed project. 
B.  Applicants requesting ordinary repair and maintenance of property located in the Historic District No. 1 may have their certificate of appropriateness acted upon by the planning director. Ordinary repair and maintenance includes but is not restricted to: 
1.  Repair using like or similar materials and design elements as the original; 
2.  All interior alterations not visible from, nor resulting in any impact upon, the structure's exterior. 
C.  An application for a certificate of appropriateness requesting more than ordinary repair and maintenance shall be scheduled for a public hearing before the historic resources commission as well as for the following types of projects: 
1.  Residential development projects which involve two or more dwelling units on a lot in the R-2, R-3 or R-4 zones of the Hadley-Greenleaf Historic District, including additions with a floor area in excess of six hundred square feet and/or major exterior remodeling to structures other than the main dwelling. 
2.  Nonresidential development projects and additions with a floor area in excess of one thousand square feet and/or exterior remodeling of structures located in the C zones or the Uptown Whittier Specific Plan that is within the Hadley-Greenleaf Historic District. 
3.  Any project which is referred by another approval authority to the historic resources commission. 
D.  At least ten days in advance of the time set for consideration of the application by the historic resources commission, the planning director shall give written notice of the time and place of the meeting to the applicant, adjacent property owners to include, at a minimum, two properties on either side, five properties behind and five properties across the street from the subject site, and any person requesting such notice. 
E.  The meeting of the historic resources commission shall be conducted so as to allow all interested persons a reasonable opportunity to be heard in connection therewith. 
F.  Notice of the decision of the historic resources commission shall be sent to the city council, property owner, the building and safety director, and one copy shall be retained in the planning department. 
G.  The decision of the historic resources commission shall be final in thirty days, unless the same is appealed by the applicant, city council, or any other interested party. 
(Ord. 2723 § 3 (part), 1998) 
(Ord. No. 2932, § 22, 8-11-09)  
18.87.070 - Required findings. 
Before a certificate of appropriateness is approved, the body approving the certificate must make the following findings of fact: 
A.  The proposed project is consistent with the purposes of this chapter; and 
B.  Every reasonable effort has been made to adapt the project in a manner which requires minimal alteration of the building, structure, object or site and its relationship to its environment; and 
C.  Distinctive stylistic features or examples of skilled craftsmanship which characterize a building, structure, object or site have been preserved as much as possible; or 
D.  The applicant has demonstrated that the proposed action is the only reasonable means to correct an unsafe or dangerous condition on the property; or 
E.  The applicant has demonstrated that denial of the application will result in immediate or substantial hardship. In determining whether immediate or substantial hardship exists, the commission shall consider the following criteria: 
1.  Whether denial of the application will severely diminish the economic value of the structure or property, 
2.  Whether denial of the application will prevent or make impractical reasonable beneficial use of the structure or property. 
(Ord. 2723 § 3 (part), 1998)  
18.87.080 - Expiration of certificate of appropriateness. 
A certificate of appropriateness issued pursuant to this chapter shall be valid for a period of twelve months from the date of issuance. The certificate shall expire at the end of this period unless work has commenced in accordance with the approved plan. The director may extend the approval for no longer than two additional six-month periods. 
(Ord. 2723 § 3 (part), 1998)  
18.87.090 - Demolition and relocation of structures. 
A.  If the application proposes demolition or off-site relocation and the certificate is not issued pursuant to Section 18.87.070 of this chapter, the commission may require a forty-five-day review period for the purpose of providing time to explore alternatives to the removal of the structure, including compliance with the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation and Preservation. 
1.  No later than the end of the forty-five days, the commission shall review the progress made towards preservation. If additional time is needed to accomplish preservation of the structure, the commission may impose an additional stay on issuance of the certificate not to exceed a total of one hundred eighty days. The stay shall be terminated at any time the commission, or the city council on appeal, determines that preservation is not feasible. 
2.  No later than the end of the one-hundred-eighty-day stay, the commission shall again review the progress made towards preservation. If preservation has not been accomplished, and alternatives to demolition or removal have been thoroughly explored, the commission shall determine whether preservation is still feasible, and either: 
a.  Issue a certificate of appropriateness for demolition, provided plans for a replacement structure have been approved; or 
b.  Deny the certificate of appropriateness application. 
B.  Prior to issuance of the certificate of appropriateness for demolition or the removal of a structure within the district, the applicant shall provide to the director, at the applicant's sole cost, archival quality photo-documentation of the exterior of the structure to be demolished or removed. 
(Ord. 2723 § 3 (part), 1998)  
18.87.100 - Unsafe or dangerous conditions. 
None of the provisions of this chapter shall be construed to prevent or apply to any work or demolition necessary to correct or eliminate the unsafe or dangerous condition of any historic building or of any building or structure located in the district, where such conditions have caused the structure to be declared unsafe, dangerous pursuant to Chapters 8.08 and 15.04 of the Whittier Municipal Code. The historic resources commission shall be advised of the required demolition, prior to issuance of the demolition or building permit needed to alleviate the unsafe condition. 
(Ord. 2723 § 3 (part), 1998)  
18.87.110 - Replacement structures. 
A.  No permit to demolish a structure within the historic district boundaries may be issued unless plans for a replacement structure or a project have been reviewed and approved by the historic resources commission, unless: 
1.  Demolition is determined to be necessary in order to correct or eliminate a dangerous or unsafe condition posing a hazard to the general public. 
B.  An applicant for demolition permits may apply to the commission for relief from the requirements of this section. The commission may grant relief if it finds that demolition without replacement will not result in adverse impact to the district. Adverse impacts to the district may include, and shall be found if, the loss of the structure without replacement is likely to result in nuisance uses of the vacant property or would have an adverse visual impact on the neighborhood. 
(Ord. 2723 § 3 (part), 1998)  
18.87.120 - Appeals—Effective date. 
The determination of the historic resources commission shall become effective and final thirty days after their final action, unless within such period of time an appeal, in writing, is filed with the city clerk-treasurer, by the applicant or any other interested person. Such appeal shall be accepted for filing only upon the paying of an appeal fee as set forth by the city council. In the event that no city council meeting is held within said thirty day period, the effective date immediately following the next city council meeting for which the item has been lawfully posted and agendized for city council consideration. 
(Ord. 2819 § 5, 2003; Ord. 2723 § 3 (part), 1998)  
18.87.130 - Appeals procedure. 
A.  Upon the filing of an appeal, the secretary to the commission shall forward to the city clerk-treasurer the commission's files with regard to such certificate of appropriateness application. Upon receipt of the same, the city clerk-treasurer shall promptly set the matter for a public hearing before the city council. The city council shall conduct a de novo public hearing upon the matter, and thereafter shall determine whether the application may be approved, conditionally approved, or denied. Within its discretion, the city council may refer, prior to its decision, such matter to the commission for a further report, with or without additional public hearing before the commission. The determination of the council shall be considered adopted by not less than a majority of the voting membership. 
B.  The appeal shall be considered by the council at a noticed public hearing, pursuant to Section 18.87.060 of this chapter. Any interested person addressing the council may present evidence as to why the commission's decision should be upheld or reversed. The council may reverse or affirm the decision in whole, or in part, and may impose conditions on the application which were not considered by the commission. 
(Ord. 2723 § 3 (part), 1998) 
  
  
  
  
  
   
Chapter 18.88 - CENTRAL PARK HISTORIC DISTRICT 
Sections: 
 
18.88.010 - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of the provisions of this chapter is to preserve and enhance the architectural and historic integrity of the Central Park historic district, ensuring that any new development or alterations to existing structures in the district are compatible with the historic fabric of the district. 
(Ord. 2705 § 2 (part), 1997)  
18.88.020 - Historic district defined. 
The following characteristics define the Central Park historic district: 
A.  Boundaries. The boundaries of the historic district are defined on the accompanying map, and as follows: 
On the east: the public alley behind lots located on the east side of Friends Avenue, generally located between the centerline of Hadley Street to the north and Philadelphia Street to the south, to include the single lot located at the southwest corner of Painter Avenue and Bailey Street. 
On the west: the public alley directly behind lots located on the west side of Washington Avenue generally located between the centerline of Hadley Street to the north, and Philadelphia Street to the south, to include the single lot located on the southeast corner of Bright Avenue and Bailey Street. 
On the north: the centerline of Hadley Street between the Washington/Bright Avenue alley to the west, and the Friends/Painter Avenue alley to the east. 
On the south: portions of blocks south of Bailey Street between Painter and Bright Avenues, as illustrated on the accompanying map. 
B.  Historic Characteristics. The features of the Central Park historic district which define its historic significance and the character of the area to be preserved include: 
1.  Land Use. The Central Park historic district is primarily a residential neighborhood on the periphery of the Uptown commercial center. Originally, the residential neighborhood contained single-family uses, and some of the original single-family homes remain. Other properties in the area have been converted to multifamily use, with some minor replacement development of apartment structures. Also located within the district is the former Women's Club building, now housing the Rio Hondo Chapter of the Red Cross. This structure, as well as the Post Office, serve as a transition into the Uptown Whittier commercial core. Central Park itself is located within the middle of the district, serving as an Uptown Whittier focal point and special event locale. 
2.  Architectural Styles. The Central Park historic district includes examples of a variety of architectural styles, including Victorian, Spanish or Mediterranean revival, and Craftsman structures. The compilation of Victorian houses in the Central Park area may arguably be the largest and most unique collection remaining in Whittier. The Victorian houses are generally two-story structures with intricate detailing including elaborate columns, extensive porch areas, varying wood shingle finishes, and steeply pitched roofs. Some structures appear to contain features from both the Victorian and Craftsman eras, most likely serving as transition buildings. 
3.  Scale. The general scale of the residential structures is fairly uniform with many of the residences surrounding the park constructed with two stories. Many of the lots maintain multifamily uses with two units (front and rear) located on the lot. The lots with single units generally cover less than half of the lot on which they are located. The open space between structures illustrates substandard setbacks typical of historic tracts, however, the distance between structures is adequate and with appropriate open areas provided for in the front lawns and backyards. 
4.  Landscaping. Central Park serves as a neighborhood green space with many references to the past. The park also serves as a major contributor to the unique character of the area. Additionally, the landscaping of both private property and public rights-of-way is extensive and mature. The impression of an original town center is very evident in the layout, street systems, and orientation of the structures surrounding the park. A large stand of palm trees, along Washington Avenue, contributes to the overall quality and maturity of the area. The preservation of these trees will continue to present the appropriate authenticity to the area. 
5.  Public Improvements. Public improvements in the area include paved local streets with curbs, gutters and sidewalks separated from the street by a landscaped median. The public right-of way includes street trees of varying type and maturity. Central Park is a public park that is maintained by the city. 
(Ord. 2705 § 2 (part), 1997)  
18.88.030 - Permitted uses. 
Land uses permitted in the Central park historic district shall be those permitted in the underlying zone; provided, the construction or operation of such use is compatible with the requirements of this chapter. In addition to such principal permitted uses, accessory uses permitted by the underlying zone classification shall also be allowed. 
(Ord. 2705 § 2 (part), 1997)  
18.88.040 - Development standards. 
No plan for development, alteration, expansion or construction on properties located in the Central Park historic district shall be approved unless the same complies with Section 18.87.040 of the zoning regulations and Chapter 5 of the Uptown Whittier Specific Plan, as amended. 
(Ord. 2705 § 2 (part), 1997)  
18.88.050 - Certificate of appropriateness required. 
Upon adoption of the Central Park historic district, no person shall perform any work requiring a building permit to demolish, remove, construct, alter, move or change the appearance of any structure or portion of a structure without first having applied for and been issued a certificate of appropriateness. 
(Ord. 2705 § 2 (part), 1997)  
18.88.060 - Procedures. 
A.  An application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be filed with the planning department, and shall contain the following data: 
1.  A clear and comprehensive statement of the proposed work; 
2.  Plans describing the size, height and appearance of the proposed work; 
3.  A site plan showing all existing buildings and structures and indicating the location of the proposed work; 
4.  Where the application involves demolition, a statement of justification for the necessity of demolition to the historic resources commission; 
5.  Color photographs of the exterior of all structures located on the site where the work is proposed, and a view of structures on adjoining lots from public streets or ways; 
6.  Samples of the materials proposed for use on the subject project; 
7.  Such other materials as the planning director may deem necessary to permit the evaluation of the impact of the proposed project. 
B.  Applicants requesting ordinary repair and maintenance of property located in the Central Park historic district may have their certificate of appropriateness issued by the planning director. Ordinary repair and maintenance includes but is not restricted to: 
1.  Repair using like or similar materials and design elements as the original; 
2.  All interior alterations not visible from, nor resulting in any impact upon, the structure's exterior. 
C.  After receiving an application for a certificate of appropriateness and determining that more than ordinary repair and maintenance is involved, the director shall set the matter for review before the historic resources commission. 
D.  At least ten days in advance of the time set for consideration of the application by the historic resources commission, the planning director shall give written notice of the time and place of the meeting to the applicant, all property owners within the Central Park historic district, and any person requesting such notice. 
E.  The meeting shall be conducted so as to allow all interested persons a reasonable opportunity to be heard in connection therewith. 
F.  Notice of the decision of the historic resources commission shall be sent to the property owner, the building and safety director, and one copy shall be retained in the planning department. 
G.  The decision of the historic resources commission shall be final in thirty days, unless the same is appealed by the applicant, city council, or any other interested party. 
(Ord. 2705 § 2 (part), 1997)  
18.88.070 - Required findings. 
Before a certificate of appropriateness is approved, the body approving the certificate must make the following findings of fact: 
A.  The proposed project is consistent with the purposes of this chapter; and 
B.  Every reasonable effort has been made to adapt the project in a manner which requires minimal alteration of the building, structure, object or site and its relationship to its environment; and 
C.  Distinctive stylistic features or examples of skilled craftsmanship which characterize a building, structure, object or site have been preserved as much as possible; or 
D.  The applicant has demonstrated that the proposed action is the only reasonable means to correct an unsafe or dangerous condition on the property; or 
E.  The applicant has demonstrated that denial of the application will result in immediate or substantial hardship. 
(Ord. 2705 § 2 (part), 1997)  
18.88.080 - Expiration of certificate of appropriateness. 
A certificate of appropriateness issued pursuant to this chapter shall be valid for a period of twelve months from the date of issuance. The certificate shall expire at the end of this period unless work has commenced in accordance with the approved plan. The director may extend the approval for no longer than two additional six-month periods. 
(Ord. 2705 § 2 (part), 1997)  
18.88.090 - Demolition and relocation of structures. 
A.  If the application proposes demolition or off-site relocation and the certificate is not issued pursuant to Section 18.88.070, the commission may require a forty-five-day review period for the purpose of providing time to explore alternatives to the removal of the structure, including compliance with the Secretary to the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation and Preservation. 
1.  No later than the end of the forty-five days, the commission shall review the progress made towards preservation. If additional time is needed to accomplish preservation of the structure, the commission may impose an additional stay on issuance of the certificate not to exceed a total of one hundred eighty days. The stay shall be terminated at any time the commission, or the city council on appeal, determines that preservation is not feasible. 
2.  No later than the end of the one-hundred-eighty-day stay, the commission shall again review the progress made towards preservation. If preservation has not been accomplished, and alternatives to demolition or removal have been thoroughly explored, the commission shall determine whether preservation is still feasible, and either: 
a.  Issue a certificate of appropriateness for demolition, provided plans for a replacement structure have been approved; or 
b.  Deny the certificate of appropriateness application. 
B.  Prior to issuance of the certificate of appropriateness for demolition or the removal of a structure within the district, the applicant shall provide to the director, at the applicant's sole cost, archival quality photo-documentation of the exterior of the structure to be demolished or removed. 
(Ord. 2705 § 2 (part), 1997)  
18.88.100 - Unsafe or dangerous conditions. 
None of the provisions of this chapter shall be construed to prevent or apply to any work or demolition necessary to correct or eliminate the unsafe or dangerous condition of any historic building or of any building or structure located in the district, where such conditions have caused the structure to be declared unsafe, dangerous pursuant to Chapters 8.08 and 15.04 of the Whittier Municipal Code. The historic resources commission shall be advised of the required demolition, prior to issuance of the demolition or building permit needed to alleviate the unsafe condition. 
(Ord. 2705 § 2 (part), 1997)  
18.88.110 - Replacement structures. 
A.  No permit to demolish a structure within the historic district boundaries may be issued unless plans for a replacement structure or a project have been reviewed and approved by the historic resources commission, unless: 
1.  Demolition is determined to be necessary in order to correct or eliminate a dangerous or unsafe condition posing a hazard to the general public. 
B.  An applicant for demolition permits may apply to the commission for relief from the requirements of this section. The commission may grant relief if it finds that demolition without replacement will not result in adverse impact to the district. Adverse impacts to the district may include, and shall be found if, the loss of the structure without replacement is likely to result in nuisance uses of the vacant property or would have an adverse visual impact on the neighborhood. 
(Ord. 2705 § 2 (part), 1997)  
18.88.120 - Appeals—Effective date. 
The determination of the historic resources commission shall become effective and final thirty days after their final action, unless within such period of time an appeal, in writing, is filed with the city clerk-treasurer, by the applicant or any other interested person. Such appeal shall be accepted for filing only upon the paying of an appeal fee as set forth by the city council. In the event that no city council meeting is held within said thirty day period, the effective date shall be extended to the date immediately following the next city council meeting for which the item has been lawfully posted and agendized for city council consideration. 
(Ord. 2819 § 6, 2003; Ord. 2705 § 2 (part), 1997)  
18.88.130 - Appeals procedure. 
A.  Upon the filing of an appeal, the secretary to the commission shall forward to the city clerk-treasurer the commission's files with regard to such certificate of appropriateness application. Upon receipt of the same, the city clerk-treasurer shall promptly set the matter for a public hearing before the city council. The city council shall conduct a de novo public hearing upon the matter, and thereafter shall determine whether the application may be approved, conditionally approved, or denied. Within its discretion, the city council may refer, prior to its decision, such matter to the commission for a further report, with or without additional public hearing before the commission. The determination of the council shall be considered adopted by not less than a majority of the voting membership. 
B.  The appeal shall be considered by the council at a noticed public hearing, pursuant to Section 18.88.060 of the zoning regulations. Any interested person addressing the council may present evidence as to why the commission's decision should be upheld or reversed. The council may reverse or affirm the decision in whole, or in part, and may impose conditions on the application which were not considered by the commission. 
(Ord. 2705 § 2 (part), 1997)  
Chapter 18.89 - COLLEGE HILLS HISTORIC DISTRICT 
 
18.89.010 - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of the provisions of this chapter is to preserve and enhance the architectural and historic integrity of the College Hills historic district, ensuring that any new development or alterations to existing structures in the district are compatible with the historic context and identity of the district. 
(Ord. No. 2926, § 1, 5-26-09)  
18.89.020 - Historic district defined. 
The following characteristics define the College Hills historic district: 
A.  Boundaries. The College Hills historic district boundaries are based on the original College Hills Subdivision Map of 1923, which is comprised of a thirty-one-acre site that has been subdivided into a total of one hundred nineteen (119) lots along Philadelphia Street, Ridge Road, Bryn Mawr Way, Hillside Lane, and Worsham Drive, as shown on the map below. Each lot within the College Hills historic district has been identified as a contributing resource, non-contributing resource or vacant lot. 
  
	Contributing Resource* 
	Non-Contributing Resource 
	Vacant 
 
*In addition to the residences located on the lots noted above, the following features are also contributing resources to the College Hills historic district: 
1.  Original street lamps located on Bryn Mawr Way, Glen Court, Hillside Lane, Philadelphia Street, and Worsham Drive. 
2.  Canary Island Pine Trees (Pinus Canariensis) planted along Bryn Mawr Way and Philadelphia Street. 
3.  Cement step walkway linking Worsham Drive, Hillside Lane, Philadelphia Street, and Ridge Road. 
4.  Retaining walls on said properties located on Bryn Mawr Way, Glen Court, Hillside Lane, Philadelphia Street, and Worsham Drive. 
B.  Historic Characteristics. The features of the College Hills historic district which define its historic significance and the character of the area to be preserved include: 
1.  Land Use. Originally a part of Worsham Ranch, the College Hills residential subdivision, now referred to as the College Hills historic district, was created in 1923 by a syndicate of Whittier businessmen who later sold their interest in the subdivision to Whittier College. 
The majority of homes within the College Hills historic district were generally developed over a period of six decades (circa 1920's to 1970's). Many of the properties have panoramic views of the city and of the greater southern California region. 
Developing a reputation as one of the finest residential subdivisions in the city, the College Hills subdivision became synonymous with many college, government, community, and business leaders in Southern California who owned property in the neighborhood. It also appealed to many well-to-do members of the community. 
As the subdivision has been successfully developed to master the steep slopes, grade changes, and curving hills throughout development, it represents not only an excellent example of an early, large scale, 20 th Century hillside subdivision, but the earliest of its type within the city of Whittier. Likewise, the site design and engineering solutions used for the construction of many of these hillside homes are unique to College Hills due to the topography of the subdivision. 
College Hills is also particularly representative of a cohesive subdivision in that over ninety-nine percent of the original 1923 lot lines within the tract have remained unchanged. The development also showcases the architectural evolution of homes that have occurred within the city, since 1923. Many of these homes reflect high quality architectural designs and craftsmanship that have been preserved since their construction resulting in the historic integrity of these structures and the lots they were developed on remaining intact. 
2.  Architectural Styles. Overall, the homes within the College Hills historic district have maintained their original architectural style, as originally built. Hence, the majority of homes serve as excellent, intact, examples of various architectural styles that have evolved since the 1920's. Many of the architectural styles found within the College Hills historic district include: Spanish Colonial Revival, Colonial Revival, Mission Revival, Tudor, Provincial Revival, and California Ranch. 
3.  Contributing Resources. A contributing resource refers to any structure, object improvement or landscape that adds to the historical, architectural, or cultural significance of a historic district and is consistent with the historic context of that district. A list of contributing resources/properties within the College Hills historic district shall be identified and maintained within the City's Local Official Register of Historic Resources. 
4.  Non-Contributing Resources. A non-contributing resource refers to any structure, object, improvement or landscape that does not add to the historical, architectural or cultural significance of a historic district and is inconsistent with the historic context of that district. 
(Ord. No. 2926, § 1, 5-26-09)  
18.89.030 - Permitted uses. 
Land uses permitted in the College Hills historic district shall be those permitted in the underlying zone; provided, the construction or operation of such use is compatible with the requirements of this chapter. In addition to such principal permitted uses, accessory uses permitted by the underlying zoning classification shall also be allowed. 
(Ord. No. 2926, § 1, 5-26-09)  
18.89.040 - Development standards. 
No plan for development, alteration, expansion or construction on properties located in the College Hills historic district shall be approved unless the same complies with all applicable provisions of the Whittier Municipal Code including, but not limited to: Chapter 18.10 (Residential Zones Generally), Chapter 18.16 (R-1 Single-Family Residential Zone); and, Chapter 18.84 (Historic Resources) except as may be modified by the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2926, § 1, 5-26-09)  
18.89.050 - Certificate of appropriateness required. 
No person shall perform any work requiring a building permit to demolish, remove, construct, alter, move or change the appearance of any structure without the prior review and approval of a certificate of appropriateness, unless a waiver is granted pursuant to Section 18.84.180 of the Whittier Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2926, § 1, 5-26-09)  
18.89.060 - Procedures. 
A.  An application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be filed in accordance with Section 18.84.160 (Certificate of appropriateness application) of the Whittier Municipal Code. 
B.  Procedures for processing a certificate of appropriateness shall be in accordance with Section 18.84.190 (Certificate of appropriateness procedure) of the Whittier Municipal Code. 
C.  A certificate of appropriateness waiver may be issued for those repairs and modifications to historic structures and landscaping described within Section 18.84.180 (Certificate of appropriateness wavier) of the Whittier Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2926, § 1, 5-26-09)  
18.89.070 - Required findings. 
Before a certificate of appropriateness is approved, the Historic Resources Commission shall make the findings of fact contained within Section 18.84.200 (Certificate of appropriateness standard findings of fact) of the Whittier Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2926, § 1, 5-26-09)  
18.89.080 - Validity and expiration of permits. 
A Certificate of Appropriateness issued pursuant to this chapter shall be valid for the time period identified within Sections 18.04.110 (Period of validity), 18.04.120 (Modifications of conditions) and 18.04.130 (Finding required for approval of time extensions) of the Whittier Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2926, § 1, 5-26-09)  
18.89.090 - Demolition and relocation of structures. 
A.  Any request for demolition of a designated historic resource, eligible historic resource or contributing resource/structure to the College Hills historic district shall be subject to all applicable provisions contained within Sections 18.84.210 (Certificate of appropriateness demolition findings of fact), 18.84.400 (Demolition of historic resources), 18.84.410 (Demolition of other historical structures), and 18.84.420 (Replacement requirements) of the Whittier Municipal Code. 
B.  Prior to the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness for demolition or the physical removal of a structure within the district, the applicant shall provide to the director, at the applicant's sole cost, archival quality photo-documentation of the exterior of the structure to be demolished or removed. 
(Ord. No. 2926, § 1, 5-26-09)  
18.89.100 - Unsafe or dangerous conditions. 
None of the provisions of this chapter shall be construed to apply to any work or demolition necessary to correct or eliminate an immediate hazard or dangerous condition that threatens the public's health, safety or welfare, as determined by the director of community development pursuant to provisions contained within Chapters 8.08 (Property Maintenance) and 15.04 (Building Codes) of the Whittier Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2926, § 1, 5-26-09)  
18.89.110 - Replacement structures. 
A.  No permit to demolish a structure within the historic district boundaries may be issued unless plans for a replacement structure, in accordance with Section 18.84.420 (Replacement requirement) of the Whittier Municipal Code, has been reviewed and approved by the historic resources commission unless: 
1.  Demolition is determined to be necessary by the director of community development pursuant to the provisions contained in Section 18.89.100 (Unsafe or dangerous conditions) of this chapter. 
B.  An applicant for demolition permits may apply to the historic resources commission for relief from the requirements of this section. The commission may grant relief if it finds that demolition without replacement will not result in an adverse impact to the College Hills historic district. 
(Ord. No. 2926, § 1, 5-26-09)  
18.89.120 - New structures and move-ons located on vacant and occupied lots. 
A.  No structure may be moved into the College Hills historic district without the prior review and approval of a certificate of appropriateness by the historic resources commission. 
B.  Any vacant or occupied lot within the College Hills historic district that is developed or re-developed with a new or moved-on structure that is less than fifty years old shall be automatically deemed a non-contributing resource within the College Hills historic district. 
C.  When any structure is moved into the College Hills historic district that is over fifty years old, the historic resources commission shall make a recommendation to the city council who shall determine whether or not the structure is to be listed as a contributing or non-contributing resource within the College Hills historic district. The determination shall be made prior to the finalization of any building permits. 
D.  Any new structure(s) developed or moved onto a vacant lot within College Hills shall reflect the architectural heritage found within the College Hills historic district and shall not detract from the historic integrity or context of the district. Any new structure(s) developed on an improved lot with an existing residence shall match the architectural style of the primary residence on the property. 
E.  Any existing structure proposed to be moved into the College Hills historic district shall be certified by a licensed structural engineer as being free of structural defects and in good repair. The structure shall also be certified by a professional extermination company as having been fumigated for termites within sixty days prior to being moved into the historic district. 
(Ord. No. 2926, § 1, 5-26-09)  
18.89.130 - Appeals—Effective date and procedures. 
The historic resources commission's determination on a project shall become final and effective fifteen days following the decision, unless appealed by any interested party during this period. Appeal procedures shall be followed pursuant to Section 18.84.290 (Appeal procedure) of the Whittier Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2926, § 1, 5-26-09)  
Division V. - Emergency Procedure  
Chapter 18.90 - EMERGENCY PROCEDURE 
 
18.90.010 - Application of division. 
The provisions contained in this division are intended to provide for certain emergency procedures and regulations in the event of a local emergency. The provisions of this division shall be operative at such time as a proclamation of local emergency is issued by the city council pursuant to applicable law. The provisions shall remain operative until the city council declares that the public interest no longer requires the provisions of this chapter to be operative. 
(Ord. 2421 § 1 (part), 1987)  
18.90.020 - Procedure relating to zone variance and conditional use permit applications. 
A.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this code to the contrary, during such time as the provisions of this division are operative, the provisions of this division shall apply to any lot in the city which has located thereon a building or a structure which has suffered damage by virtue of a casualty to which a proclamation of local emergency relates, as a result of which the building or structure must be reconstructed and/or rehabilitated, or demolished. Where such reconstruction and/or rehabilitation, or new construction replacing the demolished building or structure, can only be accomplished by the landowner if a zone variance and/or a conditional use permit is obtained, public hearings or applications for such a zone variance or a conditional use permit shall be heard by the zoning administrator upon five days' written notice given to the applicant and to the owners and occupants of real properties located within three hundred feet of the outer boundaries of the lot to which such application relates. The zoning administrator shall be empowered, based upon the evidence presented, to grant such a zone variance or a conditional use permit, provided that the facts required therefor pursuant to Chapter 18.52 of this code are present. The zoning administrator shall be empowered, based upon the evidence submitted, to condition the issuance of such a zone variance or conditional use permit in such manner as deemed appropriate to ensure compliance with the provisions of the city's zoning regulations and the city's general plan and to ensure that such building or structure will be constructed or reconstructed and maintained in a manner compatible with surrounding and adjacent properties and public facilities. 
B.  Applications for modifications to existing conditional use permits or zone variances, where such modification is required to permit such reconstruction and/or rehabilitation or new construction, shall also be heard and processed by the zoning administrator based upon a five-day written notice of hearing, given in the time and manner set forth in this section. The decision of the zoning administrator in granting, conditionally granting or denying such a zone variance application, conditional use permit application, or a modification application, shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. 2421 § 1 (part), 1987)  
18.90.030 - Temporary structures. 
A.  Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following words and phrases shall be defined as follows: 
1.  "City manager" means the city manager of the city. 
2.  "Director" means the director of building and safety of the city. 
3.  "Displaced commercial use" and "displaced industrial use" mean a commercial or industrial use which was housed in a building or structure which was severely damaged by casualty to which a proclamation of local emergency relates, to the extent that such building or structure which formerly housed such use can no longer, by virtue of the damaged condition of such building or structure, be utilized for that purpose. 
4.  "Displaced resident" means one or more natural persons whose dwelling unit, which was their principal place of residence, was damaged by casualty to which the proclamation of local emergency relates, to the extent that the dwelling unit is no longer safe for human habitation. 
5.  "Permit" means a permit issued by the director for the use of a temporary structure. 
6.  "Temporary structure" means and includes a trailer, building or other structure which is utilized for the purpose of providing temporary housing for a displaced resident, a displaced commercial use and/or a displaced industrial use. 
B.  1.  Permits for Temporary Structures—Issuance. Any displaced resident, and any owner and/or operator of a displaced commercial use or a displaced industrial use, may, subject to the provisions of this section, utilize a temporary structure for the purpose of housing a displaced commercial use, a displaced industrial use, or a displaced resident, provided a permit therefor is first obtained pursuant to the provisions of this section. A permit for a temporary structure shall be issued by the director, after the filing of an application for such permit, upon his finding the following: 
a.  That the applicant for such permit is a displaced resident or the owner/operator of a displaced commercial use or a displaced industrial use; and 
b.  That the building in which the displaced resident or displaced commercial use or displaced industrial use, was located on the date of the casualty to which the proclamation of local emergency relates, and was damaged to such an extent that its continued use is prohibited; and 
c.  That the applicant for such permit is the owner of the property upon which such damaged building or structure is located, or is the tenant under a lease relating to such property who has the consent of the landowner to file an application for a permit for such temporary structure, as evidenced by written concurrence of the landowner upon such permit application; and 
d.  That the applicant states that the owner of the damaged building or structure which formerly housed the use which has been displaced, has made or will make within a reasonable time, a bona fide application for a building permit to restore, rehabilitate and repair such damaged building, or if such building or structure has been demolished or is in the process of being demolished, such owner will make application for permits, within a reasonable time, to replace the demolished building or structure with a new building or structure. 
2.  The director shall have the power to conditionally issue a permit so as to ensure that the provisions of this section are fully met; such conditions shall include a requirement that the temporary structure meets all applicable code requirements relating to utility services and other applicable provisions of the city's building regulations, and administrative regulations relating to temporary structures. The director shall be empowered to issue regulations pertaining to the use of temporary structures so as to ensure that the same can be utilized for the stated purpose in a safe manner. 
3.  Such a permit when issued shall be valid for the period of time set forth as a condition of the issuance of such permit imposed by the director, but in no case longer than a period of three hundred sixty consecutive calendar days from and after the issuance thereof. At any time during the term of a permit, for good cause, the director may extend the duration of such permit, for a reasonable period of time. 
4.  Permits issued under this subsection shall not be transferable for any reason. 
C.  Expiration of Term of Permit. Upon expiration of the term of the permit as granted pursuant to this section, the permittee shall vacate the temporary structure and terminate all use of such temporary structure. 
D.  Conditions of Permit Approval. Each permittee shall sign a copy of the permit as issued acknowledging the permittee's acceptance of all conditions of approval imposed upon such permit and specifically acknowledging that at the conclusion of the permit term that the permittee will abandon such temporary structure and remove it from its site; and if for any reason the permittee fails to vacate and/or remove a temporary structure upon the expiration or termination of such permit, such permittee shall be obligated to pay to the city any and all costs of litigation necessary to enforce any of the provisions of this section including, but not limited to, administrative costs, including overhead, reasonable attorneys' fees and court costs. 
E.  Permit Revocation. 
1.  The director shall revoke a permit after issuance, if he finds that a violation of any provision of this section has occurred with reference to the usage allowed pursuant to such permit. The director shall, upon being advised of an alleged violation, conduct a public hearing, giving not less than five days' notice thereof to the permittee, at which hearing the permittee and any other interested person may present any relevant evidence, to determine whether any violation of the terms and conditions imposed upon such permit, or of this chapter, has occurred. The burden of proof in such a proceeding to demonstrate that a violation has occurred shall be upon the city. In the event that there is a determination that such permit should be revoked, if the permittee does not acquiesce in the order of revocation, the city may elect to proceed with a judicial action to enforce such order of revocation, in which event the permittee shall be obligated to pay any and all costs incurred in such proceeding, including administrative overhead costs, reasonable attorneys' fees and court costs. The provisions of Section 8.08.170 of this code shall apply to all temporary structures allowed pursuant to this section. 
2.  The director shall have the power, after conduct of a public hearing, giving not less than five days' notice of such hearing to the permittee, to revoke any permit issued under this section if he finds, in the case of the repair or rehabilitation of a building formerly housing the displaced use that such repair as rehabilitation is not being expeditiously repaired or if he finds that such work of reconstruction or rehabilitation has been abandoned for a period of fifteen or more consecutive calendar days. Further, if the director finds, after hearing, in the case of a building which formerly housed a displaced use which building has been demolished, that the construction of the replacement building or structure is not being expeditiously accomplished or that the construction has been abandoned for a period of not less than fifteen consecutive calendar days, he shall revoke such permit for the use of a temporary structure. 
F.  Conduct of Hearings. All hearings required to be conducted for the purpose of issuing or revoking a permit pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be conducted by the director upon not less than five consecutive calendar days' written notice to the permittee and to the owners of real property located within one hundred fifty feet of the lot upon which such temporary structure is located or is to be located. At the time of such hearing, the director shall allow any interested party to present relevant evidence on the question of whether or not such permit shall be issued or revoked, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
G.  Appeals. Any decision of the director shall be subject to an appeal by any person who appeared and presented evidence at the hearing before the director. No other person shall be permitted to file an appeal in such a proceeding. Such an appeal shall be directed to the city manager and shall not be deemed timely filed unless the written appeal, containing a statement of the reasons for such appeal, is filed with the office of the city manager within five consecutive calendar days following the determination of the director on such a matter. Thereafter, the city manager shall expeditiously cause a public hearing to be conducted before him, or before a hearing officer designated by him, for the purpose of determining, de novo, whether the action of the director is in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Notice of such an appeal hearing shall be given in the same manner as required of hearings before the director. The actions taken by the city manager upon an appeal from a decision of the director shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. 2421 § 1 (part), 1987)  
Division VI. - Community Design  
Chapter 18.92 - SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DESIGN GUIDELINES 
 
18.92.010 - Design goals. 
Single-family residential development dominates the urban form of the city. The design and configuration of lots and uses reflect various planning styles used at the time of development, such as the early town grid lots, later large subdivisions, curvilinear hillside development and planned unit developments. This diversity of housing types designed in different periods is characteristic of this community. The guidelines apply to smaller infill as well as larger master planned projects and encourage the highest level of design quality while allowing maximum flexibility in the design of single-family residential development that will: 
A.  Create livable neighborhoods and residential areas as well as safe and attractive streets by encouraging high-quality architecture, landscape and design; and 
B.  Emphasize design compatibility within existing neighborhoods, both in site planning and architectural design. 
(Ord. 2786 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
18.92.020 - Design objectives. 
The design of single-family residential development projects in the city should: 
A.  Respect the scale, proportion and character of the surrounding area; 
B.  Provide pedestrian-friendly design solutions to adverse traffic patterns; 
C.  Establish attractive, inviting, imaginative and functional site design; 
D.  Create visual interest and variety; 
E.  Maintain a sense of harmony and proportion along street frontages and other portions of the project exposed to public view; 
F.  Preserve and incorporate natural amenities unique to the site such as hillside views, topography, and mature trees; and 
G.  Preserve and incorporate historically, culturally, or architecturally significant building into the project development proposal. 
(Ord. 2786 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
18.92.030 - Site design guidelines. 
A.  Grading. Grading should be minimized where possible to preserve the natural character of the land. When grading is unavoidable, incorporate the following guidelines: 
1.  Follow the natural contours as much as possible. 
2.  Slopes should be rounded and contoured to blend with the existing terrain. 
3.  Emphasize and accentuate scenic vistas. 
4.  Avoid large manufactured slopes in favor of several smaller slopes. 
5.  Retain and incorporate significant natural vegetation into the project. 
6.  Implement slope-stabilizing landscaping and irrigation on manufactured slopes. 
B.  Compatibility. New homes should be built in scale with the existing neighborhood. Therefore, in addition to the minimum code requirements for yards, height, lot coverage and floor area; the predominant setback, yards, size and height of the existing neighborhood should be considered in determining the overall size and situation of the house. 
1.  The arrangement of structures, circulation and open spaces should recognize the particular characteristics of the site. 
2.  Project design should relate to the surrounding built environment in pattern, function, scale, character and materials. 
3.  Infill structures and new projects should meet or exceed the standards of quality which have been set by surrounding development. 
4.  Structures that are distinctive due to their age, cultural significance or unique architectural style should be preserved and incorporated in the project proposal. 
5.  Residential units should be buffered from incompatible development through increased setbacks, intensified landscaping and appropriate building orientation. 
C.  Building siting. 
1.  Primary building: 
a.  Front primary buildings to the street; 
b.  Front infill buildings in the same direction as the surrounding development; 
c.  Vary setbacks of homes and garages. 
2.  Garage. The garage and driveway location is the most significant factor in determining the overall site layout for small- to medium-size lots. The configuration that best reflects the existing neighborhood pattern should be selected. 
a.  Detached Garage. The garage is a separate structure from the house, usually located at the rear of the property, with alley or street access. Alley access is required where available. 
b.  Attached Garage—Rear. Garage is attached to the rear of the house, with side or rear access from the street or alley. Alley access is required where available. 
c.  Attached Garage—Side or Front. Garage is attached to the side or front of the house, with street access. Angled or side-entry garages should be used to break up the monotony of garage doors facing the street. 
  
d.  Interior Lots: 
i.  If the garage is attached to the front of the house, the garage door should be perpendicular to the front property line. 
ii.  If the garage door faces the street, it should be set back at least two feet from the front wall of the house. 
iii.  In no case should a front-facing garage constitute greater than sixty percent of the front façade. 
e.  Corner Lots: 
i.  If the garage is attached to the front of the house, the garage door should be perpendicular to the front of the house. 
ii.  If the garage is attached to the side of the house with the garage door parallel to the front wall of the house, the garage door should be set back at least two feet from the front wall of the house. 
iii.  In no case should a front-facing garage constitute greater than sixty percent of the front façade. 
f.  Design guidelines for attached and detached garages, as well as accessory structures, are found later in this document. 
D.  Setback.. 
The structure should be set back from the front property line either the distance required by the zoning code or the average of existing setbacks on the street, whichever is greater. 
  
E.  Walls and Fences. 
1.  Fences and walls should be built with attractive, durable materials, including, but not limited to, redwood, wrought iron, textured concrete block, or formed concrete with reveals. 
2.  Chainlink fencing, corrugated metal fencing and or fiberglass fencing and "tennis windscreens" are not permitted within the front yard or street side, side yard areas. 
3.  Fences or walls may not exceed a height of six feet within required yard areas and shall not exceed forty-two inches within the required front and street side, side yard areas, except as provided in this Title. 
4.  At the street, avoid long expanses of uninterrupted fences and walls, including those fences between the side of the house and the interior property line, which are visible from the street. Use an opening, planter box, material change, pilasters or posts, or a 3-foot stagger at least every twenty feet. When adjacent to the front corner of the house, set back fence or wall at least one foot behind house so that the wall or fence is not in line with front plane of house. 
5.  Provide an opening to fences and walls to connect walkways to the street—for pedestrians. These pedestrian "gateways" should be announced by pilasters, special landscaping, or other special features. 
6.  A protective coating should be applied to all wood and iron fences. 
7.  Fences should be constructed to industry standard. 
F.  Drainage. 
Using various control techniques to limit off-site drainage helps to create a healthier watershed. There are many ways to capture water on-site and divert water underground. Residential development should integrate water runoff best management practices into the site design. For more information on National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (Clean Water Act) guidelines and best management practices consult the city public works department. 
(Ord. 2839 § 19, 2004: Ord. 2838 § 19, 2004: Ord. 2786 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
18.92.040 - Architectural design guidelines. 
A.  Style. Single-family homes should reflect a style that characterizes or complements the predominant neighborhood style. In neighborhoods defined by a single architectural style, new homes should by built to reflect that style. Some commonly found styles in the city are listed below, along with their defining elements. 
1.  Craftsman. Heavy exposed beams and porch columns; full-width front porches; use of natural materials such as river stone and brick for base treatments; low-pitched roofs with wide eve overhangs; wood or stucco siding; darker earthtone exterior colors; double- or single-hung windows. 
Craftsman Style 
  
2.  Mediterranean. Low-pitch, tile or flat roofs with parapet; arched windows and entries, sometimes recessed; trowelled stucco finish; cream or light earthtone color; front porches accented with decorative columns or pilasters; if two-story, upper windows smaller and less ornate than lower windows. 
Mediterranean Style 
  
3.  Queen Anne Victorian. Asymmetrical design with off-set cutaway bay windows, front entry and wraparound porches; irregularly-shaped roofs with dominant front-facing gable; double- or single-hung windows; steeply-pitched roofs; patterned shingle-siding within gables and between stories; lap-siding; decorative spindlework and brackets; bright colors. 
Queen Anne Victorian Style 
  
4.  Tudor. Steeply-pitched, usually side-gabled roof with prominent, front-facing cross-gable; decorative half-timbering; arched entry; tall, narrow windows; large chimneys with decorative chimney pots; variety of siding, including stucco, brick, wood or stone cladding. 
5.  Ranch. Low-pitched, hipped roof with wood or wood-look shingles and wide eves; wide windows; variety of siding with base treatment, including stucco, lap, board-and-baton, brick or stone cladding. 
B.  Scale and Massing. The scale and massing of the house should reflect the existing neighborhood pattern. At a minimum, the following guidelines should be implemented (note that exceptions to these requirements are permissible if the style of the house dictates otherwise): 
1.  The front wall mass should be broken up into two or three planes, with one deep break of at least five feet. No required plane should be less than twenty-five percent of the length of the front wall. 
2.  All street-facing wall planes should be proportionately fenestrated, including garage side walls and dormers. 
3.  The roof design should follow the wall planes. 
4.  The steepness of the roof pitch should follow the existing neighborhood pattern. 
5.  Second stories should be set back at least ten feet from the front wall of the first story, and should comprise no more than eighty percent of the combined width of all front-facing walls. 
6.  Front- or Side-Attached Garages. 
a.  Street-facing garage doors should be no wider than nine feet, and should be separated from adjacent garage doors by a structural column no less than one foot wide. 
b.  The third and subsequent street-facing garage doors should be set back an additional five feet each. 
C.  Entries. Main front entries should be given prominent treatment, and should be oriented to address first the street, and then the on-site parking space. Main front entries should incorporate the following elements: 
Front entry treatment 
  
1.  A proportionately-sized front porch, but in no case with dimensions less than eight feet by ten feet. At least fifty percent of the front porch should be covered, integrated with the roof design. The porch should be defined by a low wall or railing with balustrades no higher than four feet; 
Proportionally sized front porch 
  
2.  Front door surround treatment, such as decorative trim appropriate to the style, a recess, or sidelights; 
  
Front door treatments 
3.  A decoratively-paved walkway leading to the sidewalk; 
4.  A decorative, shaded porch light appropriate to the architectural style. 
D.  Architectural Trim and Finish Materials. 
The following elements should be incorporated into the design of the house, unless the style dictates otherwise: 
1.  All windows, doors and garage doors should be trimmed or otherwise distinctly emphasized. Ways to accomplish this include a wood surround or stucco "pop-out", a recess, or a bay window design. Awnings may also be used, if appropriate to the style. The window trim color should be compatible with the colors used on the house. 
  
2.  A base treatment of at least four feet in height and incorporating at least a one-inch projection from the wall surface above. The base treatment should be of a darker color and/or material than the wall surface above, as appropriate to the style, and should incorporate a cap course or capping element. 
3.  Attic vents should incorporate an integrated, decorative design appropriate to the style. 
4.  Chimneys should be sided with natural stone, masonry or stucco, as is visually appropriate to their function. 
5.  Pitched roofs should be shingled or tiled as appropriate to the architectural style of the house. Shingles should have a dimensional quality. 
6.  Rain gutters and downspouts should be inconspicuously located and painted to match the building color. 
7.  Architectural details and trim, including siding, should be applied to all sides of the dwelling. 
8.  The wall and trim colors should be appropriate to the architectural style of the unit, as described above. 
9.  Natural materials should always be used in place of manufactured materials and veneers. 
10.  All finish materials should be of high quality. 
Trim and finish materials 
  
In all cases, outside corner material changes are not permitted. Additionally, foam may not be used for trim or details except on upper stories. 
  
Corner material changes 
E.  Additions and Accessory Buildings. Additions should be constructed as an integral part of the structure to which they are attached. Detached accessory buildings such as garages and guesthouses should reflect the architectural style of the primary building to which they relate by incorporating the following guidelines: 
1.  The existing siding should be carried onto the addition or building. 
2.  The windows should be of the same style as the main house, including opening mechanisms and trim. 
3.  The existing roofline should be carried onto the addition. Shed-roof additions are not permitted, unless integral to the style of the house. For detached structures, the roof style should be the same as that of the main building. 
4.  Overall proportion should be maintained. 
5.  Alley lighting design should be consistent with the prevailing architectural style of the primary structure. 
6.  Trash enclosure design should be consistent with the prevailing architectural style of the primary structure, if visible from public view.  
Chapter 18.94 - MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DESIGN GUIDELINES 
 
18.94.010 - Design goals. 
Multi-family residential development appears in a variety of forms throughout the city. Although many of the design guidelines for single-family residential apply, multi-family projects offer a wide range of issues and opportunities unique to themselves. Multi-family developments, if not properly designed, can dominate their surrounding, increase neighborhood parking and circulation problems, and decrease common and private open space. The guidelines distinguish between small projects (two or three units), and large developments (four or more units), but present common goals that encourage the highest level of design quality while allowing maximum flexibility in the design of multi-family residential development that will: 
A.  Create livable neighborhoods and residential areas as well as safe and attractive streets by encouraging high-quality architecture, landscape, design and open space; and 
B.  Emphasize design compatibility within existing neighborhoods, both in site planning and architectural design. 
(Ord. 2786 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
18.94.020 - Design objectives. 
The design of multi-family residential development projects in the city should: 
A.  Respect the scale, proportion and character of the surrounding area; 
B.  Provide pedestrian-friendly design solutions to adverse traffic patterns; 
C.  Establish attractive, inviting, imaginative and functional site design; 
D.  Provide adequate open space, parking and privacy; 
E.  Create visual interest and variety; 
F.  Maintain a sense of harmony and proportion along street frontages and other portions of the project exposed to public view; 
G.  Preserve and incorporate natural amenities unique to the site such as hillside views, topography, and mature trees; and 
H.  Preserve and incorporate historically, culturally, or architecturally significant building into the project development proposal. 
(Ord. 2786 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
18.94.030 - Site design guidelines. 
A.  Grading. Grading should be minimized where possible to preserve the natural character of the land. When grading is unavoidable, incorporate the following guidelines: 
1.  Follow the natural contours as much as possible. 
2.  Slopes should be rounded and contoured to blend with the existing terrain. 
3.  Emphasize and accentuate scenic vistas. 
4.  Avoid large manufactured slopes in favor of several smaller slopes. 
5.  Retain and incorporate significant natural vegetation into the project. 
6.  When grading is unavoidable, minimize raising the grade significantly above the grade of adjacent properties, especially near interior property lines. When such grading is unavoidable, compensate by planning for reduced building heights within the raised grades. 
7.  Implement slope-stabilizing landscaping and irrigation on manufactured slopes. 
B.  Compatibility. New units should be built in scale with the existing neighborhood. Therefore, in addition to the minimum code requirements for yards, height, lot coverage and floor area; the predominant setback, yards, size and height of the existing neighborhood should be considered in determining the overall size and situation of the buildings. 
1.  The arrangement of structures, circulation and open spaces should recognize the particular characteristics of the site. 
2.  Project design should relate to the surrounding built environment in pattern, function, scale, character and materials. 
3.  Infill structures and new projects should meet or exceed the standards of quality which have been set by surrounding development. 
4.  Structures that are distinctive due to their age, cultural significance, or unique architectural style should be preserved and incorporated in the project proposal. 
5.  Residential units should be buffered from incompatible development through increased setbacks, intensified landscaping, and appropriate building orientation. 
C.  Building Siting. 
1.  Primary Building. 
a.  Two or three Units. Multi-family development projects consisting of two to three units should be designed to appear single-family in character. Ways to achieve this at the site plan level include: 
i.  The front-most units should be oriented to face the street and incorporate single-family home features, including a prominent entry, a front porch of eight foot by ten foot minimum dimensions and a second floor setback of at least ten feet. 
ii.  The units should incorporate architectural features that help individually distinguish them, such as wall breaks, projections, distinct color schemes and individual roof treatments. 
iii.  Attached side-by-side units are permitted, if a single-family architectural appearance is maintained. 
iv.  For corner lots, units should front onto street side and front property lines. 
v.  Units should be staggered to avoid driveway corridor effect. 
vi.  Side-facing units should face the most distant side property line from the unit. 
b.  Four or More Units. Multi-family development projects consisting of four or more units should be designed to address the street, and to create pedestrian connections to adjacent, complementary uses as well as public sidewalks and facilities. The site plan should address the following guidelines: 
i.  Units should front onto, in order of consideration: public streets and sidewalks, common open spaces, and interior pedestrian paths. 
ii.  Buildings constructed on corner lots should incorporate a well-defined architectural focal element addressing the corner. The corner element should complement existing corner elements on other buildings adjacent to the intersection, in size, scale and composition, and should be proportionate in size to the street intersection it addresses. 
iii.  Units facing interior property lines should face the most distant interior property line from the unit. If this is not practical, the front wall of each unit should be set back at least ten feet from the interior property line, and screened from the view of adjacent properties by tall screening landscaping. 
iv.  If possible, the buildings should be situated to avoid driveway corridor effect to prevent the entire length of a driveway from direct view of the public. 
2.  Garage. 
a.  Two or Three Units 
i.  Alley access is required where available. To maximize open space, garages should face onto the alley and be located no further from the alley than is required for adequate vehicle access. 
ii.  The front unit garage should be located behind the unit. 
iii.  If the garage door is located within the front or side wall of any unit, the garage door should be recessed at least two feet into the wall of the unit in which it is located. 
iv.  Detached garages should be located at the rear of the property or along the interior side lot lines behind the front unit. 
v.  The garage shall not constitute greater than seventy percent of the front or side wall of any unit. 
b.  Four or More Units. 
i.  Alley access is required where available and where feasible to accommodate the number of vehicle trips expected. To maximize open space, garages and carports should face onto the alley and be located no further from the alley than is required for adequate vehicle access. 
ii.  The garage door should be recessed at least two feet into the wall of the unit in which it is located. 
iii.  The combined width of garage doors should not constitute greater than seventy percent of the front or side wall of any unit in which they are located. 
iv.  Garages and carports should not be located along street property lines. 
D.  Driveways and Guest Parking Areas. 
1.  Four or More Units. 
a.  Main driveways should incorporate no more than one lane in each direction, separated by a four-foot-wide net, curbed, planted divider within the required street setback area. 
b.  Guest parking facilities may be located directly off the main driveway, outside the required street setback area, provided they are screened from view from the street by a forty-two inch high wall. Guest parking facilities should be shaded by a wood or wire trellis structure planted with a creeping vine. 
c.  Main driveways should be enhanced by a pergola consistent with the architectural style of the buildings, of a depth of at least half the required street setback. 
d.  All driveways should incorporate an enhanced paving strip consisting of unit pavers or textured/scored concrete at the entrance and at one hundred foot-intervals thereafter, of at least ten feet in width. 
2.  Design guidelines for attached and detached garages, as well as accessory structures, are found later in this document. 
E.  Setback. The structures should be set back from the front property line either the distance required by the zoning code or the average of existing setbacks on the street, whichever is greater. 
F.  Open Space. 
1.  Two or Three Units. 
a.  All open space should be fenced for the private use of the occupants of the unit it is intended to serve. 
b.  Ground-level open space should be bounded only by garden walls, garage walls, and/or the walls of the unit the open space is intended to serve. 
c.  Ground-level open space should be located adjacent to required side and rear yards to maximize their useable area. 
d.  Above-ground open space (i.e. decks and balconies) should be set back at least ten feet from interior property lines. 
2.  Four or More Units. 
a.  Common open space should be enhanced with paths, plazas, gardens, benches, shade structures and water elements. These improvements should be consistent with the architectural style of the building. Common open spaces should be connected and coordinated with public landscape and hardscape improvements, where existing. 
b.  All private open space should be fenced for the private use of the occupants of the unit it is intended to serve. 
c.  Ground-level private open space should be bounded only by garden walls, garage walls and/or the walls of the unit the open space is intended to serve. 
d.  Ground-level private open space should be located adjacent to required side and rear yards to maximize their useable area. 
e.  Above-ground private open space (i.e. decks and balconies) should be set back at least ten feet from interior property lines. 
f.  An interconnected path system should be provided and should be integrated with the public sidewalk, where available. The path system should serve the guest parking areas. 
G.  Landscaping. 
1.  Two or Three Units. 
a.  Three twenty-four inch box size trees should be provided for each unit. The trees should be planted where they will provide significant shade for open space areas, including ground level open areas, porches and second-floor balconies; where they will shade units to reduce air conditioning demand in summer months; and where they will enhance privacy between units as well as protect the privacy of abutting lots. 
b.  Planting areas throughout the property should be enhanced with shrubs and flower beds. 
2.  Four or More Units. 
a.  One and a half twenty-four inch box size trees should be provided for each unit. The trees should be planted where they will provide significant shade for open space areas, including ground level open areas, porches and second-floor balconies; where they will shade units to reduce air conditioning demand in summer months; and where they will enhance privacy between units as well as protect the privacy of abutting lots. 
b.  Planting areas throughout the property should be enhanced with shrubs and flower beds. 
H.  Utilities. Transformers, post-indicator valves, backflow-preventers and similar apparatus shall either be undergrounded or located in inconspicuous areas, and screened with landscaping. 
I.  Walls and Fences. 
1.  The following guidelines are common to all multi-family residential development: 
a.  Fences and walls should be built with attractive, durable materials, including, but not limited to, redwood, wrought iron, textured concrete block or formed concrete with reveals. A protective coating should be applied to all wood and iron fences. All fences and walls should be constructed to industry standards. 
b.  Chainlink fencing, corrugated metal fencing or fiberglass fencing and "tennis windscreens" are not permitted within the front yard or street side, side yard areas. 
c.  Fences or walls should be compatible with materials and designs used on the dwelling and accessory buildings. 
d.  Walls may not exceed a height of six feet within required yard areas, except as provided in this Title, and should not exceed forty-two inches within the required front and street yard areas. 
e.  At the street, avoid long expanses of uninterrupted fences and walls, including those fences between the side of the front unit and the interior property line, which are visible from the street. Use an opening, planter box, material change, pilasters or posts, or a three foot stagger at least every forty feet. When adjacent to the front corner of the front unit, set back fence or wall at least one foot behind the unit so that the wall or fence is not in line with front plane of the unit. 
f.  Walls, including columns, shall be finished with a trim cap. 
g.  Walls along interior property lines, within the front yard, should be stepped down at least two times and each step should be marked by a column, that is wider than the wall. 
2.  Provide an opening to fences and walls to connect walkways to the street. These pedestrian "gateways" should be announced by pilasters, special landscaping, or other special features. 
J.  Drainage. Using various control techniques to limit off-site drainage helps to create a healthier watershed. There are many ways to capture water on-site and divert water underground. Residential development should integrate water runoff best management practices into the site design. For more information on National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (Clean Water Act) guidelines and best management practices, consult the city public works department. 
(Ord. 2839 § 20, 2004: Ord. 2838 § 20, 2004: Ord. 2786 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
18.94.040 - Architectural design guidelines. 
A.  Two or Three Units. 
1.  The architectural style chosen should reflect a style that characterizes or complements the predominant neighborhood style and which is characteristic of single-family homes. 
2.  In neighborhoods defined by a single architectural style, new units should by built to reflect that style. 
3.  The architectural style should be consistent across all units, however, each unit should have a distinct color scheme, as well as a unique exterior design based on a consistent style. 
B.  Four or More Units 
1.  The architectural style chosen should reflect a style that characterizes or complements the predominant neighborhood style. 
2.  The architectural style should be consistent across all units, however, variation in color schemes and design details should be evident. 
3.  Some commonly found styles in the city are described below, along with their defining elements. 
a.  Craftsman. Heavy exposed beams and porch columns; full-width front porches; use of natural materials such as river stone and brick for base treatments; low-pitched roofs with wide eve overhangs; wood or stucco siding; darker earthtone exterior colors; double- or single-hung windows; 
b.  Mediterranean. Low-pitch, tile or flat roofs with parapet; arched windows and entries, sometimes recessed; trowelled stucco finish; cream or light earthtone color; front porches accented with decorative columns or pilasters; if two-story, upper windows smaller and less ornate than lower windows; 
c.  Queen Anne Victorian. Asymmetrical design with off-set cutaway bay windows; front entry and wrap-around porches; irregularly-shaped roofs with dominant front-facing gable; double- or single-hung windows; steeply-pitched roofs; patterned shingle-siding within gables and between stories; lap-siding; decorative spindlework and brackets; bright colors; 
d.  Tudor. Steeply-pitched, usually side-gabled roof with prominent, front-facing cross-gable; decorative half-timbering; arched entry; tall, narrow windows; large chimneys with decorative chimney pots; variety of siding, including stucco, brick, wood or stone cladding; 
e.  Ranch. Low-pitched, hipped roof with wood or wood-look shingles and wide eves; wide windows; variety of siding with base treatment, including stucco, lap, board-and-baton, brick or stone cladding. 
C.  Scale and Massing. 
1.  Two or Three Units. The scale and massing of the house should reflect the existing neighborhood pattern. At a minimum, the following guidelines should be implemented (note that exceptions to these requirements are permissible, if the style of the house dictates otherwise): 
a.  The front wall mass of each unit should be broken up into two or three planes, with one deep break of at least three feet. No required plane should be less than twenty-five percent of the length of the front wall. 
b.  All front, rear and interior facing wall planes should be proportionately fenestrated, including garage side walls and dormers. 
c.  The roof design should follow the wall planes. 
d.  The steepness of the roof pitch should follow the existing neighborhood pattern. 
e.  Second stories should be set back at least five feet from the front wall of the first story, and should comprise no more than eighty percent of the combined width of all front walls. 
f.  Attached Garages: 
i.  Street-facing garage doors should be no wider than nine feet, and should be separated from adjacent garage doors by a structural column no less than one foot wide. 
ii.  Garage doors should be located singly or in pairs. 
iii.  Front or side-facing pairs of garage doors should not be located closer than ten feet to each other. 
2.  Four or More Units. At a minimum, the following guidelines should be implemented. Exceptions to these requirements are permissible, if the architectural style dictates otherwise. 
a.  Attached units should incorporate plan elements which provide distinction to individual units or small groups of units, such as wall breaks, projections, individual roof treatments, porches and decks. 
b.  The front wall mass of each unit should be broken up into two or three planes, with a break depth of at least three feet. No required plane should be less than twenty-five percent of the length of the front wall. 
c.  Street-facing buildings should incorporate one architectural focal element for every one hundred feet of individual building length, such as a tall projecting gable element. Avoid spacing focal points at regular intervals. Instead, create a distinct appearance by locating elements asymmetrically, side by side, or near a corner element for added corner emphasis. 
d.  Street-facing units should incorporate a deep wall break or setback for each one hundred feet of combined building length. The overall length of the breaks/setbacks should be at least forty percent of the total combined length of the street-facing buildings. The depth of the breaks or setbacks should be at least ten percent for each one hundred feet of the combined building lengths. 
e.  Units adjacent to property lines should incorporate a third floor setback of at least ten feet from lower-story walls facing the property line. Units adjacent to pedestrian paths and common open spaces should incorporate a third floor setback of at least five feet from the wall facing the path or common open space. 
f.  All front, rear and interior facing wall planes should be proportionately fenestrated, including garage side walls and dormers. 
g.  The roof design should follow the wall planes. 
h.  The steepness of the roof pitch should be consistent with the architectural style. 
3.  Garages. 
a.  For multiple-car garages, no garage door should exceed nine feet in width and intervening posts should be at least one foot in width. 
b.  Garage and carport structures should be limited to accommodating eight to twelve cars, in order to maintain proportion with the dwelling unit buildings. 
c.  Integrate substantial design elements (i.e. columns, beams, roof design) into carport structures to convey a more permanent concept. Prefabricated metal carports are not permitted. 
D.  Entries and Windows. 
1.  Two or Three Units. Main entries should be given prominent treatment, and should be oriented to address the street (if the front unit) or the side property line furthest from the front of the unit. Main entries should incorporate the following elements: 
a.  A proportionately-sized front porch, but in no case with dimensions less than eight feet by ten feet. At least fifty percent of the front porch should be covered, integrated with the roof design. The porch should be defined by a low wall or railing with balustrades no higher than four feet. 
b.  Front door surround treatment, such as decorative trim appropriate to the style, a recess, or sidelights. 
c.  A decoratively-paved walkway leading to the sidewalk. 
d.  A decorative, shaded porch light appropriate to the architectural style. 
e.  Windows should be arranged to avoid direct views into the windows of neighboring units. 
f.  Windows should not be placed in the path of vehicle headlights. 
2.  Four or More Units. Main entries should be given prominent treatment, by incorporating the following elements: 
a.  A proportionately sized front porch, but in no case with dimensions less than eight feet by ten feet. At least fifty percent of the front porch should be covered, integrated with the roof design. The porch should be defined by a low wall or railing with balustrades no higher than four feet. 
b  For higher-density projects, an enclosed landing or stoop is acceptable in lieu of a porch, with minimum dimensions of six feet by eight feet, and with a path or stairs leading down to the sidewalk. 
c.  Front door surround treatment, including a cover for weather protection, utilizing decorative trim appropriate to the style, a recess or sidelights. 
d.  A decoratively-paved walkway leading to the sidewalk. 
e.  A decorative, shaded porch light appropriate to the architectural style. 
f.  Windows should be arranged to avoid direct views into the windows of neighboring units. 
g.  Windows should not be placed in the path of vehicle headlights. 
E.  Architectural Trim and Finish Materials. 
The following elements are common to all multi-family development and should be incorporated into the design of the house/unit, unless the style dictates otherwise: 
1.  All windows, doors and garage doors should be trimmed or otherwise distinctly emphasized. Ways to accomplish this include a wood surround or stucco "pop-out," a recess or a bay window design. Awnings may also be used, if appropriate to the style. The window trim color should be compatible with the colors used on the house. 
2.  A base treatment of at least four feet in height and incorporating at least a one-inch projection from the wall surface above. The base treatment should be of a darker color and/or material than the wall surface above, as appropriate to the style, and should incorporate a cap course or capping element. 
3.  Gable/attic vents should incorporate an integrated, decorative design appropriate to the style. 
4.  Chimneys should be sided with natural stone, masonry or stucco, as is visually appropriate to their function. 
5.  Pitched roofs should be shingled or tiled as appropriate to the architectural style of the house. Shingles should have a dimensional quality. 
6.  Rain gutters and downspouts should be inconspicuously located, and painted to match the building color. 
7.  Architectural details and trim, including siding, should be carried onto all sides of the dwelling. Rear units should not be afforded significantly less architectural detail than front units. 
8  The wall and trim colors should be appropriate to the architectural style of the units, as described above. 
9.  All finish materials should be of high quality. Faux materials are not encouraged, but are permissible if a high quality imitation is selected, especially if using faux river stone or brick. 
10.  In all cases, outside corner material changes are not permitted. Additionally, foam may not be used for trim or details except on upper stories. 
F.  Additions and Accessory Buildings. 
Additions should be constructed as an integral part of the structure to which they are attached. Detached garages for all multi-family development should reflect the architectural style of the primary building to which they relate by incorporating the following guidelines: 
1.  The existing siding should be carried onto the addition or building. 
2.  The windows should be of the same style as the main house, including opening mechanisms and trim. 
3.  The existing roof line should be carried onto the addition. Shed-roof additions are not permitted, unless integral to the style of the house. For detached structures, the roof style should be the same as that of the main building. 
4.  Overall proportion should be maintained. 
5.  Integrate substantial design elements (i.e. columns, beams, roof design) into carport structures to convey a more permanent concept. 
6.  Prefabricated metal carports are not permitted. 
G.  Exterior Lighting. 
1.  Two or Three Units. 
a.  Lighting should be provided by a combination of porch lights, bollards and/or a ground-level decorative landscape and path lighting system. 
b.  Where flood lighting is deemed essential, lighting should be provided by shaded fixtures which are complementary to the architectural style of the units. "Wal-pac" style, high intensity security lights produce unnecessary "light pollution" in the form of glare and are not permitted. 
2.  Four or More Units. 
a.  Lighting should be provided by a combination of porch lights, bollards and/or a ground-level decorative landscape and path lighting system. Proportionately-sized light standards are acceptable for large area lighting in larger projects. 
b.  Where flood lighting is deemed essential, lighting should be provided by shaded fixtures which are complementary to the architectural style of the units. "Wal-pac" style, high intensity security lights produce unnecessary light pollution in the form of glare and are not acceptable. 
(Ord. 2786 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
Chapter 18.96 - COMMERCIAL DESIGN GUIDELINES 
 
18.96.010 - Design goals. 
Commercial developments are located in many prominent locations throughout the city and convey a strong visual image. The attention paid to their design reflects a city's pride in itself and its economic vitality. For this reason, the commercial design guidelines are intended to promote high quality development that will: 
A.  Lead to quality architecture and design; 
B.  Contribute to a positive physical image and identity of the city; and 
C.  Complement and preserve the surrounding natural resources. 
Commercial development should also strive to provide for both convenient auto access and safe, attractive pedestrian access. 
(Ord. 2786 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
18.96.020 - Design objectives. 
The design of each commercial project in the city should: 
A.  Reinforce or establish a distinct architectural image; 
B.  Establish attractive, inviting, imaginative and functional site design; 
C.  Facilitate and encourage pedestrian activity and mitigate adverse automotive patterns; 
D.  Enhance surrounding neighborhoods, the uptown area and the city as a whole; 
E.  Preserve and incorporate natural amenities unique to the site such as mature trees and hillside views; and 
F.  Minimize excessive or incompatible impacts of noise, light, traffic and visual character. 
(Ord. 2786 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
18.96.030 - Site design guidelines. 
A.  Grading. Grading should be minimized, where possible, to preserve the natural character of the city. Where grading is unavoidable, consider the following guidelines: 
1.  Follow the natural contours as much as possible. 
2.  Round and contour slopes to blend with the existing terrain. 
3.  Emphasize and accentuate scenic vistas. 
4.  Avoid large manufactured slopes in favor of several smaller slopes. 
5.  Retain and incorporate significant natural vegetation into the project. 
6.  Grading should be performed in such manner as to optimize water retention. 
B.  Compatibility. Consideration should be given to the compatibility of proposed uses with existing adjacent uses. A site layout should factor in the surrounding natural and built environment including: 
1.  Relate the project to the surrounding built environment in function, scale and character. 
2.  Tie the project development proposal into adjacent or nearby unique or historic structures. 
3.  Reduce impacts on nearby residential uses by incorporating strategies such as such as appropriate building orientation, intensified landscaping and increased setbacks in project layout. 
4.  Link with compatible surrounding uses through vehicular connections and pedestrian paths. 
C.  Building Siting. 
1.  Entrance Considerations. 
a.  All primary building entries should face onto a street or a connecting walkway. The placement and design of structures should facilitate and encourage pedestrian activity and convey a visual link to the street and sidewalks. Entries that do not front directly onto a street should be connected to a street and the surrounding neighborhood via a landscaped connecting walkway. 
Pedestrian Connection to Neighborhood 
  
b.  Streetside entrances to stores with large floor areas (exceeding ten thousand square feet) are often difficult to achieve. Pedestrian access to these stores can be enhanced by: 
i.  Providing an entry at or near the street, which may be in addition to an entry relating directly to parking; 
ii.  Locating small shops along connecting walkways linking anchor stores to the street; 
iii.  Placing outdoor retail areas along the street such as outdoor seating for anchor store delis; or by 
iv.  Constructing landscaped connecting walkways through parking lots to provide a direct connection to the street. 
c.  A combination of building entries, windows (including display windows) and landscaping are the primary ways that commercial development should front onto streets. Generally, building entries and windows should front onto the street, with the following exceptions: 
i.  Where parking lots and driveways front the street and conform with guidelines contained within "vehicular circulation: access/parking lots"; or, 
ii.  Where the use is auto-serving or service commercial and conforms with "auto serving uses." 
2.  Street Frontage. 
a.  Where a building fronts onto a street, fifty percent of the building's linear streetside frontage should consist of an entrance, window or display window. Streetside buildings with street front parking should not be more than one hundred-feet long without a pedestrian plaza or walkway connecting the parking lot with the street. Auto-serving uses permitted in the commercial zones need not conform to these street frontage requirements. 
b.  On corner lots, buildings should mark the corner with added height, major entry, or other notable architectural feature(s). Buildings with angled corners or plazas are encouraged at corner locations. 
c.  Where a front or corner side setback is required, buildings that front onto the street should meet one of the following conditions: 
i.  The setback should be landscaped with dense, permanently maintained vegetation reaching a height of at least eighteen inches, except where walkways lead to building entries; or 
ii.  The setback may be paved with special pavers or scored concrete three feet by (three feet maximum module size) if building entries occur at least every twenty-five feet or a continuous arcade or trellis is provided. 
3.  Gateway Facades. Facades visible from the San Gabriel River Freeway, Whittier Boulevard, Beverly Boulevard and Colima Road should be especially attractive. These facades should include a major entry feature and fenestration over at least twenty-five of the facade's surface. In addition, a monolithic appearance should be avoided through application of these design guidelines. 
  
Major entry features and façade treatments 
  
Building facade details 
4.  Facades Facing Parking Lots. Where buildings face the street with parking behind, the facade facing the parking lot should contain at least three of the following features: 
  
Preferred building and parking orientation 
a.  Upper-story uses with windows overlooking the parking lot; 
b.  Secondary entrances to ground-floor or upper-story uses; 
c.  Windows (including display windows) occupying at least half of the building's length; 
d.  At least a four-foot change in building plane in every fifty linear feet; 
e.  A trellis or arcade that is at least five-feet deep (clear, unobstructed); or 
f.  A five-foot landscape strip containing trees or other tall vegetation. 
5.  Infill within Existing Development. 
a.  Within existing projects, new buildings are encouraged to reinforce streets as walkable, civic environments and to establish pleasant and convenient pedestrian paths between streets and existing storefronts. 
b.  The architectural style of new buildings should complement the existing center or be the basis for future remodeling for the existing center. 
c.  New construction should be similar to existing buildings in height, width and rhythm of openings. 
  
One story infill 
  
Two Story infill 
d.  Shared plazas or courtyards are encouraged within and across property lines. 
6.  Specific Uses to Consider. 
a.  Auto-serving uses. 
i.  Entries and windows for auto-service uses need not front onto streets. Entries should be linked to the street via a connecting walkway. Avoid facing auto-service bays, loading areas and blank walls toward the street; orient these features to the side or rear while presenting windows, entries and landscaping to the street. Trees or other landscaping should be used to further screen these features when viewed from the street. 
  
Preferred auto-serving retail building 
ii.  When possible, place auto-serving uses near the street, including gas stations, auto service establishments, or other buildings with a floor area under ten thousand square feet or a lot coverage under twenty-five percent (whichever is less). At least twenty-five percent of the linear frontage facing the street should contain windows (excluding clerestory and glassblock) to enhance the street's security and appearance. 
  
Drive-through orientation 
b.  Drive-Through Facilities. Fast food restaurant building entrances should face the street with parking located to the side and rear of the building. Where the size of a parcel may be constraining, one bay of parking may be allowed in front. Design elements, such as trellises, may encroach into the setback when well integrated with the landscape. Landscaped berms and/or low walls shall screen the parking lot and drive-through aisle. Restrooms accessed from outside the structure should not be permitted. Ladders for roof access shall be mounted on the inside of the building, or shall be completely concealed from public view. 
i.  The site design should be pedestrian friendly with opportunities for courtyards, plazas, outdoor dining and landscaped pathways that promote safe and convenient pedestrian movement. 
ii.  Drive-through restaurants should have a drive-through lane that measures a minimum of one hundred forty-four feet in length from entry to pick-up window, accommodating six vehicles. The lane should not enter from the street. The lane should have a minimum width of eleven feet on straight section and twelve feet on curved section. Drive-through lanes should be screened through building orientation, landscaping, low screen walls and trellis work. 
c.  Hotels and Motels. Hotel and motel facades should include bay windows, balconies, arcades, towers and other projections to avoid a monotonous appearance and an overly horizontal composition. Roofs should be hipped or gabled. Tile roofs are encouraged. Roof dormers are also encouraged and should be coordinated with the rhythm of fenestration and bays. Room entrances directly adjacent to parking lots or exterior walkways are discouraged. 
d.  Mixed Use Projects. The architectural style and use of materials should be consistent throughout. Separate site access, parking facilities and entrances should be used. Commercial signage should be restrained. 
7.  Encouraged Site Layout. Create more desirable pedestrian environment by better defining the street edge. Internal parking reduces the negative impact from the street. 
Typical Site Plans 
  
Recommended Site Plan 
  
Source: GERALD A POTTERFIELD 
D.  Vehicular Circulation. Parking lots should generally be placed away from the street, preferably behind buildings. In no case should street frontages consist of uninterrupted parking lots. 
1.  Adequate areas for maneuvering, loading and emergency vehicle access should be accommodated on site. 
2.  Parking areas should be accessed from the street so that circulation to parking areas does not interfere with other site activities. 
3.  Parking areas should be arranged to minimize conflicts with loading activities. 
4.  Large parking lot areas should be divided into a series of smaller connected lots separated by additional landscaping. 
5.  Loading and parking should generally be located to the side and rear of buildings with the exception of handicap and short-term parking lots which may be sited between the street and building entrances. Large expansive paved areas between the street and the building(s) are to be avoided in favor of smaller lots separated by landscaping and buildings. 
6.  Where parking lots occur along streets, a landscaped buffer should be provided to minimize views of parked cars from the street and be permanently maintained: 
a.  The landscaped buffer at the street should be at least fifteen feet wide, excluding parkway landscaping, or ten feet wide if bermed. 
b.  Within the landscaped buffer, trees should be planted at least thirty feet on-center and within five feet of the front property line. 
c.  The landscape buffer should include a screening feature that is thirty-six to forty-two inches in height and consists of a wall, fence, hedge, berm or equivalent. Earth berms should not exceed a 3:1 slope and be rounded and densely landscaped to have a natural appearance. 
7.  Parking lots should be separated from buildings by a five foot landscape strip. 
E.  Pedestrian Circulation. 
1.  Pedestrian access should be provided between transit stops and building entrances. 
2.  Minimize pedestrian crossing distances at driveways. Ideally, a raised median should be used to separate ingress and egress lanes and to provide a pedestrian island, especially where there are three or more lanes. Special pavers, scored concrete or an equivalent treatment should mark pedestrian crossings. 
  
Raised median walkway acts as pedestrian island 
3.  Where possible, connecting walkways should follow an alignment that connects building entries and should be at least eight feet wide in these locations. 
4.  Where connecting walkways pass through parking lots, they should be at least five feet wide (excluding car overhangs) and should be accompanied by a minimum five foot landscape buffer with trees planted at least every thirty feet on-center. 
5.  Walkways should consist of special pavers or scored concrete with modules that should not exceed three feet in width. 
6.  Where a walkway is oversized to accommodate occasional emergency vehicles, landscaping, grass-crete, and other features should be used to give the walkway a more appropriate scale. Meandering walkways should follow the natural terrain and incorporate an irregular pattern. 
  
Connecting walkways 
  
F.  Loading and Storage Areas. 
1.  Loading docks, overhead doors and storage areas should not face streets and freeways, and preferably be located behind or to the side of buildings. 
Where oblique views of these features are possible from streets, freeways, connecting walkways or residences, the features should be screened through the use of walls, wood fences, trellises, tall landscaping, or equivalent features. Loading docks and storage areas should not conflict with connecting walkways. If located adjacent to residential areas, the design of overhead doors should minimize noise through devices such as rubber seals and/or other dampening features. Locate fixed hardware for rolling door on the inside of buildings to minimize visual "clutter." Loading and storage areas should maintain basic visual quality requirements contained in "Building Finishes and Detailing." 
2.  Loading and delivery areas should not be located in required setbacks. 
3.  Loading docks, overhead doors and storage areas should not face streets and freeways, and preferably be located behind or to the side of buildings. Where oblique views of these features are possible from streets, freeways, connecting walkways or residences, the features should be screened through the use of walls, wood fences, trellises, tall landscaping or equivalent features. Loading docks and storage areas should not conflict with connecting walkways. If located adjacent to residential areas, the design of overhead doors should minimize noise through devices such as rubber seals and/or other dampening features. Locate fixed hardware for rolling door on the inside of buildings to minimize visual "clutter." Loading and storage areas should maintain basic visual quality requirements contained in "Building Finishes and Detailing." 
4.  Loading and delivery areas should not be located in required setbacks. 
G.  Plazas, Public Art and Views. 
1.  Plazas. 
a.  Retail centers over ten thousand square feet should provide at least one square foot of plaza area for every one hundred square feet of gross floor area, and employment uses with more than twenty employees should provide at least ten square feet of outdoor plaza area for each employee. Plazas should provide shade, be at least ten feet wide and have decorative paving. If accompanied by a building entry, plazas may occur within front or corner side setbacks, with trellises and similar structures being allowed to project five feet into the front and street side yard setback areas. The plaza area should be calculated separate from areas devoted to connecting walkways. Outdoor seating, tables and umbrellas, public art, water features, landscaping, gazebos or other features are encouraged in plazas and should be consistent with the architectural style of the project. 
  
Retail plaza area 
  
b.  Plazas are encouraged where high levels of pedestrian activity are expected, such as adjacent to major entrances and food services such as delis, restaurants, coffee shops and bakeries. Building entries and windows should look onto plazas to enhance activity and security. 
2.  Public Art. Plazas, entries and gateways should incorporate public art in a manner consistent with the overall architectural theme of the project. Public art should illustrate local history and current events through the appropriate media, such as interpretive landscapes, murals, mosaics, sculptures and artful architectural features integrated into the project design. 
3.  Views. Site circulation and plazas can be used to draw attention to distinctive features such as entrances, public art, fountains, plantings or the local hillsides. 
  
Incorporate view into site design 
H.  Fence and Wall Design. 
1.  Fences and walls should be built with attractive, durable materials, including, but not limited to, redwood, wrought iron, textured concrete block or formed concrete with reveals. Chainlink fencing, corrugated metal fencing and "tennis windscreens" are not permitted. Fences or walls should be consistent with materials and designs used throughout the project. In the event of a wood fence, a protective coating should be applied. 
2.  All fences and walls should have a distinctive cap of different width, material or texture within the top eight inches. Walls should not exceed a height of six feet without being made of textured concrete block, interlocking "diamond" blocks, formed concrete with reveals or similar materials. Wrought iron and dimensional wood should not be used as "zone division" walls that are required adjacent to residential uses for visual and acoustical separation. 
Commercial fencing concepts 
  
3.  At the street, avoid long expanses of uninterrupted fences and walls. Use an opening, planter box, material change, pilaster or post, or a three-foot stagger at least every forty feet. Provide an opening to fences and walls to connect walkways directly to the street and avoid circuitous routes for pedestrians. These pedestrian "gateways" should be announced by pilasters, trellis, special landscaping, public art or other special features. 
4.  In order to soften the mass of a fence or wall, use landscaping such as vines, low to medium height shrubs, and trees appropriate to the architectural style or period of the development. 
5.  Fences and walls adjacent to residences. Where a side or rear property line of a commercial site adjoins a residential zone, a six-foot solid wall shall be required at the adjoining property line. 
6.  Wall design should incorporate graffiti- and vandal-resistant materials that are easily cleaned or painted. 
I.  Refuse. 
1.  Refuse enclosures and equipment should be easily accessed by service vehicles. Locate refuse enclosures and equipment within a building's facade or within a screened enclosure. Reflect the architectural style of adjacent buildings in the design of enclosures, and use similar, high-quality materials. Landscaping or trelliswork should screen enclosures visible from a street or connecting walkway and shall be permanently maintained. 
  
Trash enclosures should reflect design of adjacent structures 
2.  Trash enclosures should be located away from residential uses to minimize nuisance to adjacent properties. 
3.  Cart storage areas should be integrated within the initial building and site design. Large freestanding enclosures or unscreened "cart corrals" are considered unacceptable. 
4.  Outdoor storage areas: Locate outdoor storage areas away from the street, behind or to the side of buildings. In addition to locating storage areas away from streets, walls should be used to screen stored materials. 
J.  Lighting. 
1.  Exterior lighting standards should be located and designed to minimize direct glare beyond the parking lot or service area. Light standards under fifteen feet in height (including lighting bollards) should illuminate all streetside sidewalks and connecting walkways and are encouraged throughout a project. Taller standards, while generally discouraged, may be used only if: 
a.  Reflectors direct light only toward the center of parking areas and at least sixty feet from a residential property; and 
b.  Trees are planted along streets and property lines at a spacing of not more than thirty feet on-center. All light standards should be consistent with the overall architectural style of the project. At a minimum, all light standards should have an attractive base and top; overhanging "shoebox" standards are discouraged; and, overhanging "cobrahead" standards are not permitted. 
2.  Buildings and landscaping can be illuminated indirectly to create a strong positive image. Concealing light features within buildings and landscaping can highlight attractive features and avoid intrusion into neighboring properties. Thoughtful use of attractive pedestrian oriented lighting is especially encouraged at entries, plazas and other areas where evening activity is expected. 
  
  
Complementary light fixtures 
  
Light bollards along walkways 
K.  Drainage. Using various control techniques to limit off-site drainage helps to create a healthier watershed. There are many ways to capture water on-site and divert water underground. All commercial development should integrate water run-off best management practices into the site design. For more information on National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (Clean Water Act) guidelines and best management practices consult the city public works department. 
L.  Site Accessories. 
1.  Site design features, such as recycling bins, bike racks, litter cans, planters, benches and transit shelters, should use materials and have an architectural character consistent with the overall project. Design these features to be graffiti- and vandal-resistant by using materials that are easily cleaned or painted. Avoid interrupting connecting walkways with these features. 
2.  Site amenities within a commercial setting should be coordinated in terms of color, materials and design in order to convey a cohesive project appearance and distinctive character. 
M.  Auxiliary Structures and Areas. All auxiliary structures should be integrated architecturally with the project through their color, materials and architectural style. The location of auxiliary areas is essential to the success of a business. For example, outdoor dining areas should be placed as close to the front yard or street side yard setback as possible; at the very least, outdoor dining areas should be visible from the street. 
1.  Transit Shelters. Where a transit stop is planned adjacent to a project that is at least five acres, the developer should coordinate with the public works department and the transit department to determine a location for a transit shelter on-site. Transit shelters that are incorporated within the form of a building such as under an awning or arcade are encouraged. 
  
Transit shelters should be integrated architecturally 
2.  Play Places. Play structures associated with commercial uses should be enclosed and integrated within the building design. If the play place is a secondary use, then the size of the play structures and the portion of the building containing the play area should be subordinate to the main use and building. 
3.  Outdoor Dining Areas. Outdoor dining areas are encouraged and should provide permanent shade. Small to medium height landscaping and non-view obscuring fences should be utilized to help define outdoor dining areas. 
4.  Vending Machines. All vending machines should be located inside the store. Vending machines may be placed outside of a store if they are not visible from the public right of way and their placement is architecturally integrated into the design of the development. 
N.  Screening Equipment. All screening equipment should be designed so that these features are graffiti- and vandal-resistant by providing, at minimum, a two foot wide landscape strip at the base of these walls for vines and tall shrubs, and by using materials that are treated accordingly, and easily cleaned or painted. 
  
Trellis over drive-through 
1.  Mechanical Equipment. 
a.  The location of mechanical equipment should be integrated into the project's site and building design. Roof-top and ground-mounted equipment should be architecturally screened from view of elevated highways, streets, parking lots, connecting walkways and the freeway. 
b.  Mechanical equipment must be screened behind parapets or by recessing equipment into hips, gables, parapets or similar features; exposed boxes are not acceptable. Screening details should incorporate "capping" elements and the same exterior trim details as found elsewhere in the project. The top of screens should be at least as high as the top of the equipment, yet the screen walls should be generally kept as low as possible. If public ways have an elevation that is equal to or above the elevation of equipment, a section should be prepared which shows the relationship of the equipment to the public way and the manner in which this view will be screened. 
Mechanical equipment 
  
  
  
2.  Transformers 
a.  Transformers, heating units and other ground-mounted equipment should be adequately screened with architecturally integrated walls and/or landscaping. Additional area for future ground-mounted equipment and screening needs should be considered and set aside. Avoid interrupting connecting walkways with these features. 
b.  Transformers should not dominate the streetscape. When transformers are required to be installed adjacent to the street, they should be underground. 
Freestanding transformer location 
  
3.  Downspouts. Downspouts should be concealed on facades that face a street or freeway. 
O.  Landscaping. All landscaping should be completed in a timely manner so as to minimize erosion of slopes and off-site drainage. The following landscaping principles should also be considered: 
1.  Use a mixture of evergreen and deciduous trees to provide year-round interest. 
a.  Use evergreen trees to block winter winds and screen unsightly features. 
b.  Provide special landscaping treatment, such as intensifying density (size and/or number) of trees, accent trees, and special paving at all project entries and building entries. 
c.  Provide shade/canopy trees within parking areas at a ratio of one shade tree for every five parking stalls. 
d.  Use plants to define outdoor spaces such as edges, outdoor plazas, or movement paths between parking and building entrances. 
e.  Plant trees to provide a continuity of form across the entire project. 
2.  Landscape at Walls. 
a.  A five-foot landscape strip (excluding wall footings and car overhangs) should be provided at the base of all solid fences and walls, and at the base of buildings, except where there are entrances or loading areas. 
b.  These landscape strips should be planted with trees, hedges, vines or similar treatment and permanently maintained. 
3.  Period appropriate landscaping is encouraged. Use landscape specimens appropriate to architectural design theme. 
4.  Drought tolerant, native plants should be a priority. 
5.  The developer should construct an automatic irrigation system. 
P.  Paving. 
1.  Decorative paving should be incorporated into parking lot design, driveway entries and pedestrian walkways. 
2.  Paving materials should complement the architectural design. The use of stamped concrete, stone, brick, pavers, exposed aggregate, or colored concrete is encouraged. 
3.  The following permeable pavements are encouraged, where appropriate to the existing or new building architecture or theme: 
a.  Poured in place: pervious concrete and porous asphalt 
b.  Unit Pavers: brick, natural stone 
c.  Granular materials: gravel, cobbles. 
(Ord. 2786 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
18.96.040 - Architectural design guidelines. 
A.  Style. 
1.  Construction should render the well chosen style through appropriate detailing, properly applied materials and quality workmanship. A consistent architectural style shall be used for a building and the elements that relate to it, such as trellises, planters or light-standards. Multi-building projects should also use a consistent architectural style. While specific architectural styles are not dictated by the zoning code, several styles predominate in the city and should be emulated to help keep the city's unique "sense of place." 
2.  Styles generally respond to the region's climate. For example, a Mediterranean design should incorporate shade windows, outdoor circulation and outdoor courtyard or plazas with deep eaves, recessed window frames, awnings, arcades, loggias, trellises and trees. Other predominant styles include craftsman, victorian, mission, art deco modern and italianate. Alternative styles are permissible, provided they meet the requirements listed throughout these guidelines. Skyscraper like "high tech" styles with unarticulated surfaces and insubstantial materials should be avoided. 
3.  The selected architectural style/design should consider compatibility with surrounding character, including harmonious building style, form, size, color, materials and roofline. In developed areas, infill projects should meet or exceed the standards of quality which have been set by surrounding development. 
4.  The use of standardized "corporate" architectural styles associated with franchises is discouraged. Corporate architecture should be modified to meet the city's design guidelines with some consideration to maintaining corporate identification. 
5.  The designer is expected to employ variations in form, building details and siting in order to create visual interest. In all cases, the selected architectural style should be employed on all building elevations. 
B.  Massing. The mass and roof forms of buildings should be varied, especially with larger projects. Different heights may be used to communicate different uses or shops. Bay windows and stepped buildings also create added visual interest and relate directly to the pedestrian environment. An arcade provides another means of connecting varied masses and a more comfortable experience along pedestrian routes. Higher tower elements or similar features are encouraged at focal points, such as plazas, major entrances or where walkways meet streets. 
  
C.  Entry Design. 
1.  Gables, awnings, sign locations or other features should clearly express the location of doorways. Greater attention should be given to materials and detailing adjacent to entries. 
Entry design 
  
2.  "Notch" the street side of buildings to gain access for landscaping and to provide architectural variation. 
  
Notch 
D.  Features. 
1.  Arcades and Awnings. Outdoor arcades are encouraged to protect pedestrians from summer heat and winter rain. Where an arcade is not provided, a separate awning or other architectural feature should be used for each business to enhance the individual identity of small shops. Because they can quickly deteriorate, canvas awnings are discouraged and, when used, shall be properly maintained. 
  
Outdoor arcade 
2.  Upper-Story Uses. Upper-story uses with bay windows and balconies are encouraged to provide informal surveillance, and create a pleasant sense of enclosure, especially around plazas and along streets. Lobbies for upper-story uses should clearly be expressed through gables, awnings, special materials, or other architectural treatments. Bay windows and balconies are encouraged and should not appear to be cantilevered for more than six inches without visible blocking, brackets, corbels or posts. 
3.  Roof Forms. Roof forms should be simple and reflect the internal organization of buildings. Hipped and gable roofs are encouraged. Flat roof parapets should be accompanied by a cornice or other shadow-creating detail at its "top." 
4.  Drive-Up Windows. Construct roofs or trellises over drive-up windows. Posts supporting roofs or trellises should be substantial in appearance. Integrate these features into the overall architecture of the project. The stacking area for drive-up windows should be screened from the street through a combination of berming, low walls and landscaping. 
E.  Building Treatment, Finishes and Detailing. 
1.  Building Facades. 
a.  Buildings should not be monotonous or have a flat, shadowless appearance on any side. No wall should have a blank, uninterrupted length exceeding twenty feet without including one of the following: change in texture, change in plane (two-foot minimum), window (excluding clerestory windows and glass block), public art, lattice, tree or equivalent element. Facades that are visible from adjacent streets or walkways should display even greater visual interest by using architectural elements that break up the massing of large buildings, such as windows, arcades, porticos and other architectural features. 
  
Top treatment 
  
Base treatment 
b.  All facades should have a recognizable "base" and "top." The base should visually carry the weight of the building. A recommended rule of thumb is approximately one-eighth of a building's height, unless associated with window stem walls where it may be as little as eighteen inches tall. Techniques for establishing a base include, but are not limited to, the following: 
i.  Thicker walls; 
ii.  Richly textured materials (e.g. tile or masonry treatments); 
iii.  Darker colored materials, mullion, and/or panels; and/or 
iv.  Enriched landscaping with a mature height of at least eighteen inches and permanently maintained. 
c.  Special materials, such as ceramic tile, granite and marble, are encouraged on the base of buildings that face streets or connecting walkways, especially adjacent to major entries. 
d.  "Tops" take advantage of the visual prominence of a building's silhouette and should be approximately one-twentieth of a building's height or twelve inches (whichever is more). Techniques for clearly expressing a top include, but are not limited to, the following: 
i.  Cornice treatments; 
ii.  Roof overhangs with brackets; 
iii.  Stepped parapets; 
iv.  Richly textured materials (e.g. tile or masonry treatments); and/or 
v.  Different colored materials. 
e.  Colored "stripes" are not acceptable as the only treatment. 
2.  Quality of Construction. Give an attractive appearance to all facades through careful and correct detailing, especially at the base of buildings, along cornices, eaves, parapets or ridgetops, and around entries and windows. Details for these conditions may be requested as part of development review. Appearance may also be enhanced through the correct use of materials, expansion joints and reveals. 
3.  Exterior Materials. High quality building materials are encouraged. Recommended materials include brick, stucco, exterior plaster, wood siding, tile or stone. Veneers that are visibly prefabricated are discouraged. Materials and detailing should have a substantial and long-lasting appearance. 
4.  Material Changes. To avoid the false appearance of lightweight veneers, material changes should not occur at external corners. Material changes may occur at "reverse" or interior corners or as a "return" at least two feet from external corners. 
5.  Windows. To provide a base element and greater safety, window frames should generally be set upon a stem wall or framed panel that is at least eighteen inches high. In addition, window frames should be substantial and should be framed or inset to establish an attractive shadow, flush with the exterior finish. Glazing inset at least two inches from the front face of the exterior finish is encouraged. 
6.  Roof Materials. Roofing materials should be durable and display frequent, clearly marked shadow lines. Roofing materials that are generally acceptable include metal standing seam, concrete tile, ceramic tile and slate or slate-like materials. Non-acceptable roofing materials include all combustible or non-fire-rated roofing materials, "roll roofing" and lightweight asphalt shingles. 
7.  Colors. For larger building surfaces (excluding trim), colors should be muted and lighter in value. (Muted colors contain a mix of complementary colors that result in off-whites, tans and other "softer colors." Lighter colors have a value equivalent to thirty percent or less on a gray scale.) Accent colors may include brighter and darker colors. 
(Ord. 2786 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
Chapter 18.98 - MANUFACTURING DESIGN GUIDELINES 
 
18.98.010 - Design goals. 
Manufacturing development has typically been physically and visually isolated from other city land uses in the past. The very nature of early manufacturing dictated a function-over-form design of large-scale developments on the outskirts of town. Rapid urban growth and technological advances in industry have blurred the spatial and visual gap between manufacturing and other uses. For this reason, the manufacturing design guidelines are intended to promote high quality development that will: 
A.  Provide for function while promoting high quality architecture, landscaping and design; 
B.  Integrate or transition land uses through sensitive siting and design; 
C.  Ensure compatibility with other parts of the community; and 
D.  Enhance the street environment for motorists and pedestrians. 
(Ord. 2786 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
18.98.020 - Design objectives. 
The design of each manufacturing project in the city should: 
A.  Reinforce or establish a distinct architectural image; 
B.  Consider the scale, proportion and character of surrounding development; 
C.  Establish attractive, inviting, imaginative and functional design; 
D.  Provide convenient pedestrian connections between employment locations and services; 
E.  Provide for safe on-site pedestrian activity and avoid adverse traffic problems; 
F.  Minimize excessive or incompatible impacts of noise, light, traffic and visual character; 
G.  Preserve and incorporate natural amenities unique to the site such as mature trees and hillside views; and 
H.  Preserve and incorporate historically, culturally, or architecturally significant buildings into the project design. 
(Ord. 2786 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
18.98.030 - Site design guidelines. 
A.  Grading. Grading should be minimized where possible to preserve the natural character of the city. Where grading is unavoidable, consider the following guidelines: 
1.  Follow the natural contours as much as possible. 
2.  Round and contour slopes to blend with the existing terrain. 
3.  Emphasize and accentuate scenic vistas. 
4.  Avoid large manufactured slopes in favor of several smaller slopes. 
5.  Retain and incorporate significant natural vegetation into the project. 
6.  Graded slopes should be landscaped for aesthetic and slope stability purposes. 
7.  Optimize on-site water retention basins. 
B.  Compatibility. Consideration should be given to the compatibility of proposed uses with existing adjacent uses. A site layout should factor in the surrounding natural and built environment including: 
1.  Relate the project to the surrounding built environment in function, scale and character. 
2.  Tie the project development proposal into adjacent or nearby unique or historic structures. 
3.  Reduce impacts on nearby residential uses by incorporating strategies such as appropriate building orientation, intensified landscaping and increased setbacks in project layout. 
4.  Link with compatible surrounding uses through vehicular connections and pedestrian paths. 
C.  Building Siting. Building siting should consider the context of the surrounding area, location of incompatible uses, location of major traffic generators and site characteristics, when applying the following guidelines: 
Recommended site orientation 
  
1.  Front the entries, buildings, office areas, and windows onto the street; 
2.  Give attention to public view, both on- and off-site; 
3.  Vary building setbacks to provide relief from long monotonous facades; 
4.  Increase building setbacks as height increases; and 
5.  Cluster buildings to create plazas and courtyards. 
D.  Site Entry. Major vehicular and pedestrian entries to manufacturing developments should create visible "gateways" through the use of: 
1.  Decorative, textured paving; 
2.  Accent trees and ornamental landscaping; 
3.  Low profile monument signage; and 
4.  Pedestrian plazas where site entries are adjacent to a building entry. 
  
Site entry design treatments 
  
E.  Vehicular Circulation. 
1.  Adequate areas for maneuvering, stacking, truck staging, loading and emergency vehicle access should be accommodated on site. 
2.  Parking areas should be accessed from the street so that circulation to parking areas does not interfere with other site activities. 
3.  Parking areas should be arranged to minimize conflicts with loading activities. 
4.  Large parking lot areas should be divided into a series of smaller connected lots separated by additional landscaping. 
5.  Loading and parking should generally be located to the side and rear of buildings with the exception of visitor and short-term parking lots which may be sited between the street and building entrances. Large expansive paved areas between the street and the building(s) are to be avoided in favor of smaller lots separated by landscaping and buildings. 
6.  Where parking lots occur along streets, a landscaped buffer should be provided to minimize views of parked cars from the street and be permanently maintained: 
a.  The landscaped buffer at the street should be at least fifteen feet wide, excluding parkway landscaping, or ten feet wide if bermed. Within the landscaped buffer, trees should be planted at least thirty feet on-center and within five feet of the front property line. 
Landscape screen 
  
b.  The landscape buffer should include a screening feature that is thirty-six to forty-two inches in height and consist of a wall, fence, hedge, berm or equivalent. Earth berms should not exceed a 3:1 slope and be rounded and densely landscaped to have a natural appearance. 
c.  Parking lots should be separated from buildings by a five foot landscape strip. 
  
Streetscape design 
F.  Pedestrian Circulation. 
1.  Walkways should connect major building entries with the public sidewalk along the street. 
2.  Pedestrian walkways should be adjacent to buildings and be overlooked by frequent entries or windows. 
3.  Connecting walkways should be at least four feet wide (excluding car overhangs) and should be accompanied by a five foot minimum landscape buffer with trees planted at least every thirty feet on-center. 
4.  Walkways with decorative pavers or other special design treatment are preferred. 
5.  Walkways should provide a direct route without conflicting with parking and loading areas, and vehicular access and egress points to the parking areas. 
6.  Pedestrian access should be provided between transit stops and building entrances. 
  
G.  Loading, Delivery and Storage Areas. 
1.  Loading and storage areas should not face streets. When these features must face a street, they must be screened with a solid decorative wall or berm. Where oblique views of these features are possible from streets, freeways, connecting walkways or residences, the features should be screened through the use of walls, trellises, tall landscaping or equivalent features. 
  
  
2.  Section plans should be prepared to show that the wall height is sufficient to screen the loading area, vehicles and trailers from view of adjacent properties and streets. 
3.  Adequate room should be provided for trucks maneuvering or waiting to unload; the area within one hundred twenty feet in front of loading docks should be paved and kept free of obstacles. 
4.  Loading and storage areas should not conflict with connecting walkways or required parking areas. 
5.  Loading and delivery areas should not be located in required setback areas. 
6.  Loading areas should be designed to include attractive and durable materials. Design considerations for loading and storage areas include: 
a.  Locate fixed hardware for rolling doors on the inside of buildings to minimize visual "clutter." 
b.  In the loading and storage areas, building segments above loading doors visible from the street and surrounding properties should conform with other guidelines pertaining to building features, materials and finishes. 
c.  If located adjacent to residential areas, the design of overhead doors should minimize noise through devices such as rubber seals and/or other dampening features. 
d.  Outdoor storage shall not exceed eight feet in height. A lower grade of loading docks is encouraged, where practical, to help minimize views from the street and the need for tall walls or fencing. 
H.  Plazas. Plazas are encouraged as a site amenity and design detail. 
  
Outdoor plaza design 
1.  Arrange buildings to include opportunities for plazas, courts or gardens, and lunch areas for employees with such amenities as outdoor seating, landscaping, water elements, pergolas, special lighting and other "place-making" features. 
2.  Plazas are encouraged where high levels of pedestrian activity are expected, such as adjacent to major entrances and food services such as delis, restaurants and bakeries or between building clusters in a business park development. 
3.  Building entries and windows should look onto plazas to enhance activity and security. 
4.  Locate outdoor employee break areas preferably away from loading areas or other high-traffic areas. 
I.  Fence and Wall Design. 
  
Fences and walls 
1.  Materials. Fences and walls in public view should be built with attractive durable materials, including, but not limited to, wrought iron, textured concrete block or formed concrete with reveals. Fences or walls should be consistent with materials and designs used throughout the project. Sliding gates to loading areas visible from a street should be constructed with wrought iron and high density perforated metal screening, painted to match or complement adjacent walls. Site entries requiring gates should be offset from direct view to loading areas, where possible, to minimize extent of screening, and avoid direct view to loading areas when gates are open. 
2.  Height. Street side fences or walls should adequately screen views to the top of loading bays and parked vehicles and/or trailers. The height of screen walls outside the setback areas should not exceed twelve feet from the highest finished grade. The area in front of walls and fences should be landscaped with shrubs and trees reaching a mature height that exceeds the height of the wall or fence. Additional landscaping should be used when walls exceed seven feet in height. 
3.  Special Design Considerations. Along street frontages, avoid long expanses of uninterrupted fences and walls. Long expanses of wall surfaces should be offset and architecturally treated to prevent monotony. Techniques to accomplish this treatment may include, but are not limited to, the following: raised planters, openings, material change, staggered sections, and pilasters or posts. Vegetation should be used in conjunction with these suggestions, but should not be used in place of special wall treatments. Provide openings to fences and walls to connect walkways directly to the street and avoid circuitous routes for pedestrians. These pedestrian "gateways" should be announced by pilasters, trellises, special landscaping, or other special features. Landscape berms should be provided to minimize the height impact of screen walls. 
4.  Fences and Walls Adjacent to Non-Industrial Uses. Where manufacturing uses are adjacent to non-manufacturing uses, appropriate buffering techniques such as setbacks, screening, and landscaping need to be provided to mitigate any negative effects of manufacturing uses. 
J.  Refuse. 
1.  Refuse containers and equipment shall be easily accessed by service vehicles, but screened from public view. 
2.  Locate refuse containers and equipment within a building's facade or within a screened enclosure. Reflect the architectural style or significant architectural elements of adjacent buildings in the design of enclosures, and use similar, high-quality materials. 
3.  Landscaping or trelliswork should be provided on each side of screened enclosures within parking areas and when visible from a street or connecting walkway. (See development standards for minimum size) 
  
Refuse container enclosures 
K.  Lighting. 
1.  Exterior lighting standards should be located and designed to minimize direct glare beyond the parking lot or service area. Light standards under twenty-five feet in height (including lighting bollards) are encouraged throughout a project and should illuminate all sidewalks and connecting walkways. 
  
Complementary light fixtures 
  
Light bollards along walkways 
  
Bollards along entry 
Taller standards may be used only if: 
a.  Reflectors direct light only toward the center of parking areas and at least sixty feet from a residential property; and 
b.  Trees are planted along streets and property lines at a spacing of not more than thirty feet on-center. 
2.  All light standards should be consistent with respect to design, materials, color, light color and with the overall architectural style of the project. At a minimum, all light standards should have an attractive base and top; overhead "cobrahead" standards are not permitted. Buildings and landscaping can be illuminated indirectly to create a strong positive image. 
3.  Concealing light features within buildings and landscaping can highlight attractive features and avoid intrusion into neighboring properties. Use of lighting is especially encouraged at entries, plazas and other areas where evening activity is expected. 
  
L.  Drainage. Using various control techniques to limit off-site drainage helps to create a healthier watershed. There are many ways to capture water on-site and divert water underground. Residential development should integrate water runoff best management practices into the site design. For more information on National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (Clean Water Act) guidelines and best management practices, consult the city public works department. 
M.  Site Accessories. 
1.  Site features, such as recycling bins, bike racks, litter cans, planters, and benches should be designed as an integral part of the project. Architectural character and use of materials should be consistent with the overall project. Design these features to be graffiti- and vandal-resistant by using materials that are easily cleaned or painted. Avoid interrupting connecting walkways with these features. 
2.  Site amenities within a manufacturing setting should be coordinated in terms of color, materials and design in order to convey a cohesive project appearance and distinctive character. 
N.  Auxiliary Structures. Transit shelters should be provided near major concentrations of employees. Where a transit stop is planned adjacent to a project of at least five acres, the developer should coordinate with the transit department to determine a suitable location for a transit shelter on-site. Freestanding shelters should be integrated architecturally with the project with respect to color, materials and architectural style. 
  
Multi-model shelter 
(Ord 2786 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
18.98.040 - Architectural design guidelines. 
A.  Style. 
1.  A consistent architectural style should be used for a building and the elements that relate to it, such as trellises, planters, light standards, etc. Multi-building projects should also use a consistent architectural style. 
2.  Consideration should be given to the architectural and site design of a proposed project with those of existing adjacent uses. Also, projects that abut residentially and commercially zoned properties should be designed in such a manner so as to minimize the massing and effects typically associated with large manufacturing buildings. 
3.  An attractive appearance to all facades should be provided through careful detailing, especially at the base of buildings, along cornices, eaves, parapets or ridgetops, and around entries and windows. (Details for these conditions may be requested as part of development review). Appearance may also be enhanced through the correct use of materials, expansion joints, and reveals. 
B.  Massing. A single, dominant building mass should be avoided. Substantial variations in massing should include changes in height and horizontal plane. 
1.  Horizontal masses for building elevations less than seven hundred lineal feet should not exceed a height/width ratio of 1:5 without a substantial architectural element that projects up or away from the building, such as towers, bays, lattices, or other architectural features. 
2.  Buildings greater than seven hundred lineal feet should not exceed a height/width ratio of 1:6 without massing variations. 
3.  A ratio of 1:10 may be considered for facades greater than seven hundred lineal feet with external treatment detached from the building to help break the mass of the structure between massing breaks, including columns, colonnades, trellises or enhanced landscape treatment. 
  
Massing ratios 
Massing and building projections 
  
The extent of massing breaks and building projections should relate visually to the overall scale of the building. 
C.  Entry Design. 
  
1.  Building Facades. 
Avoid blank walls between massing breaks, especially along facades immediately visible from adjacent streets or walkways, by using one or more of the following techniques: 
a.  Change in texture; 
b.  Revealed pilaster; 
c.  Change in plane (two-foot minimum); 
d.  Vertical variation of roof line; 
e.  Window; and 
f.  Lattice, accent tree or equivalent. 
2.  Gateway Facades. Facades visible from freeways and major street corridors should be especially attractive. These facades should include a major entry feature and fenestration over at least twenty-five percent of the facade's surface. In addition, a monolithic appearance should be avoided. 
Gateway facades 
  
3.  Major Entries. 
a.  Highlight primary building entries through the massing of the building. Greater height can be used to highlight and accentuate entries in the form of corner tower elements, tall voids, or a central mass meeting an entry plaza. Conversely, smaller building masses can also communicate the location of entries. 
Entry design 
  
b.  Contrasting forms can also be used to help highlight major entry points on large building facades. Elements such as curved and straight lines, cylindrical corner elements with sharp corners help highlight major entry points on manufacturing buildings. 
4.  Pedestrian Entries. 
a.  Entries and windows are encouraged to face streets and pedestrian walkways. 
b.  Projects with few employees should attempt to place entries and the most active areas near the street to avoid long, "unguarded" walkways. Incorporate special materials, color, detailing, or equivalent architectural treatment at major entries. 
  
D.  Building Treatment, Finishes and Detailing. 
1.  Base and Top Treatments. 
Facades having a recognizable "base" and "top" are encouraged. 
  
a.  The "base" should visually relate to the proportion and scale of the building. Techniques for establishing a base include, but are not limited to: 
i.  Richly textured materials (e.g., tile or masonry treatments); 
ii.  Darker colored materials, mullion, panels, reveals; and 
iii.  Enriched landscaping. 
  
Base treatment 
b.  "Tops" take advantage of the visual prominence of a building's silhouette. Techniques for clearly expressing a top may include, but are not limited to: 
  
Top treatment 
  
Acceptable top design techniques 
i.  Cornice treatments, 
ii.  Roof overhangs with brackets, 
iii.  Richly textured materials (e.g. tile, masonry or fluted concrete), and/or 
iv.  Different colored materials. 
c.  Colored "stripes" are not acceptable as the only treatment. Texture, reveals and color may be appropriate in some applications. Vertical expressions that comply with the General Massing section may be considered as an alternative for "top" treatment on large distribution buildings. 
2.  Roof Materials. 
a.  Roofline. Vertical variations to the roofline should incorporate roof projections, to avoid a false front/unfinished appearance. Rear elevations screened from public view may be excluded. 
  
External treatment for long elevations 
b.  Roof Form and Materials. Vertical roof forms should be simple, avoid a massive appearance, and reflect the internal organization of buildings. Roofing materials should be durable. Where visible from the street, acceptable roofing materials include metal standing seam and concrete tile. 
3.  Material Changes. Avoid the false appearance of lightweight veneers by hiding material changes through careful detailing. Material changes should not occur at externals corners. Material changes may occur at "reverse" or interior corners or as a "return" at least four feet from external corners, with extended returns provided for large buildings. 
  
Materials should turn corner 
4.  Colors. For larger building surfaces (excluding trim), colors should be muted and other "softer colors". Lighter colors have a value equivalent to thirty percent or less on a gray scale. Accent colors may include brighter and darker colors. 
5.  Downspouts. Downspouts should be concealed on facades that face a street or freeway, or should be architecturally integrated into the design of the building. 
6.  Windows. Window frames should appear substantial and should not be flush with the exterior finish. Glazing should be inset at least two inches from the front face of the exterior finish. On windows facing a public right-of-way or facing a plaza, bare aluminum finishes are discouraged, except when designed as a critical element of the overall architectural design. 
7.  Mechanical Equipment Screening. Mechanical equipment screening should be integrated as part of a project's site and building design. 
a.  Rooftop and ground-mounted equipment should be screened from view of streets, parking lots, connecting walkways and freeways. 
b.  Integrate rooftop equipment into the overall mass of a building. 
c.  Screen roof-mounted equipment through the use of parapets, screen walls, equipment wells, mechanical room enclosures and similar design features. Screening devices other than parapet walls shall be designed as an integral element of the building mass. 
d.  Picket fencing, chain-link fencing and metal boxes shall be avoided. 
e.  The top of screens should be at least as high as the top of the equipment, with additional height provided where larger equipment units could be used in the future. 
Mechanical equipment screening 
  
  
f.  Cross-section drawings should be prepared to illustrate the method in which the equipment will be screened from view of adjacent streets, freeways and properties. 
g.  Typical ground-mounted equipment (such as transformers and heating units) should be screened with walls and/or landscaping. 
h.  Large structures and/or equipment such as water tanks, silos and large bins should be screened by the building from view of adjacent streets, freeways and properties. 
(Ord. 2786 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
Chapter 18.99 - PARKING STRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS & DESIGN GUIDELINES 
 
18.99.010 - Purpose. 
Parking structures are an efficient and economical option to providing parking without acquiring additional land for surface parking. Each parking structure design must consider architectural compatibility, size, scale, and bulk as it relates to both on-site and off-site adjacent properties in conjunction with the overall design of the project. This chapter shall be referenced for the development and design standards of all above and below ground parking structures within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2920, § 1, 2-10-09)  
18.99.020 - Site development. 
Unless stated otherwise within this chapter, the parking structure shall comply will all signage, design and development standards of the Specific Plan or Whittier Municipal Code for the zoning classification of the property that it is developed on subject to the review and approval of a development review application by the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 2920, § 1, 2-10-09)  
18.99.030 - Location. 
A.  Each parking structure design shall consider architectural compatibility, size, scale, bulk and its relationship to the structures immediately adjacent to it. 
B.  Parking structures that are located immediately adjacent to sensitive receptors such as residential uses, elementary/high schools, or parks, shall incorporate appropriate setbacks, massing, and screening mitigation. 
(Ord. No. 2920, § 1, 2-10-09)  
18.99.040 - Setbacks and development standards. 
A.  Parking structures shall comply with the setback and development requirements identified for the zoning classification it is built in. 
B.  The approval authority may modify the setback requirements, as deemed necessary, for aesthetic and land use compatibility purposes, subject to the approval of a conditional use permit. 
  
Setback parking structures on street sides 
C.  Structures that immediately abut property zoned, used or designated on the General Plan for residential purposes shall provide a fifteen-foot minimum landscape setback adjacent to that use. 
(Ord. No. 2920, § 1, 2-10-09)  
18.99.050 - Building height. 
The maximum building height shall not exceed the permitted building height for the zoning classification on the property the parking structure is developed on. However, a conditional use permit may be approved by the planning commission for any increase over the maximum building height, up to nine feet, to accommodate decorative mechanical equipment enclosures, elevator shafts, parapet walls/screens, light poles, roof top trellises etc. 
(Ord. No. 2920, § 1, 2-10-09)  
18.99.060 - Driveways and ramps. 
A.  The internal driveways, ramps and circulation pattern within all parking structures shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  The maximum vehicle ramp grade shall not exceed twelve percent, with minimum twelve-foot long transitions (not exceeding five percent) at the top and bottom of the ramp. 
2.  The maximum cross slope of a driveway or ramp shall not exceed ten percent when parking on a ramp is provided; the maximum ramp grade shall not exceed five percent. 
3.  Grade differentials shall not exceed 9.5 degrees at ramp break-over. 
4.  Any deviation from the provisions listed within this section, shall require the prior review and approval of the director of public works. 
(Ord. No. 2920, § 1, 2-10-09)  
18.99.070 - Interior circulation and parking. 
The following standards apply to interior circulation and parking: 
A.  All vehicular parking shall be designed with double striped stalls that are a minimum of nine feet wide by eighteen feet deep. However, when a parking stall is adjacent to a solid wall or column, the minimum parking stall width shall be ten feet wide. 
B.  All one-way travel lanes within a parking structure shall be a minimum of twelve feet wide, and all two-way travel lane shall be a minimum of twenty-four feet wide. Each travel lane shall maintain a one-foot setback from the edge of all fixed objects over eighteen inches in height in addition to the minimum travel lane width. 
C.  The minimum required vehicular back-up distance within a parking structure shall be twenty-five feet. 
D.  A minimum two-foot wide concrete finger or barrier shall be constructed immediately between an end parking stall and an adjacent vehicular travel lane. 
E.  All parking garages shall have an unobstructed headroom clearance of not less seven feet six inches above the finished floor to any ceiling, beam, pipe or similar obstruction. 
F.  All entrances, transition ramps and vertical clearances within a parking structure shall have a uniform, minimum, vertical height clearance of eight fee two inches throughout the entire parking level where accessibility to parking spaces for persons with physical disabilities are provided. 
G.  Vehicular circulation within the parking structure shall be continuous and uninterrupted at all levels. Dead-end parking aisles or "hammerhead" type parking is prohibited. However, this provision shall not be applicable under the following circumstances: 
1)  For any portion of a parking structure that is designed exclusively to accommodate assigned residential parking spaces. 
2)  When the parking structure is designed with less than one hundred seventy-five parking spaces. 
H.  All vehicular travel lanes shall be designed with an appropriate turning radius (as recommended by the city traffic engineer) so that all vehicular turning movements can be made by a large passenger vehicle without having to steer the vehicle into the on-coming lane of traffic to make a turn. 
I.  Pedestrian pathways shall be visible and delineated from vehicle travel lane. 
J.  There shall be no "blind spots" within the vehicular ramp or transition area. 
K.  Elevator and stair shafts, mechanical rooms and similar visual disruptions located on the interior of each parking level shall be minimized to reduce their visibility. 
L.  The number of vehicular access points to public streets shall be minimized. All entrances and exits shall be capable of closure after hours with a decorative wrought iron or roll down security gate. 
M.  Each parking structure consisting of over one hundred parking stalls shall contain a separate area designated specifically for motorcycles parking and bicycles storage at the entry level into the parking structure. Bicycle security racks shall be provided to accommodate a minimum of twelve bicycles. 
N.  When parking ticket dispensers or gated parking entrances into a parking structure are provided, the minimum vehicular queuing length behind the ticket dispenser or gate shall be determined by the approval authority based upon a recommendation made by an independent California licensed traffic engineer. Vehicular queuing shall not occur within the public right-of-way. 
O.  All parking structure pay booth lanes shall provide a minimum vehicular queuing length of sixty feet behind the pay booth. The location of the pay booth shall be designed so as to not obstruct vehicular circulation within the parking structure. 
P.  When a parking structure is used for both public and private (residential) parking, the private residential spaces shall be completely segregated from public parking spaces. However, common vehicular entrances and exits may be used for the parking structure so long as a visitor call box is provided prior to entering the residential parking area with a vehicular turnaround. 
Q.  A curb or wheel stop, not less than six inches in height, shall be erected two feet from the front of the parking stall and any adjacent wall, structure, guard rail or walkway within a parking structure. 
(Ord. No. 2920, § 1, 2-10-09)  
18.99.080 - Lighting and illumination. 
A.  A minimum of five foot-candles of illumination shall be provided inside the parking. Higher levels are recommended for remote areas subject to security considerations (e.g., stairways, elevators, and other pedestrian access points). Minimum illumination, levels measured from the adjacent finished floor, shall be as follows: 
1.  Stairways and exits: five foot-candles 
2.  Interior drive aisles, centerline: five foot-candles 
3.  Interior parking at barrier railings: one foot-candle 
4.  Roof parking areas: one foot-candle 
B.  All exterior lighting fixtures on the parking structure shall have light shields to block light and glare from the public right-of-way and adjacent properties. 
(Ord. No. 2920, § 1, 2-10-09)  
18.99.090 - Parking structure design—Exterior. 
A.  Exterior elevations shall be designed to minimize untreated facades. Long expanses of shear walls are not permitted. 
B.  Exterior elevations shall be architecturally compatible with the architectural style, design, and materials of any principle on-site building located on the same property as the parking structure. The design shall also be aesthetically compatible with the adjacent off-site buildings. 
(Ord. No. 2920, § 1, 2-10-09)  
18.99.100 - Parking structure design—Interior. 
A.  Interior walls and ceilings shall be painted a light color to improve illumination. 
B.  All interior mechanical equipment and piping/conduits must be painted to match the interior of the structure. 
C.  Where possible, elevators and stairs shall be located on the perimeter of the structure to provide natural surveillance from exterior public areas. 
  
Elevators and stairs should be visible from public areas. 
D.  Stairwells must be integrated within the footprint of the parking structure, unless designed specifically as a decorative architectural feature of the building. 
E.  All solid stairwell doors shall provide viewing panels. Blind corners in stairwells shall be eliminated through the use of convex mirrors. 
F.  To provide maximum visibility, stairwells must be open to the interior and at least partially open at the exterior of the structure. 
G.  Stairwells must exit out onto a public street or pedestrian courtyard. 
(Ord. No. 2920, § 1, 2-10-09)  
18.99.110 - Landscaping, screening and amenities. 
A.  All parking structure setbacks shall be densely landscaped. However, such requirements may be modified or eliminated by the approval authority if the parking structure is designed to be integrated as part of a pedestrian plaza area. 
B.  Landscaping shall not obstruct ventilation or other required openings on the exterior of the structure. 
C.  A plaza/courtyard area is encouraged as part of the parking structure design with amenities that facilitate pedestrian use such as seating areas, objects of art, water features, decorative lighting, and landscape planters providing annual color. 
D.  A decorative designed trellis may be incorporated into the building design where blank walls occur on the structure. The trellis material shall be constructed of decorative and durable materials to enable vines to attach themselves for support. The trellis area should cover a minimum of sixty percent of the blank wall. 
E.  All appurtenances (i.e., transformers, ventilation shafts, etc.) shall be located outside of all required setbacks and shall be screened from public view. 
F.  Trees and plant material shall consist of minimum thirty-six-inch box trees and fifteen-gallon shrubs. When Palm trees are used, a minimum twelve to fifteen feet brown trunk height shall be required. An automatic irrigation system shall be designed to provide deep watering for trees, shrubs and vines along with moisture sensors to monitor and minimize water usage. 
  
The use of trees, shrubs, and vines are encouraged along the perimeter of the structure.  
18.99.120 - Signage. 
A.  A master sign plan shall be developed for all interior and exterior signage associated with a parking structure, including vehicular and pedestrian directional signage. Such signage and graphics for parking structures shall be consistent, harmonious and visually related through the incorporation of common design elements. 
B.  Exterior signs shall be consistent with any master sign program on the property. 
C.  Directional arrows and signage indicating exits, elevators, and emergency buzzers/telephones must be visibly displayed on walls. 
D.  Directional signage shall be provided at the ingress and egress to all parking structures to indicate permitted vehicular turning movements. 
E.  Directional signage in stairwells shall be provided to orient the pedestrian to adjacent activities and facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2920, § 1, 2-10-09)  
18.99.130 - Security. 
A.  Subterranean parking lots shall maintain lighting during all hours of operation. Vandal resistant covers shall protect lighting devices. 
B.  For public protection, parking structures shall be designed to facilitate public visibility into the structure to dissuade criminal activity. 
C.  Surveillance cameras shall be installed along each level of the parking structure to discourage criminal activity. These cameras shall utilize web-based/DSL/Broadband technology, which can be viewed remotely by the Whittier Police Department. The storage of images shall be kept a minimum of thirty days after being taken and made available, upon request, to the Whittier Police Department. 
D.  The parking structure shall be adequately secured when it is closed for parking to prevent unauthorized trespassing and to discourage criminal activity. 
E.  "No Loitering" signs shall be placed at the entrance into the parking structure and on each parking level in a conspicuous public place. 
F.  Garage stairwells at ground level shall be fully enclosed and designed to provide maximum interior visibility of the stairwell. The enclosure shall be equipped with a control in/free out form of access control when residential parking spaces are to be located within the parking garage. 
(Ord. No. 2920, § 1, 2-10-09)  
18.99.140 - Miscellaneous. 
A.  Activities such as shops, offices, or other commercial space can be incorporated along the ground level of the parking structure, where appropriate, or as liner buildings that are designed for retail, office or residential use, if appropriately zoned to do so. 
  
Parking structure with retail on the ground level can be articulated in a manner to lessen the appearance or mass and bulk. 
B.  Trash enclosures shall not be placed adjacent to points of pedestrian or vehicular access. All trash enclosures located within the footprint of the parking structure must be fully enclosed with view obscuring, durable, metal gates. 
C.  Each new parking structure is encouraged to incorporate design features that are environmentally friendly (i.e., shade structures, motion light sensors, energy cells, etc.) and aesthetically compatible with the building design. 
(Ord. No. 2920, § 1, 2-10-09) 
